Davidson’s
Principles and Practice of
Medicine
22nd Edition
Sir Stanley Davidson (1894–1981)
This famous textbook was the brainchild of one of the 
great Professors of Medicine of the 20th century. Stanley 
Davidson was born in Sri Lanka and began his medical 
undergraduate training at Trinity College, Cambridge; 
this was interrupted by World War I and later resumed 
in Edinburgh. He was seriously wounded in battle, and 
the carnage and shocking waste of young life that he 
encountered at that time had a profound effect on his 
subsequent attitudes and values.
In 1930 Stanley Davidson was appointed Professor of 
Medicine at the University of Aberdeen, one of the first 
full-time Chairs of Medicine anywhere and the first in 
Scotland. In 1938 he took up the Chair of Medicine at 
Edinburgh and was to remain in this post until retire-
ment in 1959. He was a renowned educator and a par-
ticularly gifted teacher at the bedside, where he taught 
that everything had to be questioned and explained. He 
himself gave most of the systematic lectures in Medicine, 
which were made available as typewritten notes that 
emphasised the essentials and far surpassed any text-
book available at the time.
Principles and Practice of Medicine was conceived in the 
late 1940s with its origins in those lecture notes. The first 
edition, published in 1952, was a masterpiece of clarity 
and uniformity of style. It was of modest size and price, 
but sufficiently comprehensive and up to date to provide 
students with the main elements of sound medical prac-
tice. Although the format and presentation have seen 
many changes in 21 subsequent editions, Sir Stanley’s 
original vision and objectives remain. More than half a 
century after its first publication, his book continues to 
inform and educate students, doctors and health profes-
sionals all over the world.
Readers may be interested to listen to an interview with 
Sir Stanley Davidson, which can be found on the Royal 
College of Physicians of Edinburgh website at: www.rcpe.
ac.uk/library-archives/sir-stanley-davidson-1894-1981.
Content Strategist: Laurence Hunter
Content Development Specialist: Wendy Lee
Project Manager: Louisa Talbott
Designer/Design Direction: Miles Hitchen
Illustration Manager: Jennifer Rose
Davidson’s
Principles and Practice of
Medicine
22nd Edition
Edited by
Brian R. Walker BSc MD FRCPE FRSE
Professor of Endocrinology, 
University of Edinburgh;
Honorary Consultant Physician, 
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, UK
Nicki R. Colledge BSc FRCPE
Consultant Physician in Medicine for the Elderly, 
Liberton Hospital, Edinburgh, 
and Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh;
Honorary Senior Lecturer, 
University of Edinburgh, UK
Stuart H. Ralston MD FRCP FMedSci FRSE
Arthritis Research UK Professor of Rheumatology, 
University of Edinburgh; 
Honorary Consultant Rheumatologist, 
Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, UK
Ian D. Penman BSc MD FRCPE
Consultant Gastroenterologist, 
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh;
Honorary Senior Lecturer, 
University of Edinburgh, UK
Illustrations by
Robert Britton
Edinburgh  London  New York  Oxford  Philadelphia  St Louis  Sydney  Toronto  2014
An imprint of Elsevier Limited
© 2014, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek 
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements 
with organisations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the 
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
First edition 1952
Twelfth edition 1977
Second edition 1954
Thirteenth edition 1981
Third edition 1956
Fourteenth edition 1984
Fourth edition 1958
Fifteenth edition 1987
Fifth edition 1960
Sixteenth edition 1991
Sixth edition 1962
Seventeenth edition 1995
Seventh edition 1964
Eighteenth edition 1999
Eighth edition 1966
Nineteenth edition 2002
Ninth edition 1968
Twentieth edition 2006
Tenth edition 1971
Twenty-first edition 2010
Eleventh edition 1974
Twenty-second edition 2014
Main Edition ISBN-13: 978-0-7020-5035-0
International Edition ISBN-13: 978-0-7020-5047-3
eBook ISBN-13: 978-0-7020-5103-6
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical 
treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein.  
In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety  
of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the 
most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each 
product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration 
of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their 
own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the 
best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, 
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products 
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, 
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
The  
publisher’s 
policy is to use
paper manufactured 
from sustainable forests
Printed in China
v
Preface
Since Davidson’s Principles and Practice of Medicine was 
first published in 1952, over two million copies have 
been sold and the book has acquired a large following 
of medical students, doctors and other health profes-
sionals all over the world. It has been translated into 
many languages, most recently Japanese, Russian, 
Italian and Polish, and has won numerous prizes, the 
last edition being highly commended in the British 
Medical Association Book Awards. Davidson’s has 
endured because with each new edition it has evolved 
to provide comprehensive updated information in a 
concise and easy-to-read format.
From its beginnings, Davidson’s has sought to explain 
the basis for medical practice. The integration of ‘pre-
clinical’ science with clinical practice is now a feature of 
many undergraduate medical curricula, and many stu-
dents use Davidson’s from the outset of their medical 
course. In recognition of this, the first part of the book, 
‘Principles of Medicine’, highlights the mechanisms of 
health and disease, along with the professional and 
ethical principles underlying medical practice. Many 
examples of clinical problems are included to bring the 
medical sciences to life for the new student and to reju-
venate the interest of the experienced clinician. The 
second part of the book, ‘Practice of Medicine’, covers 
the major medical specialties. Every chapter has been 
thoroughly revised for this edition to ensure that it 
reflects the ‘cutting edge’ of medical knowledge and 
practice and is pitched at a level of detail to meet the 
needs of candidates preparing for examination for 
Membership of the Royal College of Physicians or its 
equivalents. In recognition of the emerging specialty of 
Stroke Medicine, this topic is now covered in a separate 
chapter from Neurological Disease. Surgical approaches 
to disease management are mentioned in Davidson’s, 
but readers are encouraged to consult the sister book, 
Principles and Practice of Surgery, for more details.
Many of the innovations introduced in recent edi-
tions have been warmly received. We have retained both 
a patient-orientated approach, in the ever-popular ‘Clin-
ical Examination’ overviews and ‘Presenting Problems’ 
sections, alongside practical content, in ‘Emergency’ and 
‘Practice Point’ boxes. Embedding horizontal themes 
within the book – for example, with the ‘In Old Age’ and 
‘In Pregnancy’ boxes – has been applauded, and we have 
extended this approach by adding ‘In Adolescence’ 
boxes in relevant chapters; these emphasise key points 
in managing the transition of patients between paed­
iatric and adult services.
We are proud of Davidson’s international heritage. 
As well as recruiting authors from around the globe, 
particularly for topics such as Infectious Diseases and 
HIV, we have welcomed new members on to our 
International Advisory Board. These leading experts 
from 16 countries provide detailed comments that, 
along with the feedback received from our global read-
ership, are crucial to our planning of every chapter in 
each new edition. We have also visited several medical 
schools on the Indian subcontinent and received invalu-
able feedback from students and teachers. We have 
addressed as many of these suggestions as possible in 
this edition.
Education is achieved by assimilating information 
from many sources and readers of this book can enhance 
their learning experience by using complementary 
resources. The StudentConsult platform continues to 
provide online access to the text and illustrations of the 
main edition. The book is also available in various eBook 
formats. Davidson’s has had a long-standing association 
with its sister books, Macleod’s Clinical Examination (now 
in its 13th Edition) and Principles and Practice of Surgery 
(now in its 6th Edition). The Davidson’s ‘family’ has 
expanded with the publication of Davidson’s Essentials of 
Medicine, a long-requested pocket-size version of the 
main text; Davidson’s Foundations of Clinical Practice, a 
guide to starting work as a junior doctor; Davidson’s 100 
Clinical Cases, which contains cases directly based on the 
‘Presenting Problems’ in the main text; and Macleod’s 
Clinical Diagnosis, which describes a systematic approach 
to differential diagnosis of symptoms and signs. We 
congratulate the editors and authors of these books for 
continuing the tradition of concise, easily read and beau-
tifully illustrated texts.
The regular introduction of new authors and editors 
to Davidson’s is important to maintain the freshness of 
each new edition. On this occasion, Dr Ian Penman has 
joined the editorial team and 18 new authors have con-
tributed material. We all take immense pride in produc-
ing an outstanding book for the next generation of 
doctors, and in continuing the great tradition first estab-
lished by Sir Stanley Davidson and passed on by all the 
previous editors and authors, for what remains one of 
the world’s leading textbooks of medicine.
BRW, NRC, SHR, IDP
Edinburgh
vi Contents
List of presenting problems	
viii
Contributors	
x
International Advisory Board	
xiv
Introduction	
xvi
Acknowledgements	
xviii
Figure acknowledgements	
xix
PART 1 PRINCIPLES OF MEDICINE
1	 Good medical practice	
1
A.D. Cumming • S.I.R. Noble
2	 Therapeutics and good prescribing	
17
S. Maxwell
3	 Molecular and genetic factors in disease	
41
D.R. FitzPatrick • J.R. Seckl
4	 Immunological factors in disease	
71
S.E. Marshall
5	 Environmental and nutritional factors in disease	
97
P. Hanlon • M. Byers • J.P.H. Wilding • H.M. Macdonald
6	 Principles of infectious disease	
133
R.P. Hobson • D.H. Dockrell
7	 Ageing and disease	
165
M.D. Witham
PART 2 PRACTICE OF MEDICINE
8	 Critical illness	
179
G.R. Nimmo • T. Walsh
9	 Poisoning	
205
S.H.L. Thomas • J. White
10	 Medical psychiatry	
231
M.C. Sharpe • S.M. Lawrie
11	 Oncology	
259
G.G. Dark • A.R. Abdul Razak
Contents
vii
12	 Palliative care and pain	
283
D. Oxenham
13	 Infectious disease	
293
D.H. Dockrell • S. Sundar • B.J. Angus • R.P. Hobson
14	 HIV infection and AIDS	
387
G. Maartens
15	 Sexually transmitted infections	
411
G.R. Scott
16	 Clinical biochemistry and metabolism	
427
M.J. Field • L. Burnett • D.R. Sullivan • P. Stewart
17	 Kidney and urinary tract disease	
461
J. Goddard • A.N. Turner
18	 Cardiovascular disease	
525
D.E. Newby • N.R. Grubb • A. Bradbury
19	 Respiratory disease	
643
P.T. Reid • J.A. Innes
20	 Endocrine disease	
733
M.W.J. Strachan • J. Newell-Price
21	 Diabetes mellitus	
797
E.R. Pearson • R.J. McCrimmon
22	 Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease	
837
I.D. Penman • C.W. Lees
23	 Liver and biliary tract disease	
921
Q.M. Anstee • D.E.J. Jones
24	 Blood disease	
989
H.G. Watson • J.I.O. Craig • L.M. Manson
25	 Rheumatology and bone disease	
1057
S.H. Ralston • I.B. McInnes
26	 Neurological disease	
1137
J.P. Leach • R.J. Davenport
27	 Stroke disease	
1231
P. Langhorne
28	 Skin disease	
1249
S.H. Ibbotson • R.S. Dawe
29	 Laboratory reference ranges	
1307
S.W. Walker
Index	
1313
viii List of presenting problems
also been employed in several of the chapters in the 
‘Principles of Medicine’ section, reinforcing the close 
connection between clinical problems and fundamental 
mechanisms of disease.
These presentations represent the most common 
reasons for referral to each medical specialty and are 
described in the ‘Presenting Problems’ sections of 
all system-based chapters. The same approach has 
Abnormal investigation results
Acid–base, 443
Metabolic acidosis, 445
Metabolic alkalosis, 446
Mixed abnormalities, 447
Respiratory acidosis, 447
Respiratory alkalosis, 447
Blood culture
Positive, 303
Electrolytes
Hypercalcaemia, 767
Hypocalcaemia, 768
Hyperkalaemia, 442
Hypokalaemia, 440
Hypermagnesaemia, 448
Hypomagnesaemia, 448
Hypernatraemia, 439
Hyponatraemia, 437
Hyperphosphataemia, 449
Hypophosphataemia, 448
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Raised, 85
Full blood count
Anaemia, 1001
Leucocytosis, 1005
Leucopenia, 1004
Pancytopenia, 1008
Polycythaemia, 1003
Thrombocytopenia, 1007
Thrombocytosis, 1008
Glucose
Hyperglycaemia, 808, 818
Hypoglycaemia, 783, 814
Hormones
Hyperprolactinaemia, 790
Hypogonadism, male, 760
Hypothyroidism, 743
Thyroid function tests 
Asymptomatic abnormalities, 745
Thyrotoxicosis, 740
Lipids, 453
Hypercholesterolaemia, 453
Hypertriglyceridaemia, 455
Mixed hyperlipidaemia, 455
Rare hyperlipidaemia, 455
Liver function tests, 935
Proteinuria, 476
Radiology
Adrenal mass, 779
Incidental pulmonary nodule, 660
Pituitary tumour, 789
Symptoms and signs
Amenorrhoea, 759
Ascites, 938
Blackouts, 554, 1157
Bleeding
Gastrointestinal, 853, 942
Generalised, 201, 1006
Breathlessness, 289, 543, 655
Chest pain, 539, 658
Coma, 198, 1159, 1237
Constipation, 860
Cough, 289, 654
Deafness, 1173
Diarrhoea, 306, 857
Dizziness, 173, 554, 1157, 1167
Dyspepsia, 852
Dysphagia, 851, 1173
Erectile dysfunction, 474
Falls, 172, 554, 1157
Fever, 296
In immunocompromised host, 301, 396
In injection drug user, 299
In neutropenic patient, 302
With weight loss, 271
Finger clubbing, 271
Gait abnormalities, 1168
Galactorrhoea, 790
Genital problems, 415, 417
Itch/pain in women, 418
Itch/rash in men, 415
Lumps in men, 416
Lumps in women, 418
Ulceration in men, 415
Ulceration in women, 418
Urethral discharge, 415
Vaginal discharge, 417
Goitre, 746
Gynaecomastia, 762
Haemoptysis, 658
Hair and nail problems, 1264
Heart murmurs and abnormal heart 
sounds, 560
Heartburn, 852
Hepatomegaly, 938
Hirsutism, 763
Hypertension, 478
Incontinence
Faecal, 1174
Urinary, 175, 472, 1174
Infertility, 761
Jaundice, 936
Lymphadenopathy, 395, 1005
Memory loss, 1161
Movement and coordination  
problems, 1165, 1237
List of presenting problems
ix
Nausea, 289, 306, 853
Oedema, 478
Pain, 284
Abdominal, 418, 861
Ankle and foot, 1076
Back, 1072
Elbow, 1075
Generalised musculoskeletal, 1071, 
1076
Hand and wrist, 1075
Headache, 1156, 1237
Hip, 1075
Knee, 1075
Loin, 471
Multiple joints, 1069
Neck, 1074
Regional musculoskeletal, 1074
Shoulder, 1074
Single joint, 1069
Palpable mass, 270
Palpitation, 556
Pleural effusion, 661
Psychological
Abnormal perception, 1167
Anxiety, 234, 290
Confusion, agitation, delirium, 173, 
237, 238, 290, 1161, 1175
Delusions, 236, 1175
Depressed mood, 235, 290, 1175
Elated mood, 235
Hallucinations, 236, 1175
Personality change, 1175
Puberty
Delayed, 758
Seizures, 1159, 1237
Sensory disturbance, 1164
Skin problems, 1256
Blisters, 1258
Colour change, 1263
Itch (pruritus), 415, 418, 1258
Leg ulcers, 1262
Lumps and changing lesions, 1256
Papulosquamous rashes, 1257
Photosensitivity, 1260
Sleep disturbance, 1175
Smell disturbance, 1169
Speech disturbance, 1168, 1236
Splenomegaly, 1006
Syncope see Falls and Blackouts
Urinary symptoms, 471
Dysuria, 471
Frequency, 472
Haematuria, 474
Incontinence, 175, 472, 1174
Nocturia, 472
Oliguria/anuria, 471
Polyuria, 472
Visual disturbance, 1169, 1237
Vomiting, 289, 306, 853
Weakness, 290, 1076, 1162, 1236
Weight loss, 271, 290, 396, 859
Adrenal insufficiency, 777
Ageing problems, 176
Alcohol misuse, 240
Allergy, 90
Anaphylaxis, 91, 190
Angioedema, 93
Cardiac arrest, 557
Circulatory failure
Anaphylaxis, 91, 190
Shock, 190, 544
Cushing’s syndrome, 773
Diabetes mellitus, 808
Complications, 820
Hyperosmolarity, 814
In pregnancy, 817
In young patients, 818
Ketoacidosis, 811
Long-term supervision, 811
Newly discovered, 808
Peri-operative, 818
Disseminated intravascular  
coagulation, 201, 1007
Drug reactions
Adverse reactions, 175
Glucocorticoids/corticosteroids, 776
Ectopic hormone production, 271
Fracture, 1071
Gastrointestinal and liver abnormalities in 
critical illness, 198
Gastrointestinal obstruction in terminal 
illness, 290
Heart failure, 546
Hepatic encephalopathy, 941
HIV/AIDS manifestations, 395
Cardiac, 405
Gastrointestinal, 399
Haematological, 404
Liver, 400
Mucocutaneous, 396
Neoplasms, 405
Nervous system, 402
Ophthalmic, 402
Renal, 405
Respiratory, 400
Rheumatological, 404
Hypopituitarism, 787
Infection manifestations
In adolescence, 313
In blood disease, 1008
In pregnancy, 313
In the tropics, 308
Recurrent, 79
Liver failure
Acute, 932
Syndromes
Malabsorption, 857
Paraneoplastic syndromes, 271
Proctitis, 417
Psychological
Medically unexplained symptoms, 236
Psychological factors affecting medical 
conditions, 240
Renal failure
Acute, 197, 478
Chronic, 483
Respiratory failure, 191, 663
Self-harm, 238
Sepsis, 200, 304
Skin
Acute failure, 1264
Skin manifestations of cancer, 272
Sodium depletion, 432
Sodium excess, 434
Substance misuse, 240
Sudden death, 557
Venous thrombosis, 1008
x Contributors
Albiruni Ryan Abdul Razak
MRCPI
Consultant Medical Oncologist, Princess Margaret 
Cancer Centre, Toronto; Assistant Professor, 
University of Toronto, Canada
Brian J. Angus
BSc DTM&H FRCP MD FFTM(Glas)
Reader in Infectious Diseases, Nuffield Department 
of Medicine, University of Oxford; Director,  
Oxford Centre for Tropical Medicine, UK
Quentin M. Anstee
BSc MBBS PhD MRCP(UK)
Senior Lecturer, Institute of Cellular Medicine, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne; 
Honorary Consultant Hepatologist, Freeman 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Andrew W. Bradbury
BSc MBChB(Hons) MD MBA FEBVS(Hon) FRCSE
Sampson Gamgee Professor of Vascular Surgery, 
Director of Quality Assurance and Enhancement, 
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of 
Birmingham, UK
Leslie Burnett
MBBS PhD FRCPA FHGSA
Consultant Pathologist, NSW Health, PaLMS 
Pathology North, Royal North Shore Hospital, 
Sydney; Clinical Professor in Pathology and Genetic 
Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University of 
Sydney, Australia
Mark Byers
OBE FRCGP MCEM MFSEM DA(UK)
General Practitioner, Ministry of Defence, UK
Jenny I.O. Craig
MD FRCPE FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, 
Cambridge, UK
Allan D. Cumming
BSc MD FRCPE
Dean of Students, College of Medicine and 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Edinburgh, UK
Graham Dark
MBBS FRCP FHEA
Senior Lecturer in Cancer Education, Newcastle 
University; Consultant Medical Oncologist, Freeman 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Richard J. Davenport
FRCPE DM
Consultant Neurologist, Royal Infirmary of 
Edinburgh and Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh; Honorary Senior Lecturer,  
University of Edinburgh, UK
Robert S. Dawe
MD FRCPE
Consultant Dermatologist, Ninewells Hospital and 
Medical School, Dundee; Honorary Clinical Reader, 
University of Dundee, UK
David Dockrell
MD FRCPI FRCPG FACP
Professor of Infectious Diseases, University of 
Sheffield, UK
Michael J. Field
AM MD FRACP
Emeritus Professor, Sydney Medical School, 
University of Sydney, Australia
David R. FitzPatrick
MD FRCPE
Consultant in Clinical Genetics, Royal Hospital for 
Sick Children, Edinburgh; Professor, University of 
Edinburgh, UK
Jane Goddard
PhD FRCPE
Consultant Nephrologist, Royal Infirmary of 
Edinburgh; Part-time Senior Lecturer, University of 
Edinburgh, UK
Neil R. Grubb
MD FRCP
Consultant Cardiologist, Edinburgh Heart  
Centre; Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of 
Edinburgh, UK
Contributors
xi
Phil Hanlon
BSc MD MPH
Professor of Public Health, University of Glasgow, UK
Richard P. Hobson
PhD MCRP(UK), FRCPath
Consultant Microbiologist, Leeds Teaching Hospitals 
NHS Trust; Honorary Senior Lecturer, Leeds 
University, UK
Sally H. Ibbotson
BSc(Hons) MD FRCPE
Clinical Senior Lecturer in Photobiology, University 
of Dundee; Honorary Consultant Dermatologist, 
Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK
J. Alastair Innes
BSc MBChB PhD FRCPE
Consultant Physician, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh; Honorary Reader in Respiratory 
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, UK
David E. Jones
MA BM BCh PhD FRCP
Professor of Liver Immunology, Institute of Cellular 
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne; Consultant Hepatologist, Freeman Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Peter Langhorne
PhD FRCPG
Professor of Stroke Care, University of Glasgow; 
Honorary Consultant, Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UK
Stephen M. Lawrie
MD(Hons) FRCPsych FRCPE(Hon)
Head, Division of Psychiatry, School of Clinical 
Sciences, University of Edinburgh; Honorary 
Consultant Psychiatrist, Royal Edinburgh  
Hospital, UK
John Paul Leach
MD FRCPG FRCPE
Consultant Neurologist, Institute of Neuroscience, 
Southern General Hospital, Glasgow; Honorary 
Associate Clinical Professor, University of Glasgow, UK
Charlie W. Lees
MBBS FRCPE PhD
Consultant Gastroenterologist, Western General 
Hospital, Edinburgh; Honorary Senior Lecturer, 
University of Edinburgh, UK
Gary Maartens
MBChB MMed
Consultant Physician, Department of Medicine, Groote 
Schuur Hospital, Cape Town; Professor of Clinical 
Pharmacology, University of Cape Town, South Africa
Helen M. Macdonald
BSc(Hons) PhD MSc RNutr(Public Health)
Chair in Nutrition and Musculoskeletal Health, 
University of Aberdeen, UK
Lynn M. Manson
MD FRCPE FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist, Scottish National Blood 
Transfusion Service; Honorary Clinical Senior 
Lecturer, University of Edinburgh, UK
Sara E. Marshall
FRCPE FRCPath PhD
Honorary Consultant Immunologist, NHS Tayside; 
Professor of Clinical Immunology, University of 
Dundee, UK
Simon Maxwell
MD PhD FRCP FRCPE FBPharmacoIS FHEA
Professor of Student Learning (Clinical Pharmacology 
and Prescribing), University of Edinburgh; Honorary 
Consultant Physician, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, UK
Rory J. McCrimmon
MD FRCPE
Professor of Experimental Diabetes and  
Metabolism, University of Dundee; Honorary 
Consultant, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, 
Dundee, UK
Iain B. McInnes
FRCP PhD FRSE FMedSci
Muirhead Professor of Medicine and Director of 
Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, 
College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, UK
David E. Newby
FESC FACC FMedSci FRSE
British Heart Foundation John Wheatley  
Professor of Cardiology, University of Edinburgh; 
Consultant Cardiologist, Royal Infirmary of 
Edinburgh, UK
John D. Newell-Price
MA PhD FRCP
Reader in Endocrinology and Honorary Consultant 
Endocrinologist, Department of Human Metabolism, 
School of Medicine and Biomedical Science,  
Sheffield, UK
Graham R. Nimmo
MD FRCPE FFARCSI FFICM
Consultant Physician in Intensive Care Medicine and 
Clinical Education, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, UK
Contributors
xii
Simon I.R. Noble
MBBS MD FRCP Dip Pal Med PGCE
Clinical Senior Lecturer in Palliative Medicine, 
Cardiff University; Honorary Consultant,  
Palliative Medicine, Royal Gwent Hospital,  
Newport, UK
David R. Oxenham
MRCP
Consultant in Palliative Care, Marie Curie Hospice, 
Edinburgh; Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of 
Edinburgh, UK
Ewan R. Pearson
PhD FRCPE
Professor of Diabetic Medicine, University of 
Dundee; Honorary Consultant in Diabetes,  
Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,  
Dundee, UK
Ian D. Penman
BSc MD FRCPE
Consultant Gastroenterologist, Royal Infirmary of 
Edinburgh; Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of 
Edinburgh, UK
Stuart H. Ralston
MD FRCP FMedSci FRSE
Arthritis Research UK Professor of Rheumatology, 
University of Edinburgh; Honorary Consultant 
Rheumatologist, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, UK
Peter T. Reid
MD FRCPE
Consultant Physician, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh; Honorary Senior Lecturer in  
Respiratory Medicine, University of  
Edinburgh, UK
Gordon R. Scott
BSc FRCP
Consultant in Genitourinary Medicine,  
Chalmers Sexual Health Centre, Edinburgh; 
Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of  
Edinburgh, UK
Jonathan R. Seckl
BSc MBBS PhD FRCPE FMedSci FRSE
Professor of Molecular Medicine, Executive Dean 
(Medicine) and Vice-Principal (Research), University 
of Edinburgh; Honorary Consultant Physician, Royal 
Infirmary of Edinburgh, UK
Michael Sharpe
MA MD FRCP FRCPE FRCPsych
Professor of Psychological Medicine, University of 
Oxford; Honorary Professor, University of 
Edinburgh; Honorary Consultant in Psychological 
Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust 
and Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK
Peter Stewart
FRACP FRCPA MBA
Clinical Director, Sydney South West Pathology 
Service; Clinical Associate Professor, University of 
Sydney, Australia
Mark W.J. Strachan
MD FRCPE
Consultant in Diabetes and Endocrinology, Western 
General Hospital, Edinburgh; Honorary Professor, 
University of Edinburgh, UK
David Sullivan
FRACP FRCPA FCSANZ
Clinical Associate Professor, Central Clinical School, 
Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, 
Australia
Shyam Sundar
MD FRCP FNA
Professor of Medicine, Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India
Simon H.L. Thomas
BSc MD FRCP FRCPE
Consultant Physician, Newcastle Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust; Professor of Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK
A. Neil Turner
PhD FRCP
Professor of Nephrology, University of Edinburgh; 
Honorary Consultant Physician, Royal Infirmary of 
Edinburgh, UK
Simon W. Walker
DM FRCPath FRCPE
Senior Lecturer in Clinical Biochemistry, University 
of Edinburgh; Honorary Consultant Clinical 
Biochemist, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, UK
Tim Walsh
BSc(Hons) MBChB(Hons) FRCA FRCP FFICM MD MRes
Professor of Critical Care, University of Edinburgh; 
Honorary Consultant, Royal Infirmary of  
Edinburgh, UK
Contributors
xiii
Henry Watson
MD FRCPE FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist, Aberdeen Royal 
Infirmary; Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of 
Aberdeen, UK
Julian White
MD FACTM
Consultant Clinical Toxinologist and Head  
of Toxinology, Women’s and Children’s  
Hospital, Adelaide; Associate Professor,  
Department of Paediatrics, University of  
Adelaide, Australia
John P.H. Wilding
DM FRCP
Professor of Medicine, Head of Department of 
Obesity and Endocrinology, Institute of Ageing and 
Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool; Honorary 
Consultant Physician, University Hospital Aintree, 
Liverpool, UK
Miles D. Witham
BM BCh PhD FRCPE
Clinical Senior Lecturer in Ageing and Health, 
University of Dundee; Honorary Consultant 
Geriatrician, NHS Tayside, Dundee, UK
xiv International Advisory Board
Albert G. Frauman
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 
University of Melbourne; Medical Director, Austin 
Centre for Clinical Studies, Austin Health, 
Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia
Tsuguya Fukui
President, St Luke’s International Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan
Hadi A. Goubran
Haematologist, Saskatoon Cancer Centre and Adjunct 
Professor, College of Medicine, University of 
Saskatchewan, Canada; Professor of Medicine and 
Haematology, Cairo University, Egypt
Saman B. Gunatilake
Professor of Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka
Rajiva Gupta
Director and Head, Rheumatology and Clinical 
Immunology, Medanta – The Medicity, Gurgaon, 
India
S.M. Wasim Jafri
Alticharn Professor of Medicine, Associate Dean,  
Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan
Saroj Jayasinghe
Professor, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Colombo; Honorary 
Consultant Physician, National Hospital of Sri Lanka, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka
A.L. Kakrani
Professor and Head, Department of Medicine, 
Padmashree Dr D.Y. Patil Medical College and 
Hospital, Pimpri, Pune, India
Vasantha Kamath
Director–Dean, Karnataka Institute of Medical 
Sciences (KIMS), Hubli, Karnataka, India
Piotr Kuna
Professor of Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Asthma and Allergy, Barlicki University 
Hospital, Medical University of Lodz, Poland
O.C. Abraham
Professor, Department of Medicine, Christian 
Medical College, Vellore, India
Tofayel Ahmed
Professor of Medicine, Somaj Vittik Medical College, 
Gono Bishwabidyalay, Dhaka; Professor of Medicine, 
Pioneer Dental College, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Samar Banerjee
Professor, Department of Medicine, Vivekananda 
Institute of Medical Sciences and Ramakrishna 
Mission Seva Pratishthan, Kolkata, India
Matthew A. Brown
Professor of Immunogenetics and Director, 
University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, 
Translational Research Institute, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Khalid I. Bzeizi
Senior Consultant and Head of Hepatology,  
Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh,  
Saudi Arabia
M.K. Daga
Director, Professor of Medicine and In-Charge  
ICU, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, 
India
D. Dalus
Professor and Head, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Medical College and Hospital, 
Trivandrum, India
Tapas Das
Professor, Department of Medicine, KPC Medical 
College and Hospital, Jadavpur, Kolkata, India
Tarun Kumar Dutta
Head, Division of Clinical Haematology; Professor 
and Head, Department of Medicine, Jawaharlal 
Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and 
Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, India
M. Abul Faiz
Professor of Medicine (Retired), Sir Salimullah 
Medical College, Mitford, Dhaka, Bangladesh
International Advisory Board
xv
Ammar F. Mubaidin
Associate Professor of Neurology, King Hussein 
Medical Center, Amman, Jordan
Milind Nadkar
Professor of Medicine (Emergency Medicine) and 
Chief, Rheumatology Services, Seth G.S. Medical 
College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai, India
Saraladevi Naicker
Professor and Head, Division of Nephrology; 
Academic Head, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 
South Africa
Nardeep Naithani
Professor and Head, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Armed Forces Medical College, Pune, India
Matthew Ng
Honorary Clinical Professor, University of Hong 
Kong, Tung Wah Hospital, Hong Kong
Tommy Olsson
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden
Prem Pais
Dean and Professor of Medicine, St John’s Medical 
College, Bangalore, India
A. Ramachandran
President, India Diabetes Research Foundation,  
and Chairman, Dr A. Ramachandran’s Diabetes 
Hospitals, Chennai, India; Visiting Professor, 
Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
Department of Medicine, Imperial College,  
London, UK
Medha Y. Rao
Professor of Internal Medicine and Associate Dean, 
M.S. Ramaiah Medical College and Hospital, 
Bangalore, India
N.R. Rau
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Kasturba Hospital, Manipal, India
Harsha R. Salkar
Professor and Head, Department of Medicine,  
NKP Salve Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagpur, 
India
K.R. Sethuraman
Vice-Chancellor, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth University, 
Pondicherry, India
Surendra K. Sharma
Chief, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine; Professor and Head, Department of 
Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
New Delhi, India
Ibrahim Sherif
Emeritus Professor of Medicine, Tripoli University; 
Consultant Endocrinologist, Alafia Clinic, Tripoli, 
Libya
Ian J. Simpson
Emeritus Professor of Medicine, Faculty of Medical 
and Health Sciences, University of Auckland; 
Nephrologist, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, 
New Zealand
Dr S.G. Siva Chidambaram
Professor of Medicine, Institute of Internal Medicine, 
Madras Medical College and Rajiv Gandhi 
Government General Hospital, Chennai, India
Arvind K. Vaish
Professor and Head, Department of Medicine,  
King George’s Medical University, Lucknow, India
Subhash Varma
Professor and Head, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Education and Research, Chandigarh, India
xvi Introduction
the most common reasons for referral to each medical 
specialty. The same approach has been used in several 
of the chapters in the ‘Principles of Medicine’ section, to 
reinforce the close connection between clinical problems 
and fundamental mechanisms of disease. Many patients 
present with symptoms such as weight loss, dizziness or 
breathlessness, which are not specific to a particular 
system; these are described in the most relevant chapter 
and cross-referenced elsewhere. A list of presenting 
problems may be found on pages vii–viii.
Boxes
Boxes are a popular way of presenting information and 
are particularly useful for revision. They are classified 
by the type of information they contain, using specific 
symbols.
  General Information
These include causes, clinical features, investigations, 
treatments and other useful information.
  Evidence-based Medicine
Clinicians base their practice on the best available evi-
dence, which needs to be up to date, relevant, authorita-
tive and easily accessible. Over 120 evidence-based 
medicine (EBM) boxes are included in this edition. They 
contain recommendations that are supported by evi-
dence obtained from meta-analysis of several ran-
domised controlled trials (RCTs) or one (or more) 
high-quality RCT, and therefore conform to ‘Grade A’ 
criteria, as described in Chapter 1 (p. 8).
  Practice Point
There are many practical skills that students and doctors 
must learn. These vary from inserting a nasogastric tube 
to reading an ECG or X-ray, or interpreting investiga-
tions such as arterial blood gases or thyroid function 
tests. ‘Practice Point’ boxes provide straightforward 
guidance on how these and many other skills can be 
acquired and applied.
  Emergency
These boxes describe management of many of the most 
common emergencies in medicine.
The first section of the book, ‘Principles of Medicine’, 
describes the basis on which medicine is practised and 
the fundamental mechanisms determining health and 
disease which are relevant to all medical specialties. The 
second section, ‘Practice of Medicine’, is devoted to indi-
vidual medical specialties. Each chapter has been written 
by experts in the field to provide the level of detail 
expected of trainees in their discipline. To maintain the 
book’s virtue of being concise, care has been taken to 
avoid unnecessary duplication between chapters.
The system-based chapters follow a standard format, 
beginning with an overview of relevant clinical exami-
nation, followed by an account of functional anatomy, 
physiology and investigations, then the common pres-
entations of disease, and details of the individual dis-
eases and treatments of that system. Where appropriate, 
the chapters in the first section follow a similar format; 
in chapters which describe the immunological, cellular 
and molecular basis of disease, this problem-based 
approach brings the close links between modern medical 
science and clinical practice into sharp focus.
The methods used to present information are 
described below.
Clinical examination overviews
The value of good clinical skills is highlighted by a two-
page overview of the important elements of the clinical 
examination at the beginning of most chapters. The 
left-hand page includes a mannikin to illustrate key 
steps in examination of the relevant system, beginning 
with simple observations and progressing in a logical 
sequence around the body. The right-hand page expands 
on selected themes and includes tips on examination 
technique and interpretation of physical signs. These 
overviews are intended to act as an aide-mémoire and 
not as a replacement for a detailed text on clinical exami-
nation, as provided in the sister title, Macleod’s Clinical 
Examination.
Presenting problems
Medical students and junior doctors must not only learn 
a great many facts about various disorders, but also 
develop an analytical approach to formulating a differ-
ential diagnosis and a plan of investigation for patients 
who present with particular symptoms or signs. In 
Davidson’s this is addressed by incorporating a ‘Present-
ing Problems’ section into all system-based chapters. 
Nearly 300 presentations are included, which represent 
Introduction
xvii
  In Old Age
In most developed countries, older people comprise 20% 
of the population and are the chief users of health care. 
While they contract the same diseases as those who are 
younger, there are often important differences in the 
way they present and how they are best managed.
Chapter 7, ‘Ageing and Disease’, concentrates on the 
principles of managing the frailest group who suffer 
from multiple comorbidity and disability, and who tend 
to present with non-specific problems such as falls or 
delirium. However, many older people also suffer from 
specific single-organ pathology. ‘In Old Age’ boxes are 
thus included in each chapter and describe common 
presentations, implications of physiological changes of 
ageing, effects of age on investigations, problems of 
treatment in old age, and the benefits and risks of inter-
vention in older people.
  In Pregnancy
Many conditions are different in the context of preg-
nancy, while some arise only during or shortly after 
pregnancy. Particular care must be taken with investiga-
tions (for example, to avoid radiation exposure to the 
fetus) and treatment (to avoid the use of drugs which 
harm the fetus). These issues are highlighted by ‘In Preg-
nancy’ boxes distributed throughout the book.
  In Adolescence
Although Paediatric Medicine is not covered in 
Davidson’s, many chronic disorders begin in childhood 
and adult physicians often contribute to multidiscipli-
nary teams that manage young patients ‘in transition’ 
between paediatric and adult health-care services. This 
group of patients often presents a particular challenge, 
due to the physiological and psychological changes that 
occur in adolescence and which can have a major impact 
on the disease and its management. Adolescents can 
be encouraged to take over responsibility from their 
parents/carers in managing their disease, but are natu-
rally rebellious and often struggle to adhere to the impo-
sitions of chronic treatment. To highlight these issues, 
we have introduced this new box format in the 22nd 
Edition.
Terminology
Recommended International Non-proprietary Names 
(rINNs) are used for all drugs, with the exception of 
adrenaline and noradrenaline. However, British spell-
ings have been retained for drug classes and groups (e.g. 
amphetamines not amfetamines).
Units of measurement
The International System of Units (SI units) is the recom-
mended means of presentation for laboratory data and 
has been used throughout Davidson’s. However, we 
recognise that many laboratories around the world 
continue to provide data in non-SI units, so these have 
been included in the text for the commonly measured 
analytes. Both SI and non-SI units are also given in 
Chapter 29, which describes the reference ranges used 
in Edinburgh’s laboratories. It should be appreciated 
that these reference ranges may vary from those used 
in other laboratories.
Finding what you are looking for
A contents list is given on the opening page of each 
chapter. In addition, the book contains numerous cross-
references to help readers find their way around, along 
with an extensive index of over 15 000 subject entries. 
The online text available on StudentConsult (www 
.studentconsult.com) allows for detailed searches of the 
content by keyword. A list of up-to-date reviews and 
useful websites with links to management guidelines 
appears at the end of each chapter.
xviii Acknowledgements
We are indebted to former authors who have stepped 
down from this edition. They include Dr Chris M.C. 
Allen, Dr Jeffrey K. Aronson, Dr Jane Collier, Professor 
Martin Dennis, Professor Michael Doherty, Professor B. 
Miles Fisher, Professor Brian M. Frier, Dr Ian Grant, 
Professor Christian J. Lueck, Dr Brian McClelland, Dr 
Kelvin Palmer, Professor Jonathan Rees, Dr Olivia 
Schofield, Mr Laurence H. Stewart, Dr George Webster 
and Dr Edmund Wilkins.
We are grateful to members of the International Advi-
sory Board, all of whom provided detailed suggestions 
which have improved the book. Several members have 
stepped down and we would like to thank them for their 
support during the preparation of previous editions. 
They include Professor Jan D. Bos, Professor Y.C. Chee, 
Professor W.F. Mollentze, Professor Dato’ Tahir Azhar, 
Professor C.F. Van der Merwe, Dr G. Wittert and Profes-
sor M.E. Yeolekar.
Detailed chapter reviews were commissioned to help 
plan this new edition and we would like to acknowledge 
all those who assisted, including Dr Sam Alfred, 
Dr Rustam Al-Shahi Salman, Professor Harry Campbell, 
Dr Richard Casasola, Dr Gavin Clunie, Professor Michael 
Eddleston, Dr Catherine Elliot, Professor David 
Gawkrodger, Professor Jeremy Hall, Dr Amy Hughes, 
Professor Alan Jardine, Dr Uwe Kornak, Dr Stuart 
McLellan, Dr Scott Murray, Dr Rak Nandwani, Dr David 
Patch, Professor Donald Salter, Professor John Simpson, 
Mr Grant Stewart and Professor Ian Weller.
As part of the publisher’s review, students and 
doctors from medical schools in the UK, Europe, Africa 
and Asia have provided valuable feedback on this text-
book and their comments have helped shape this new 
edition. We hope we have listed all those who have 
contributed and apologise if any names have been acci-
dentally omitted. We are indebted to the following for 
their enthusiastic support: Alessandro Aldera, Sabreen 
Ali, Syed Hyder Ali, Ashish Kumar Amant, Abdullah 
Ansaari, Ruhith Ariyapala, James Armstrong, Charu 
Dutt Arora, Akshay Athreya, Gavin Baillie, Anna Kate 
Barton, Kapil Battista, Katrina Bell, Andrew Beverstock, 
B. Bharadwaj, Charlie Billington, Lili Bird, Dwaipayan 
Biswas, Rudradeep Biswas, Sagnik Biswas, Tamoghna 
Biswas, Tom Brazel, Mark Karlsson Cairns, Rachel 
Callaghan, Elizabeth Carr, Richard Cassidy, Yen-Jei 
Chen, Sudip Chowdhury, Sarah Clay, Danielle Clyde, 
Andrew Cochrane, Amanda Collins, Guy Conlon, India 
Cox, Prafulla M. Davangere, Emma Donoghue, Kate 
Doughty, Jemima Horsley Downie, Simon Durkin, 
Padmaraj Duvvuri, Ahmad Farooqui, Ruth Fergie, Alice 
Finlayson, James Fraser, Saad Ahmed Fyyaz, David 
Gall, Raj Ghoniya, Alice Graham, Paul Gray, Vaibhav 
Gupta, Vibhuti Gupta, Sarah Guthrie, Ailsa Hamilton, 
V. Harivanzan, David Haunschmidt, Sandipan Hazra, 
Francesca Heard, Elizabeth Hird, Bernard Ho, Prerana 
Huddar, Catherine Humphreys, Adam Hunter, James 
Hyman, Pankaj Insan, Hemant Iqbal, Neethu Isac, David 
W. Jack, Ben Jacka, Aasems Jacob, Namrata Joshi, Sonal 
Sanjay Kadu, Rajdeep Kaur, Amit Kaura, Patrick Kearns, 
Rahul Khanna, Robert Kimmitt, Omkar Kulkarni, Dinesh 
Kumar, D. Praveen Kumar, Raghvendra Kumar, Sudhir 
Kumar, Vishan Lal, Sarah Langlands, Kristina Lee, Jade 
Liew, Xuxin Lim, Marie-Pier Lirette, Michael Lowe, 
Stephanie Lua, Jill Macfarlane, Piyush Madaan, Karan 
Malhotra, Kathryn Maltby, Manu Easow Mathew, 
Andrew McCulloch, James McDonald, Katy McFadyen, 
Aaron McLean, Bruce McLintock, Neil McNiven, 
Sriharsha Merugu, B.N. Mishra, Kevin Mohee, Turlough 
Montague, 
Brian 
Morrissey, 
Mohammed 
Abdul 
Muqeeth, Nikhil Narayanaswamy, Dima Nassif, Vijay 
Negalur, 
Anup 
Netravalkar, 
Douglas 
Newlands, 
Tahseen Nishath, Anna O’Donoghue, Francis O’Hanlon, 
Anas Onmu, Kate O’Sullivan, Vishal Pandit, Neena Kirit 
Pankhania, Satvik Patel, Tom Paterson, Abigail Paul, 
Christopher Pennington, Sinead Philip, Lowri Phillips, 
Rory Piper, Rachel Poffley, Michael Poon, Gyan Prakash, 
Harsh Priya, Zara Qureshi, G. Raaja, Adithi S. 
Raghavan, Arrvind Raghunath, Nidhi Rai, Gomathi 
Ravula, Chaitanya Reddy, Abhishek Roy, Suhel Abbas 
Sabunwala, Sanghamitra Samanta, Somya Saxena, Jenna 
Schafers, Victoria Scott, Sanket Shah, Aitha Shiva, Peng 
Yong Sim, Ajay Paul Singh, Nikita Nilabh Singh, Kiran 
Kumar Singuru, Reetu Sinha, Andrew Smith, Amanda 
Swan, Shabiullah Syyed, Callum Taylor, Iain Tennant, 
Nailesh Thozanenjan, Jason Ting, Kathleen Tinkler, 
Prasanna S. Vadhan, Ela Varasi, Siddarth Varshney, 
Arun Kumar Vasa, Monica Vijayakumar, Andrew 
Wilson, Vincent Wong, James Wood, Sara Zafar and 
Jim Zhong.
We would like to extend our thanks to the many 
readers who contacted us with suggestions for improve-
ments. Their input has been invaluable and is much 
appreciated; they are unfortunately too numerous to 
mention individually.
We are grateful to colleagues who have generously 
provided many of the illustrations that appear in this 
edition. They are acknowledged on the next page.
We are especially grateful to all those working for 
Churchill Livingstone, in particular Laurence Hunter, 
Wendy Lee and Robert Britton, for their endless support 
and expertise in the shaping, collation and illustration 
of this edition. We would also like to thank Louisa 
Talbott for her efficient project management, Susan 
Boobis for her labours in compiling the extensive index 
and Ruth Noble for expert proofreading.
BRW, NRC, SHR, IDP
Edinburgh
xix
Figure acknowledgements
imago/sediment/sed.htm). Figs 17.1CE, 17.22ACDE 
Dr J.G. Simpson, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary.  
Figs 17.3AB, 17.4AB, 17.5, 17.25, 17.27, 17.32AB 
Dr A.P. Bayliss and Dr P. Thorpe, Aberdeen Royal 
Infirmary. Fig. 17.22F–H Dr R. Herriot. Fig. 17.23BC 
Dr J. Collar, St Mary’s Hospital, London. Fig. 17.29 
Dr P. Robinson, St James’s University Hospital,  
Leeds.
Fig. 18.82E Dr T. Lawton. Fig. 18.83AB Dr B. Cullen.
Page 644 insets (idiopathic kyphoscoliosis) Dr I. Smith, 
Papworth Hospital, Cambridge; (serous, mucopurulent 
and purulent sputum) Dr J. Foweraker, Papworth 
Hospital, Cambridge. Fig. 19.15 Dr P. Sivasothy, Dept 
of Respiratory Medicine, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, 
Cambridge. Fig. 19.26B British Lung Foundation. Figs 
19.36, 19.58, 19.59, 19.66B Dr William Wallace, Dept of 
Pathology, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh. Fig. 19.41 
Adam Hill. Fig. 19.44 Mr T. Russell and Dr M. Hanson, 
Dept of Microbiology, NHS Lothian. Fig. 19.66A Dr S. 
Jackson, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh. Fig. 
19.71 Prof N.J. Douglas.
Fig. 20.4 inset (toxic multinodular goitre) 
Dr P.L. Padfield, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh.
Page 798 inset (exudative maculopathy), page 799 
(background and proliferative retinopathy) Dr A.W. Patrick 
and Dr I.W. Campbell. Fig. 21.4 insets (normal islet, 
beta-cell destruction) Dr A. Foulis, Dept of Pathology, 
University of Glasgow.
Fig. 22.14A Given Imaging.
Figs 23.10, 23.34, 23.37, 23.43 Dr D. Redhead, Royal 
Infirmary of Edinburgh.
Fig. 25.6 Dr I. Beggs; Fig. 25.7 Dr N. McKay.
Page 1138 insets (winging of scapula, 12th nerve palsy, 
wasting of thenar eminence) Dr R.E. Cull, Western 
General Hospital, Edinburgh. Figs 26.12A–C, 26.13A–C 
Dr D. Collie. Fig. 26.22C Dr B. Cullen. Fig. 26.27 Prof. 
D.A.S. Compston. Fig. 26.29 Dr J. Xuereb.
Figs 27.4AB, 27.9AB Dr A. Farrell and Prof. J. Wardlaw. 
Fig. 27.5A–D Dr D. Collie.
Figures reproduced with the publisher’s permission 
are listed at the end of each chapter. We are also 
grateful to the following individuals  and organisations 
for the loan of illustrations:
Fig. 5.18A Institute of Ophthalmology, Moorfields Eye 
Hospital, London.
Fig. 6.9 Disc kindly supplied by Charlotte Symes.
Figs 10.4, 10.5AB Dr J. Xuereb.
Fig. 11.5 Dr J. Wilsdon, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle 
upon Tyne.
Page 294 insets (splinter haemorrhages) Dr Nick Beeching, 
Royal Liverpool University Hospital; (Roth’s spots) 
Prof. Ian Rennie, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, 
Sheffield. Page 295 (streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, 
meningococcal sepsis, shingles), Fig. 13.1 inset (cellulitis 
of the leg), Figs 13.6ABD, 13.20, 13.44B, 13.45B, 13.51 
Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield. 
Fig. 13.1 insets (pulmonary tuberculosis) Dr Ann 
Chapman, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield; 
(empyema, pyogenic liver abscess, diverticular abscess, 
tuberculous osteomyelitis) Dr Robert Peck, Royal 
Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield. Fig. 13.3C Dr Julia 
Greig, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield. Fig. 13.6C 
Dr Rattanaphone Phetsouvanh, Mahosot Hospital, 
Vientiane, PDR Laos. Fig. 13.14 Prof. Goura Kudesia, 
Northern General Hospital, Sheffield. Fig. 13.29 
Institute of Ophthalmology, Moorfields Eye Hospital, 
London. Fig. 13.33 insets (malaria retinopathy) Dr 
Nicholas Beare, Royal Liverpool University Hospital; 
(blood films of P. vivax and P. falciparum) Dr Kamolrat 
Silamut, Mahidol Oxford Research Unit, Bangkok, 
Thailand. Fig. 13.41 Dr S. Sundar and Dr H.W. Murray. 
Fig. 13.42B Dr E.E. Zijlstra. Fig. 13.53 Dr Wendi Bailey, 
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. Fig. 13.57 insets 
(dimorphic fungi) Beatriz Gomez and Angela Restrepo, 
CIB, Medellín, Colombia.
Page 388 inset (oral hairy leucoplakia) Audiovisual Dept, 
St Mary’s Hospital, London.
Fig. 15.4 Dr P. Hay, St George’s Hospital, London.
Page 463(4AB) Dr G.M. Iadorola and Dr F. Quarello, 
G. Bosco Hospital, Turin (from www.sin-italia.org/
This page intentionally left blank
1
1 
Medical practice 2
The doctor–patient relationship 2
Communication and other clinical skills 4
Using investigations 4
Estimating and communicating risk 7
Clinical decision-making 7
Practising medicine in low-resource settings 9
Medical ethics 9
Medical law 13
Personal and professional development 14
Complementary and alternative medicine 15
Good medical practice
A.D. Cumming
S.I.R. Noble
Good medical practice
1 
2
formulate a treatment plan. In oncology, for example, 
this ensures that various modalities of treatment (surgi­
cal, oncological and palliative) are considered.
The doctor–patient relationship is in itself thera­
peutic; a successful consultation with a trusted and 
respected practitioner will have beneficial effects irre­
spective of any other therapy given. The doctor–patient 
relationship is multilayered, dynamic and bilateral 
(Fig. 1.1).
Regulatory bodies, such as the UK General Medical 
Council, seek to define the medical side of the doctor–
patient relationship in terms of the ‘Duties of a Doctor’ 
(Box 1.2). It is common for medical schools to require 
undergraduate students to sign an ethical code of 
conduct based on statements like this.
Difficulties in the  
doctor–patient relationship
Regardless of experience and skill, it is inevitable that, 
at some point in a doctor’s career, the doctor–patient 
relationship will break down. There can be many reasons 
for this; sometimes, these are beyond the control of the 
clinician, but often conflict arises when there is a genuine 
or perceived failure of the doctor to meet one or more 
of the duties outlined in Box 1.2. It is important to rec­
ognise a breakdown in the relationship quickly and, 
whenever possible, identify the reason. If patients are 
unhappy with an aspect of their care, they are entitled 
to a prompt, open, constructive and honest response that 
includes an explanation and, if appropriate, an apology. 
It is also important to reassure the patient that the issues 
raised will not adversely affect their future care.
Often, an acknowledgement that something is wrong 
and demonstration of a desire to put things right are 
sufficient to rectify any conflict. However, the longer 
Since the time of Hippocrates, the role of the doctor has 
extended beyond the narrow remit of curing patients of 
their ailments. Good medical practice, or the art of medi­
cine, hinges on recognising and respecting the breadth 
of physical, cultural, spiritual, experiential and psycho­
social characteristics of each patient, and understanding 
their impact on the patient’s beliefs, attitudes and expec­
tations. Doctors must deliver appropriate care which 
considers the technical complexities of modern treat­
ment, and at the same time deals with the communica­
tion and interpersonal needs of the patient, at a time 
when he or she may feel most vulnerable. In addition to 
the diagnosis and treatment of illness, the scope of medi­
cine has expanded to preventing disease through meas­
ures such as screening, vaccination and health promotion. 
Doctors are centrally involved in tackling lifestyle-
related issues of the modern world, such as obesity, 
alcohol excess, cigarette smoking and sexual health.
Medical professionalism has been described in the 
UK by a Royal College of Physicians working party 
(2005) as ‘a set of values, behaviours and relationships 
that underpin the trust the public has in doctors’. They 
stated that doctors should be committed to integrity, 
compassion, altruism, continuous improvement, excel­
lence, and working in partnership with members of the 
wider health-care team. They perceived that medical 
professionalism was relevant to leadership, education, 
career pathways, appraisal and research.
This chapter outlines how doctors must provide 
patients and their families with relevant but complex 
information, discuss management options, and reach 
appropriate clinical decisions, commensurate with the 
available resources. It also describes processes to 
develop, maintain and assure medical professionalism.
MEDICAL PRACTICE
The doctor–patient relationship
The contents of this book are not all based on indisput­
able contemporary evidence; many reflect wisdom and 
understanding distilled over hundreds of years and 
passed from generation to generation of doctors. This 
perceived wisdom lies at the heart of the way that 
doctors and patients interact; it demands respect, and if 
the doctor also displays compassion, sets the scene for 
the development of trust.
Due to the complexities of many chronic diseases and 
treatments, and the multifaceted impact of illness on a 
patient, there is an increasing role for health care to be 
delivered by a multidisciplinary team (Box 1.1). This 
model of care recognises the different skills of each allied 
health professional and focuses patient care beyond sur­
gical procedures or pharmacological manipulation. The 
doctor usually takes the lead in determining the overall 
direction of care but must also:
•	 guide the patient through the unfamiliar landscape, 
language and customs of clinical care
•	 interpret, synthesise and convey complex information
•	 help patients and families to participate fully in the 
decision-making process.
In many clinical disciplines, doctors from several spe­
cialties form a multidisciplinary team in order to 
Professional
Roles
Doctor
Diagnosis and treatment
Overall coordination of care
Specialist nurse
Patient and family support
Information-giving
Physiotherapist
Improving physical function
Physical rehabilitation
Occupational therapist
Maximising skills and abilities
Complex re-enablement
Speech and language 
therapist
Optimising communication
Swallowing assessment
Dietitian
Nutritional advice
Parenteral feeding support
Pharmacist
Safe prescribing
Complex medicines delivery
Social worker
Coordination of home care
Financial advice
Clinical psychologist
Cognitive interventions
Psychological support
Pastoral care
Psychological support
Spiritual support
1.1  Members and roles of a multidisciplinary 
team
Medical practice
1 
3
Fig. 1.1  Some aspects of the doctor–patient relationship. 
You can’t expect to lose weight
if you eat 4000 calories a day
I’ve been waiting 30 minutes
out there, doctor
I believe this patient’s telling me
the truth
I believe this doctor will do the right
thing for me
Trust
I don’t believe what this patient’s
telling me
I don’t have much confidence in
this doctor
Cynicism
Attitudes and beliefs
This patient deserves the best
care I can provide
I think she’s a very good doctor
This patient needs to pull himself
together
I don’t think much of her
These are the choices. My
recommendation would be...
This is what I’m going to do...
Paternalism
I’m hoping for the best but realise
there are limits
I hope he takes the tablets 
– but perhaps he won’t
Realistic
This test’s always right, so you
don’t have prostate cancer
You must be able to cure this,
it’s your job...
Distorted
Respect
Scorn
If you stop smoking you’ll fare
much better after the operation
Reasonable
Smoking never hurt me or my father
–  he died at 82 of stomach cancer
Not amenable
to reason
The main thing is to get you fit in
time for your daughter’s wedding
Common
vision
The main thing is to get you out
of hospital
Asymmetrical
perception
I get the feeling you’re
worried about something?
Listening/
hearing
Any fever? Jaundice? TB?
Indigestion?
Not listening/
hearing
Behaviours and roles
OK, can I just ask you to go over
those symptoms again?
Calm
Anger,
irritation
Well done, Mr Jones, you’ve
lost 6 pounds and your blood
pressure’s down
Thank you, doctor, for your
good work
Praise
Criticism
There’s slight inflammation in your
kidneys causing red blood cells
to leak out in the urine
Clarity
Jargon
You have IgA nephropathy causing
microscopic haematuria
Doctor
Patient
I’d like more time to think about it
Autonomy
Mr Jones, as long as you continue
to smoke I’m really wasting my time
Whatever you say, doctor
Patients must be able to trust doctors with their lives and health. 
To justify that trust you must show respect for human life and 
make sure your practice meets the standards expected of you in 
four domains.
Knowledge, skills and performance
•	 Make the care of your patient your first concern.
•	 Provide a good standard of practice and care.
Keep your professional knowledge and skills up to date.
Recognise and work within the limits of your competence.
Safety and quality
•	 Take prompt action if you think that patient safety, dignity or 
comfort is being compromised.
•	 Protect and promote the health of patients and the public.
Communication, partnership and teamwork
•	 Treat patients as individuals and respect their dignity.
Treat patients politely and considerately.
Respect patients’ right to confidentiality.
•	 Work in partnership with patients.
Listen to, and respond to, their concerns and preferences.
Give patients the information they want or need in a way 
they can understand.
Respect patients’ right to reach decisions with you about 
their treatment and care.
Support patients in caring for themselves to improve and 
maintain their health.
•	 Work with colleagues in the ways that best serve patients’ 
interests.
Maintaining trust
•	 Be honest and open and act with integrity.
•	 Never discriminate unfairly against patients or colleagues.
•	 Never abuse your patients’ trust in you or the public’s trust in 
the profession.
You are personally accountable for your professional practice 
and must always be prepared to justify your decisions and actions.
1.2  The duties of a doctor registered with the UK General Medical Council
Good medical practice
1 
4
Specific communication scenarios, such as breaking 
bad news or dealing with aggression, require additional 
targeted strategies (see Macleod’s Clinical Examination).
While many common clinical conditions can be iden­
tified on the basis of the history from the patient, the 
process of physical examination remains important in 
most clinical scenarios. Physical examination is an 
important characteristic of the doctor–patient relation­
ship, at best benefiting from and reinforcing trust, but 
at worst a focus of complaint when the doctor–patient 
relationship has not been established or has broken 
down. Key findings on physical examination pointing to 
disease in specific body systems are described in the 
relevant chapters of this book.
Using investigations
Modern medical practice has become dominated by 
sophisticated and often expensive investigations. It is 
easy to forget that the judicious use of these tools, and 
the interpretation of the data that they provide, are cru­
cially dependent on good basic clinical skills. Indeed, a 
test should only be ordered if it is clear that the result 
will influence the patient’s management and the per­
ceived value of the resulting information exceeds the 
•	 Open questions allow patients to express their own thoughts 
and feelings, e.g. ‘How have you been since we last saw 
you?’, ‘Is there anything else that you want to mention?’
•	 Closed questions are requests for factual information, e.g. 
‘When did this pain start?’
•	 Leading questions invite specific responses and suggest 
options, e.g. ‘You’ll be glad when this treatment is over, 
won’t you?’
•	 Reflecting questions help to develop or expand topics, e.g. 
‘Can you tell me more about your family?’
•	 Active listening encourages further dialogue, e.g. ‘Go on,’ 
‘I see,’ ‘Hmm’ etc.
•	 Requesting clarification encourages further detail, e.g. 
‘How do mean?’, ‘In what way?’ etc.
•	 Summarising ensures accurate understanding, e.g. ‘Tell me 
if I’ve got this right.’
1.4  Communication skills in the 
medical interview
The clinician
•	 Authoritarian or dismissive attitude
•	 Hurried approach
•	 Use of jargon
•	 Inability to speak first language of patient
•	 No experience of patient’s cultural background
The patient
•	 Anxiety
•	 Reluctance to discuss sensitive or seemingly trivial issues
•	 Misconceptions
•	 Conflicting sources of information
•	 Cognitive impairment
•	 Hearing/speech/visual impediment
1.3  Some barriers to good communication in 
health care
one takes to address a problem, the more difficult it 
becomes to resolve. The patient may continue to be 
dissatisfied with the doctor and it may be most 
appropriate for another colleague to take over their care. 
It is important to reflect on such incidents, to identify 
whether one would approach a similar challenge 
differently next time.
Communication and other clinical skills
Communication lies at the heart of good medical prac­
tice. The most technically capable clinician will fail in 
the duty of care if he or she is unable to communicate 
effectively with patients or relatives, since this is 
essential for accurate history-taking, information-giving 
and decision-making. Likewise, the delivery of holistic 
care requires effective communication with other doctors 
and members of the multidisciplinary team. Clear and 
appropriately detailed clinical note-keeping is essential, 
as are timely and accurate written communications 
between professionals.
Failures in communication may lead to poor health 
outcomes, strained working relations, dissatisfaction 
among patients, their families and health professionals, 
anger and litigation. The majority of complaints received 
by health-care professionals could have been avoided by 
effective communication. Box 1.3 lists some common 
barriers to good communication.
Developing communication skills to facilitate accu­
rate history-taking and information-giving takes many 
years and requires frequent personal reflection on previ­
ous consultations. A detailed account of history-taking, 
clinical examination and communication skills is beyond 
the scope of this chapter but is provided in Davidson’s 
sister book, Macleod’s Clinical Examination. However, 
some communication principles are discussed below 
and these can be applied to most consultations.
The main aim of a medical interview is to establish a 
factual account of the patient’s illness. The clinician must 
allow the patient to describe the problems without 
overbearing interrogation, but should try to facilitate 
the process with appropriate questions (Box 1.4). Tech­
niques such as an unhurried approach, checking prior 
understanding, making it clear that the interviewer is 
listening, the use of silence when appropriate, recapping 
on what has been said, and reflection of key points back 
to the patient are all important. A major requirement is 
to express complex information and concepts in lan­
guage with which the patient can readily engage. Non-
verbal communication is equally important. The patient’s 
facial expressions and body language may betray hidden 
fears. The clinician can help the patient to talk more 
freely by smiling or nodding appropriately.
Beyond the factual account of symptoms, the clini­
cian should also explore patients’ feelings, determine 
how they interpret their symptoms, unearth their con­
cerns and fears, and explore their expectations before 
suggesting and agreeing a plan of management. Clini­
cians should demonstrate understanding, sensitivity 
and empathy (i.e. imagine themselves in the patient’s 
position). Most patients have more than one concern and 
will be reluctant to discuss potentially important issues 
if they feel that the clinician is not interested or is likely 
to dismiss their complaints as irrational or trivial.
Medical practice
1 
5
Fig. 1.2). In some diseases, there is typically no overlap 
between results from the normal and abnormal popula­
tion (e.g. elevated serum creatinine in renal failure, 
p. 467). In many diseases, however, there is overlap, 
sometimes extending into the reference range (e.g. ele­
vated serum thyroxine in toxic multinodular goitre, 
p. 753). In these circumstances, the greater the difference 
between the test result and the limits of the reference 
range, the higher the chance that the person has a 
disease, but there is a risk that results within the refer­
ence range may be ‘false negatives’ and results outside 
the reference range may be ‘false positives’.
Each time a test is performed in a member of the 
normal population there is a 5% (1 in 20) chance that the 
result will be outside the reference range. If two tests are 
performed, the chance that one of them will be ‘abnor­
mal’ is 10% (2 in 20), and so on; the chance of an ‘abnor­
mal’ result increases as more tests are performed, so 
multiple indiscriminate testing should be avoided.
In practice, reference ranges are usually established 
by performing the test in a number of healthy volunteers 
who are assumed to be a random sample of the normal 
population. Not all populations are the same, however, 
and while it is common to have different reference 
ranges for men and women or children and adults, clini­
cians need to be aware that reference ranges defined 
either by test manufacturers or even within the local 
laboratory may have been established in small numbers 
of healthy young people who are not necessarily repre­
sentative of their patient population.
For some tests, the clinical decision does not depend 
on whether or not the patient is a member of the normal 
population. This commonly applies to quantitative risk 
factors for future disease. For example, higher plasma 
total cholesterol levels are associated with a higher risk 
of future myocardial infarction (p. 583) within the 
normal population. Although a reference range for cho­
lesterol can be calculated, cholesterol-lowering therapy 
is commonly recommended for people with values 
within the reference range; the ‘cutoff’ value at which 
therapy is recommended depends upon the presence of 
other risk factors for cardiovascular disease. The refer­
ence range for plasma cholesterol is therefore redundant 
and the phrase ‘normal plasma cholesterol level’ is 
unhelpful. Similar arguments apply for interpretation of 
values of blood pressure (p. 583), bone mineral density 
(p. 1065) and so on.
Some quantitative test results are not normally dis­
tributed, usually because a substantial proportion of 
the normal population will have an unrecordably low 
result (e.g. serum prostate-specific antigen, p. 518), and 
the distribution cannot be described by mean and SDs. 
Alternative statistical procedures can be used to calcu­
late 95th centiles, but it is common in these circum­
stances to use information from normal and abnormal 
people to identify ‘cutoff’ values which are associated 
with a certain risk of disease, as described below.
Sensitivity and specificity
No test is completely reliable. All diagnostic tests can 
produce false positives (an abnormal result in the 
absence of disease) and false negatives (a normal result 
in a patient with disease). The diagnostic accuracy of a 
test can be expressed in terms of its sensitivity and its 
specificity (Box 1.5).
anticipated discomfort, risk and cost of the procedure. 
Clinicians should therefore analyse their patient’s condi­
tion carefully and draw up a provisional management 
plan before requesting any investigations.
The ‘normal’ (or reference) range
Although some tests provide qualitative results (present 
or absent, e.g. faecal occult blood testing, p. 857), most 
provide quantitative results (i.e. a value on a continuous 
numeric scale). In order to classify quantitative results 
as normal or abnormal, it is necessary to define a ‘normal 
range’. Many quantitative measurements in populations 
exhibit a bell-shaped, or Gaussian, frequency distribu­
tion (Fig. 1.2); this is called a ‘normal distribution’ and 
is characteristic of biological variables determined by a 
complex mixture of genetic and environmental factors 
(e.g. height) and of test results (e.g. plasma sodium con­
centration). A normal distribution can be described by 
the mean value (which places the centre of the bell-
shaped curve on the x axis) and the standard deviation 
(SD, which describes the width of the bell-shaped curve). 
Within each SD away from the mean, there is a fixed 
percentage of the population. By convention, the ‘normal 
range’ is defined as those values which encompass 95% 
of the population, i.e. the values within 2 SDs above and 
below the mean. If this convention is used, however, 
2.5% of the normal population will have values above, 
and 2.5% will have values below, the normal range; for 
this reason, it is more precise to describe ‘reference’ 
rather than ‘normal’ ranges.
‘Abnormal’ results, i.e. those lying beyond 2 SDs from 
the mean, may occur either because the person is one of 
the 2.5% of the normal population whose test result is 
outside the reference range, or because he or she has a 
disease characterised by a different result from the test. 
Test results in ‘abnormal’ populations also have a bell-
shaped distribution with a different mean and SD (see 
Fig. 1.2  Normal distribution and ‘normal’ (reference) range. 
For many tests, the frequency distribution of results in the normal healthy 
population (red line) is a symmetrical bell-shaped curve. The mean ± 2 
standard deviations (SD) encompasses 95% of the normal population and 
usually defines the ‘normal range’ (or ‘reference range’); 2.5% of the 
normal population have values above, and 2.5% below, the reference 
range (shaded areas). For some diseases (blue line), test results overlap 
with the normal population or even with the reference range. For other 
diseases (green line), tests may be more reliable because there is no 
overlap between the normal and abnormal population. 
Normal
population
Abnormal
populations
Number of people
having each value
Mean
Mean
–2 SD
Mean
+2 SD
‘Normal range’
Value
Good medical practice
1 
6
Fig. 1.3  Receiver operating characteristic graphs illustrating 
the trade-off between sensitivity and specificity for a given test. 
The curve is generated by ‘adjusting’ the cutoff values defining normal  
and abnormal results, calculating the effect on sensitivity and specificity 
and then plotting these against each other. The closer the curve lies to  
the top left-hand corner, the more useful the test. The red line illustrates  
a test with useful discriminant value and the green line illustrates a less 
useful, poorly discriminant test. 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Specificity
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sensitivity
Positive test
Post-test probability 
of disease 
=
×
×
+
−
×
−
pre
sens
pre
sens
sens
spec
(
)
((
)
(
))
1
1
Negative test
Post-test probability 
of disease 
=
×
−
×
−
+
−
×
pre
sens
pre
sens
pre
spec
(
)
(
(
))
((
)
)
1
1
1
(pre = pre-test probability of disease; sens = sensitivity; 
spec = specificity)
Example
Assume: Exercise tolerance testing for the diagnosis of coronary 
artery disease (CAD) (using cutoff of 2 mm ST depression) has 
70% sensitivity (0.7) and 90% specificity (0.9) The pre-test odds 
of significant CAD in a 65-year-old woman with atypical angina 
on effort are 50% (0.5)
Post-test odds of significant CAD will be:
Positive test 
0 5
0 7
0 5
0 7
0 3
0 1
92
.
.
( .
. )
( .
. )
%
×
×
+
×
=
 
Negative test 
0 5
0 3
0 5
0 3
0 5
0 9
25
.
.
( .
. )
( .
. )
%
×
×
+
×
=
In contrast, the pre-test probability of significant coronary 
disease in a 45-year-old man with typical angina on effort would 
be 90%, with post-test odds of 95% in the event of a positive 
exercise test and 75% in the event of a negative test.
1.6  Bayes’ theorem: post-test likelihood of 
disease
Affected
Unaffected
Positive test
True +ve (a)
False +ve (b)
Negative test
False −ve (c)
True –ve (d)
Sensitivity (%) = [a/(a + c)] × 100
Specificity (%) = [d/(b + d)] × 100
Positive predictive value = a/(a + b)
Negative predictive value = d/(c + d)
Likelihood ratio: positive test = sensitivity/(1 − specificity)
negative test = (1 − sensitivity)/specificity
1.5  The accuracy of diagnostic tests
Sensitivity is defined as the percentage of the test 
population who are affected by the index condition and 
test positive for it. In contrast, specificity is defined as 
the percentage of the test population who are healthy 
and test negative. A very sensitive test will detect most 
disease but may generate abnormal findings in healthy 
people; a negative result will therefore reliably exclude 
disease but a positive test is likely to require further 
evaluation. On the other hand, a very specific test may 
miss significant pathology but is likely to establish the 
diagnosis, beyond doubt, when the result is positive.
In choosing how a test is used to guide decision-
making, there is an inevitable trade-off between 
emphasising sensitivity versus specificity. For example, 
defining an exercise electrocardiogram (p. 534) as abnor­
mal if there is at least 0.5 mm ST depression will ensure 
that very few cases of coronary artery disease are missed 
but will generate many false-positive tests (high sensi­
tivity, low specificity). On the other hand, a cutoff point 
of at least 2.0 mm ST depression will detect most cases 
of important coronary disease with far fewer false-
positives. This trade-off can be illustrated by the receiver 
operating characteristic curve of the test (Fig. 1.3).
Predictive value
The predictive value of a test is determined by its sensi­
tivity and specificity, and can be expressed in several 
ways. The positive predictive value is the probability 
that a patient with a positive test has the index condi­
tion, while the negative predictive value is the probabil­
ity that a patient with a negative test does not have the 
condition (see Box 1.5). The likelihood ratio expresses 
the odds that a given finding would occur in a patient 
with, as opposed to a patient without, the index condi­
tion (see Box 1.5); as the odds rise above 1, the probabil­
ity that disease is present rises.
The interpretation and the utility of a test are 
critically dependent on the circumstances in which it is 
used. Bayes’ theorem dictates that the value of a 
diagnostic test is determined by the prevalence of the 
condition in the test population. The probability that a 
subject has a particular condition (the post-test probabil­
ity) can be calculated if the pre-test probability and 
the sensitivity and specificity of the test are known 
(Box 1.6). A test is most valuable when there is an 
intermediate pre-test probability of disease. Clinicians 
seldom have access to such precise information but must 
appreciate the importance of integrating clinical and 
laboratory data.
Screening
Many health-care systems run screening programmes to 
detect important (and treatable) disease in apparently 
healthy but at-risk individuals. These initiatives may be 
directed towards a single pathology (e.g. mammogra­
phy for breast cancer, p. 280) or may comprise a battery 
Medical practice
1 
7
Fig. 1.4  Visual portrayal of benefit and risks. The image refers to 
an operation that is expected to relieve symptoms in 90% of patients, but 
cause stroke in 2% and death in 1%. From Edwards, et al. 2002 – see  
p. 16.
Feel better
No difference
Stroke
Dead
Would you take a drug once a day for a year to prevent stroke if:
•	 it reduced your risk of having a stroke by 47%?
•	 it reduced your chance of suffering a stroke from 0.26% to 
0.14%?
•	 there was one chance in 850 that it would prevent you 
having a stroke?
•	 849 out of 850 patients derived no benefit from the 
treatment?
•	 there was a 99.7% chance that you would not have a stroke 
anyway?
All these statements are derived from the same data and 
describe an equivalent effect.*
*MRC trial of treatment of mild hypertension (bendroflumethiazide vs 
placebo). BMJ 1985; 291:97–104.
1.8  Explaining the risks and benefits of therapy
•	 The prevalence of the disease in the target population
•	 The cost of the screening test
•	 The sensitivity and specificity of the screening test
•	 The availability and effectiveness of treatment
•	 The cost of not detecting and treating the disease
1.7  Factors that influence the cost-effectiveness 
of screening for a disease
of tests for a wide range of conditions. Screening inevi­
tably generates a number of false-positive results that 
require further, potentially expensive and sometimes 
risky, investigation. This may engender a good deal of 
anxiety for the patient and create dilemmas for the clini­
cian; for example, it may be difficult to determine how 
to evaluate minor abnormalities of the liver function 
tests in an otherwise healthy person (p. 935).
Some of the criteria that must be considered before 
deciding if the wider costs of a screening programme 
can be justified are listed in Box 1.7.
Estimating and communicating risk
Medical management decisions are usually made by 
weighing up the anticipated benefits of a particular pro­
cedure or treatment against the potential risks. To allow 
patients to contribute to the decision-making process, 
health professionals must be able to explain risk in an 
accurate and understandable way.
Providing the relevant biomedical facts is seldom 
sufficient to guide decision-making because a patient’s 
perception of risk is often coloured by emotional, and 
sometimes irrational, factors. Most patients will have 
access to information from a wide variety of sometimes 
conflicting sources, including the Internet, books, maga­
zines, self-help groups, other health-care professionals, 
friends and family. The clinician must be aware of and 
sensitive to the way in which these resources influence 
the individual, while building trust with the patient, 
clarifying the problem and conveying the key facts.
Research evidence provides statistics but these can be 
confusing (Box 1.8). Relative risk describes the propor­
tional increase in risk; it is a useful measure of the size 
of an effect. In contrast, absolute risk describes the actual 
chance of an event and is what matters to most patients. 
Terms such as ‘common’, ‘rare’, ‘probable’ and ‘unlikely’ 
are elastic. Whenever possible, clinicians should quote 
numerical information using consistent denominators 
(e.g. ‘90 of 100 patients who have this operation feel 
much better, 1 will die during the operation and 2 will 
suffer a stroke’). Positive framing (‘There is a 99% chance 
of survival’) and negative framing (‘There is a 1% chance 
of death’) may both be appropriate. A variety of visual 
aids can be used to present complex statistical informa­
tion (Fig. 1.4).
Finally, it is essential to allow the patient to place his 
or her own weighting on the potential benefits and 
adverse effects of each course of action. Thus, some 
patients may choose to sacrifice a good chance of pain 
relief because they are not prepared to run even a small 
risk of paralysis, whilst others may opt to proceed with 
very high-risk spinal surgery because they find their 
current circumstances intolerable.
Clinical decision-making
Assimilating symptoms, signs and results of investiga­
tions into a diagnosis and then planning treatment are 
highly complex tasks that require not only factual 
knowledge but also a highly developed set of skills in 
decision-making. Diagnostic decision-making is guided 
by Ockham’s razor, originally expressed by the 14th- 
century Englishman William of Ockham as ‘plurality 
should not be posited without necessity.’ In short, all 
things being equal, the simplest explanation is the 
best. In practice, clinicians formulate hypotheses about 
the underlying diagnosis (or shortlist of diagnoses, 
the ‘differential’ diagnosis) during the consultation 
with the patient and refine this hypothesis both by 
collecting selected additional information and by choos­
ing to ignore other information which they regard as 
irrelevant, in order to reach the most parsimonious 
diagnosis.
Decision-making in health care often operates under 
conditions of uncertainty, where it is uncertain what is 
wrong with the patient or which treatment is most 
appropriate. This can lead to variations in how clinicians 
Good medical practice
1 
8
make decisions, and subsequently variations in the 
care that patients receive. Clinicians often employ a 
process of ‘ad hoc’ decision-making, where they use 
some form of global judgement about what might be the 
best course of action for an individual patient. These ad 
hoc decisions may be based on a number of factors, 
including what a clinician has been taught, his or her 
clinical experience of other patients with that particular 
disease, or what is common practice within a particular 
institution. However, such decisions may be governed 
by heuristics or bias, which may lead to errors. Heuris­
tics are cognitive processes or ‘rules of thumb’ used 
unconsciously when making decisions (Box 1.9). Such 
processes may lead to mistakes, most commonly when 
there is a lack of evidence to inform practice. Whenever 
possible, clinical decision-making should be guided by 
evidence-based medicine.
Evidence-based medicine
Patient treatment should be based on the integration 
of best research evidence alongside clinical expertise 
and patient values. The discipline of evidence-based 
medicine (EBM) came into being in order to introduce a 
more systematic approach to the use of evidence in 
making clinical decisions. This was made possible by:
•	 the development of statistical methods to analyse 
data systematically
•	 recognition of the importance of analysing all data, 
both published and unpublished
•	 the development of databases of relevant information 
and systems by which to access such information.
*From the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN; see 
www.sign.ac.uk). This scheme is widely used, although other modified 
schemes exist.
Levels of evidence (in descending order of strength)
Ia	
Evidence obtained from meta-analysis of randomised 
clinical trials
Ib	
Evidence obtained from at least one randomised controlled 
trial
IIa	 Evidence obtained from at least one well-designed 
controlled study without randomisation
IIb	 Evidence obtained from at least one other type of 
well-designed quasi-experimental study
III	
Evidence obtained from well-designed non-experimental 
descriptive studies, such as comparative studies, 
correlation studies and case studies
IV	
Evidence obtained from expert committee reports or 
opinions and/or clinical experiences of respected authorities
Grades of recommendation
A	
Directly based on level I studies
B	
Directly based on level II studies or extrapolations from 
level I studies
C	
Directly based on level III studies or extrapolations from 
level I or II studies
D	
Directly based on level IV studies or extrapolations from 
level I, II or III studies
1.10  Categories in evidence-based 
medicine (EBM)*
Availability
•	 The probability of an event is estimated based on how easily 
an individual can recall a similar event, e.g. a doctor judges 
that a patient has a particular disease because the case 
reminds him or her of a similar case seen recently
•	 This can lead to errors, as individuals often recall recent or 
vivid events more easily, rather than considering the 
likelihood of an event in the wider population
Representativeness
•	 The probability of an event is estimated based on how 
similar (or representative) it is of a wider category of events, 
e.g. a doctor judges that a patient has a particular disease 
because the patient’s signs and symptoms are 
‘representative’ of that disease
•	 This can lead to errors, such as neglecting to take into 
account the prevalence of the disease in a specific patient 
population
Anchoring and adjustment
•	 The probability of an event is estimated by taking an initial 
reference point (anchor) and then adjusting this to reach a 
final judgement about likelihood, e.g. a doctor judges that the 
likelihood of a patient having a particular disease is 60%. 
The doctor collects information (perhaps from diagnostic 
tests) and re-assesses his or her estimation on the basis of 
these results to reach a final diagnosis
•	 This can lead to errors, as final estimations of likelihood are 
linked to the original anchor, so if this is incorrect, the final 
judgement is also likely to be inaccurate
1.9  Heuristics in clinical decision-making
The principles of EBM are based on the tenet that 
well-formulated questions about medical management 
can be answered by:
•	 conducting high-quality randomised controlled 
trials
•	 tracing all the available evidence
•	 critically appraising the evidence
•	 applying the evidence to the management of the 
individual patient.
EBM categorises different types of clinical evidence 
and ranks them according to their freedom from the 
various biases that beset medical research. It therefore 
places greater emphasis on evidence from a meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials than on a series 
of case reports or expert opinion (Box 1.10).
Guidelines and protocols
The terms ‘clinical guidelines’ and ‘protocols’ are often 
used together, yet they are inherently different.
Guidelines
Clinical guidelines aim to guide clinicians on how to 
manage specific clinical scenarios using the best availa­
ble evidence. They have been in existence throughout 
the history of medicine, although many were based on 
tradition or authority. A large number of local, national 
and international bodies have produced guidelines, 
following a range of different methodologies (see 
www.evidence.nhs.uk). Some are based on systematic 
reviews of the medical literature and others on consen­
sus of expert opinion. When considering guidelines, it is 
important for clinicians to be aware of the strength 
of the evidence on which the recommendations are 
based (see Box 1.10).
Medical practice
1 
9
(4 × 0.6). Thus a cost per QALY can be calculated and 
compared with other interventions (p. 32). This approach 
is not perfect but offers a means of comparing the cost-
effectiveness of a wide range of treatments.
Another useful measure is the disability-adjusted 
life year (DALY), which is used by the World Health 
Organization to quantify the overall burden of disease 
in populations; it cumulatively estimates the number of 
years lost due to ill health, disability and death.
Practising medicine in  
low-resource settings
The challenges associated with medical care in low-
resource areas cluster in four domains:
•	 Prevention versus cure. Prevention is easier, cheaper 
and more effective than cure for many diseases. On 
the other hand, curative medicine is immediate, 
highly visible and glamorous. This tension is most 
evident when a disease is common and the benefits 
of prevention have yet to be realised. The allocation 
of adequate resources for long-term prevention 
needs both political will and social acceptance.
•	 Acute versus chronic care. Treating chronic illness can 
be time-consuming and less immediately gratifying 
than acute emergency medicine. Facilities for  
chronic care are therefore accorded a low priority  
in many health-care systems. Unfortunately, this 
often results in patients who require long-term  
care being denied treatment altogether or being 
managed inappropriately in the acute sector.
•	 The ideal versus the possible. Most medical 
management guidelines are derived from studies 
that were conducted in well-resourced health-care 
systems. In trying to apply this knowledge to the 
developing world, there are tensions between  
best practice and what is possible. For example, 
anticoagulant therapy (p. 1018) may pose risks  
that were not evident in the studies that underpin 
guidelines if it is prescribed in areas where reliable 
laboratories are not available and medications that 
interact with warfarin are commonly purchased 
‘over the counter’.
•	 Channels of health-care provision. In developing 
countries, health care may be delivered through 
government-run public clinics (usually free  
or subsidised) or non-governmental organisations 
(sometimes subsidised but usually privately 
funded). Many of the available services are too 
costly for the average patient. There is a need for 
constructive cooperation between all of the health-
care sectors.
The best possible practice is that which can be 
delivered within the available resources in a specific 
setting. Compassionate care given with empathy, under­
standing and good communication is always within the 
physician’s reach, even when resources are inadequate.
Medical ethics
Ethics has been described as the ‘science’ of morality, 
and defines systems of moral values. Medical ethics is 
Properly developed guidelines recognise that medi­
cine is an art as well as a science and that the evidence 
on which the guidelines are based is, strictly speaking, 
only applicable to the study population in the trial(s). 
Clinicians must therefore use their judgement to ascer­
tain whether the recommendations are applicable to 
the patient in front of them.
Some guidelines are formulated not only from 
evidence-based best practice but also from cost-
effectiveness (see below). An example in the UK is 
guidance produced by the government-commissioned 
body, the National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence (NICE; see www.nice.org.uk). These guide­
lines recognise that health services have limited 
resources, and that treatments should be prioritised 
which offer the greatest improvement in health for the 
largest number of people per unit of resource.
Protocols
Whilst guidelines recognise the individuality of the 
patient and help clinicians decide on which action is 
best, protocols are far more directive and are written to 
be followed exactly. Protocols usually apply in situa­
tions where the clinical decision has already been made 
and an intervention is then being instigated. Protocols 
aim to ensure that treatment will be identical, irrespec­
tive of where and by whom it is given. For example, a 
guideline may help a multidisciplinary team decide 
which modality of treatment is best for someone with 
lung cancer by evaluating the best evidence alongside 
the individual psychosocial needs of the patient. 
However, once a decision has been made in favour of a 
certain treatment, e.g. chemotherapy, the clinician will 
be expected to follow a strict protocol outlining dosages, 
routes of administration and monitoring.
Cost-effectiveness
The best available health care can be expensive. No 
country can now afford to provide unlimited state-of-
the-art medicine for all its citizens. Health-care systems 
must therefore take account of the cost-effectiveness of 
the treatments they provide. This can create difficult 
dilemmas for clinicians, who may be asked to withhold 
expensive but effective therapies (e.g. implantable defi­
brillators) from individual patients on the basis that the 
money will do more good for more patients if it is spent 
elsewhere (e.g. offering angioplasty to all acute myocar­
dial infarction patients). Assessing the cost-effectiveness 
of interventions and allocating resources accordingly 
follows ethical principles such as justice, which are 
covered in greater detail below.
Quality-adjusted life years
Outcomes from health care can be measured in terms of 
changes in the quality and quantity of life. Life expect­
ancy is easily defined but quality of life is difficult 
to measure. Nevertheless, it is possible to construct a 
continuum between perfect health (score 1), survival 
with no quality of life (score 0), and states that are per­
ceived to be worse than death (minus score). Quality and 
quantity of life can then be combined in a measure 
known as the quality-adjusted life year (QALY). For 
example, an intervention that results in a patient living 
an additional 4 years with an average quality of life 
rated as 0.6 on the continuum would yield 2.4 QALYs 
Good medical practice
1 
10
•	 Clinical ethics deals with the relationship between 
clinicians and patients, as described below.
•	 Public health ethics deals with the health issues of 
groups of people – the community. Examples 
include the banning of smoking in public places, 
where the autonomy of the individual may be 
coerced for the greater good of the community.
•	 Research ethics deals with issues related to clinical 
research. This is to ensure not only that research  
is conducted safely but also that the rights of the 
participants are paramount. No research can be 
undertaken unless it has undergone ethical scrutiny.
Principles of clinical ethics
In clinical ethics, four key principles are frequently 
used to analyse a problem, and often abbreviated to 
‘autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence and justice’.
Respect for persons and their autonomy
This respect is a significant aspect of the relationship 
between patient and doctor. The patient seeks out a 
doctor based on a desire to attain freedom from a dis­
ability or disease which limits his or her ability to exer­
cise autonomy (the power or right of self-determination). 
Unless the patient is a child, is unconscious or is men­
tally incapacitated, it is the patient’s choice to seek 
advice. The physician must therefore respect the patient’s 
autonomy. This includes the patient’s right to refuse 
therapy. The doctor must also actively seek to empower 
the patient with adequate information.
Truth-telling
Telling the truth is essential to generating and maintain­
ing trust between the doctor and the patient. This 
includes providing information about the nature of the 
illness, expected outcome and therapeutic alternatives, 
and answering questions honestly. The facts should not 
be given ‘brutally’ but with due sensitivity to appropri­
ate timing and to the patient’s capacity to cope with 
bad news. However, the clinical uncertainties described 
earlier in the chapter must also be acknowledged. There 
are two rare situations where the truth may, at least for 
a time, be withheld:
•	 If it will cause real harm to the patient (e.g. a 
depressed patient likely to commit suicide who  
has to be told that he or she has cancer). This  
is sometimes called ‘therapeutic privilege’,  
since it should be exercised only in the patient’s 
interests, for serious clinical reasons.
•	 If the patient makes it clear that he or she does not 
want to hear the bad news (but always bearing  
in mind that this may be a stage in the patient’s 
adjustment to the condition).
In no case should false information be given, and the 
physician should always be prepared to justify any deci­
sion to withhold relevant information.
Informed consent
This term describes the participation of patients in 
decisions about their health care. In order to facilitate 
this, the clinician must provide the patient with an 
adequate explanation and details of the relevant risks, 
benefits and uncertainties of each possible course of 
action. The amount of information to provide will 
concerned both with the standards of conduct and com­
petence expected of medical professionals, some of 
which are captured in legislation, and with the study of 
moral problems raised by the practice of medicine. 
Recent advances in biomedical science and their applica­
tion to clinical care have thrown up many difficult 
ethical problems. These include human cloning, predic­
tive genetic testing, eugenics, new reproductive tech­
nologies, antenatal screening, abortion, priority-setting, 
under-served populations, brain death, organ transplan­
tation, end-of-life issues, and assisted suicide. Detailed 
discussion of these is beyond the scope of this chapter 
but a framework for the application of ethics to medical 
practice is described.
In general, ethical problems relate to the intentions 
or motives of those involved, their actions, the conse­
quences of their actions, and the context in which their 
actions take place. Ethical problems can be analysed in 
a variety of ways, sometimes leading to different conclu­
sions. To find the best solution, it may be necessary to 
apply several analytical approaches and attempt to 
reconcile the conclusions. In modern medical practice, 
there is not always time to do this systematically. 
However, the process of applying an ethical framework 
to a given situation is a key element in clinical decision-
making and helps to ensure that a decision is both 
morally acceptable and legally defensible.
•	 Virtue ethics is concerned with the character of the 
persons involved and with their actions. Are my 
intentions (what my actions aim at) and my motives 
(what moves me to act) good or bad, wise or 
unwise, sensible or unrealistic, patient-centred or 
self-centred, and so on? Is the action I propose to 
take one which would be considered appropriate by 
a prudent doctor – or by a prudent patient? The 
focus here is on the characteristics of a virtuous 
person and the action they would take.
•	 Deontological ethics is concerned with whether a 
proposed action or course of action, in itself and 
regardless of its consequences, is right or wrong. Is 
it ever right or always wrong to kill, to tell a lie, to 
break a promise? Deontological (from the Greek  
for ‘duty’) considerations include rights as well as 
duties, and omissions as well as acts. An action is 
right if it is in accordance with an established moral 
rule or principle.
•	 Teleological ethics (or consequentialism) is concerned 
with the consequences of a proposed action. Are 
they likely to be good or bad, in the short term and 
long term, for the patient, doctor, family and 
society? What will promote a net balance of good 
over harm for the individual, as well as ‘the greatest 
good for the greatest number’?
An ethical problem can therefore be addressed by 
trying to decide what a virtuous person would do, 
whether an action or course of action is right or wrong 
in itself, or what its consequences might be. Yet the cir­
cumstances in which any decision is made will vary, and 
what may be right in one context may be wrong in 
another. Situation ethics recognises this, emphasising the 
need to consider carefully the context (or situation) in 
which a course of action is chosen.
Ethics is applied to the practice of medicine in three 
broad areas:
Medical practice
1 
11
greatest number’ – must be considered. In the case of 
individual patients, however, justice is also equated 
with being ‘fair’ and ‘even-handed’. The concept of 
fair delivery of health care can be viewed from three 
perspectives:
•	 Respect for the needs of the individual. Health care 
is delivered first to those who need it most. This 
perspective is particularly relevant when need must 
be assessed by some kind of triage.
•	 Respect for the rights of a person. Everyone who 
needs health care is entitled to a fair share of the 
resources available. This perspective is particularly 
relevant when local or global economic, social, 
educational or other inequalities prevent or reduce 
equitable access to health care.
•	 Respect for merit. Health care is delivered on the 
basis of value judgements, according to financial, 
political, social or other factors relating to the value 
of the individual to society. For example, many 
national leaders have their own personal physician 
and medical teams. The relevance of this 
perspective to health care is widely disputed, not 
least because such value judgements are difficult to 
make in practice and to defend ethically.
Types of ethical problem
When faced with an ethical problem, it is often helpful 
to characterise it in terms of certain patterns (Fig. 1.5).
A gap or block
The ideal goal is clearly seen but there are major obsta­
cles to achieving it. The obstacles may be economic or 
social, or in the belief system of the patient. The obvious 
answer – to bridge the gap or remove the block – may 
not be possible within the available time frame and 
resources. A young boy from a poor family in a develop­
ing country, who has Wilson’s disease and needs a liver 
transplant, is an example of an economic block. Some 
problems of this kind cannot be resolved satisfactorily 
in the clinical context until or unless they are resolved 
in the economic or political context.
Priority-setting
The right course of action is clear but prioritisation is 
necessary and the principles to guide that process have 
to be defined. A decision to allocate the last bed in inten­
sive care to either an 80-year-old with pneumonia or a 
20-year-old with advanced lymphoma is an example. 
While it is not possible to cover all eventualities, guide­
lines agreed in advance with stakeholders are helpful.
A moral dilemma
Acting in accordance with one ethical principle may 
conflict with another ethical principle. This can create a 
moral dilemma – a choice between two alternatives, 
neither of which is ethically satisfactory. For example, a 
physician may decide that a particular mode of therapy 
is best (principle of beneficence), while the patient makes 
a different choice (principle of respect for autonomy). 
Consider artificial feeding by a percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy (PEG; p. 123). The doctor may be reluctant 
to see the patient die for lack of nutrition and believe 
that this is the best route for feeding. The patient may, 
however, refuse the procedure, based on an informed 
vary, depending on the patient’s condition and the 
complexity of the treatment, and on the physician’s 
assessment of the patient’s understanding of the situa­
tion. Not all options need be explained, but those that 
a ‘prudent patient’ would consider significant should 
be explored – for example, by open questioning (see 
Box 1.4, p. 4).
From both a legal and an ethical perspective, the 
patient retains the right to decide what is in his or her 
best interests. All adults have decision-making capacity 
if they can understand the relevant information (which 
may have to be explained in simple terms), consider the 
implications of the relevant options, and make a com­
municable decision. If a patient makes choices that seem 
irrational or are at variance with professional advice, it 
does not mean that they lack capacity.
When the patient does lack decision-making capacity, 
the clinician should always act in the best interests of the 
patient. In an emergency, consent may be presumed, but 
only for treatment immediately necessary to preserve 
the patient’s life and health, and if there is no clear evi­
dence that this would be against the previous settled 
wishes of the patient when competent (for example, 
blood transfusion in the case of an adult Jehovah’s 
Witness). If the patient has a legally entitled surrogate 
decision-maker, their consent should be sought if pos­
sible. It is also good practice to involve close relatives in 
decision-making but the hierarchy of surrogate decision-
makers will depend on local laws and culture.
Confidentiality
Confidentiality in relation to the management of patient-
specific information is important in generating and 
maintaining trust in the doctor–patient relationship. 
Health-care teams must take precautions to prevent 
unauthorised access to patient records, and may disclose 
patient-identifying information only when the patient 
has given consent or when required by law. When such 
information is shared with other health-care profession­
als in order to optimise patient care, this should be done 
on a strictly ‘need-to-know’ basis.
Beneficence
This is the principle of doing good, or acting in another 
person’s best interests. In clinical ethics, the term 
refers to the good of the individual patient. It means 
considering the patient’s view, as well as the medical 
view, of his or her own best interests. Situations may 
arise when there is a conflict between what is good for 
the individual and what is best for society, but the tra­
ditional medical approach is that stated in the Declara­
tion of Geneva (World Medical Association): ‘The health 
of my patient will be my first consideration.’
Non-maleficence
This is the principle of doing no harm: in medicine, the 
traditional ‘primum non nocere’. In balancing benefi­
cence and non-maleficence (benefit versus risk), the cli­
nician must share information with the patient, who can 
then be helped to make an informed decision.
Justice
In the context of clinical ethics, justice relates primarily 
to the distribution of medical care and the allocation 
of resources. In order to distribute health resources 
justly, the concept of utility – ’greatest good for the 
Good medical practice
1 
12
conclusion. It helps the decision-maker to grow per­
sonally and professionally, allows communication of 
the process by which a decision is made, and permits 
the process to be constructively criticised. When, in 
everyday practice, time for reflection is limited, knowl­
edge of methods of moral reasoning provides a useful 
background and aid for decision-making, and is often 
employed in ways analogous to those of ‘the novice–
expert shift’ (see Box 1.14, p. 14). Some approaches that 
can be applied are as follows:
•	 A principles approach. This involves analysing an 
ethical problem in terms of the principles of respect 
for autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence and 
justice. If all of these principles support a particular 
course of action, then that course of action is 
probably correct and there may, in fact, no longer 
be an ethical problem. If, however, different 
principles suggest different courses of action, this 
approach has no intrinsic mechanism for deciding 
which principle has priority. On the other hand, 
analysing the problem in terms of these principles 
can help to clarify the nature of the ethical problem 
and the issues which need to be addressed if the 
problem is to be resolved.
•	 A casuistry (cases) approach. This uses precedent as a 
guide to what to do. A case is recalled or imagined 
which is similar to that under discussion but where 
the right choice of action/behaviour was obvious. 
Then the features which make the present case 
different, if any, are analysed and considered to see 
if and why they lead to a different conclusion. A 
variation on this approach, related to virtue ethics, 
is to imagine what a physician who was particularly 
skilled or experienced in this type of situation 
would do, or how a previous patient might have 
viewed the problem.
•	 A perspectives (or narrative) approach. A perspectives 
approach involves considering the views of all the 
stakeholders: the patient, the family or carers, the 
health-care team, the health service and society.  
The greater the degree of concordance of these 
views on a particular outcome, the more likely it is 
that the decision leading to that outcome is right. A 
narrative approach is similar but involves listening 
attentively to the different ‘stories’ told by the 
stakeholders about the problem and how they 
perceive it. Where these stories differ can provide 
clues to a more nuanced understanding of the 
problem and how it might be resolved.
•	 A counter-argument approach. A particular course 
of action is chosen and the best ethical arguments 
against it are then marshalled and evaluated.  
This may or may not cause the decision to be 
reconsidered.
•	 Application of rules. In certain common and clearly 
defined situations, externally imposed rules 
(including the law) may require, or guide towards, 
a specific course of action. This does not obviate the 
need for ethical analysis. Moreover, any such rules 
must be reviewed regularly.
While all of these approaches may be useful, it is 
important to remember that none of them removes 
the need, on the one hand, for the exercise of judge­
ment and, on the other, for good communication and 
consensus decision-making. No less important is the 
Fig. 1.5  A classification of ethical problems. 
Priority-setting
Resolving conflict
A moral dilemma
The gap/block
assessment of their own quality of life and prospects of 
recovery. In theory, the dilemma can be resolved only if 
one of the ethical principles is given priority; ethical 
analysis (see below) can help to achieve resolution. True 
moral dilemmas are less common in practice than in 
theory; apparent dilemmas can often be resolved by 
good doctor–patient communication.
Resolving conflict
A conflict of opinion may arise between members of the 
team responsible for care of the patient. For example, 
doctors in a renal medicine unit providing dialysis 
therapy (p. 489) may have divergent views on whe­
ther this treatment is appropriate for a patient who is 
elderly with significant comorbidity. Differing views 
should normally be resolved through discussion; in 
this example, conflict would usually be resolved in a 
multidisciplinary team meeting at which discussion of 
patients approaching end-stage renal failure is routine. 
However, if this does not work, referral to a decision-
making authority allocated in advance (e.g. the clinical 
director of the service) may be necessary. The challenge 
then is to ensure consistent and accurate implementa­
tion of the decision.
Ethical analysis
Ethical analysis (or moral reasoning) is the process 
of thinking through ethical problems and reaching a 
Medical practice
1 
13
requirement for all of this to be based on sound and 
shared information about the clinical and human facts 
of the case. In this respect, a practical, integrated way 
of addressing ethical problems is provided by what 
has been called an onion-peel approach, which uses a 
layered framework to analyse the problem systemati­
cally (Box 1.11).
Discussion with colleagues and others is crucial 
in reaching ethical decisions. Many hospitals have a 
clinical ethics committee to review difficult decisions. 
Up-to-date, accurate, valid and reliable data should 
inform the decision-making progress. Local legal 
issues must be considered. Once a conclusion has been 
reached, a strategy to complete the action must be 
implemented. Post-hoc evaluation of decisions is 
important, and again is best carried out collectively 
by an ethics committee or some other means of ret­
rospective review.
A clinical ethics scenario
A 70-year-old man who has chronic obstructive pulmo­
nary disease, hypertension and diabetes mellitus is 
admitted to hospital with pneumonia. His memory has 
been deteriorating for 3 years, with a rapid decline in 
cognition over the last 3 months, and he needs help to 
carry out activities of daily living. A neurologist has 
excluded reversible causes of dementia. The patient 
deteriorates and needs mechanical ventilation. His wife 
states that he told her (when he was well) that he did 
not want to be put on ‘life support machines’ and is 
therefore opposed to mechanical ventilation. Two of his 
children fail to confirm this and request active treatment. 
There is no formal written ‘advance directive’ on file 
(pp. 171 and 291). What care should be given?
Patient preferences: data gathered from patient and  
relatives/carers
•	 What is the quality of life expected after therapy – from the 
patient’s perspective?
•	 If the patient is competent, has he or she been offered 
options and made choices?
•	 If the patient is not competent, who will make the decisions?
Medical goals: data gathered from literature, guidelines,  
expert opinion
•	 What are the prospects of a successful outcome?
•	 What are the best therapeutic options available based on 
evidence?
•	 Has the therapy been optimised and matched to this 
individual patient?
Regional issues: data gathered from local sources
•	 What decisions are most consistent with local laws and with 
social and cultural values?
Basic ethical principles, type of ethical problem, ethical 
analysis (see text)
•	 Consider the basic principles of medical ethics
•	 Consider the type of ethical problem
•	 Choose the ethical analytical approaches to apply to the 
problem
1.11  Ethical analysis: an ‘onion-peel’ approach
On the one hand, considered mainly in  
teleological terms:
The patient is incapable of making an autonomous deci­
sion. The closest surrogate indicates that he would have 
preferred to forego life-sustaining therapy at this stage. 
(Respect for autonomy might support this.) The conse­
quences of ventilation would probably be to prolong 
the process of dying (which non-maleficence could 
argue against) rather than increase his chances of recov­
ery to a good quality of life. Beneficence requires that he 
receive general care and symptom relief immediately. 
An appropriate action therefore is not to ventilate the 
patient but to continue basic medical (fluids, oxygen and 
antibiotics) and nursing care in a general ward setting 
in order to optimise patient comfort.
On the other hand, considered in deontological as 
well as teleological terms:
The present illness is due to a potentially reversible 
infection. The patient’s real preference is uncertain and 
his family, who have difficulty in looking after him, have 
expressed differing views. In terms of the duty of a 
doctor to make the patient’s health the first considera­
tion, and of the patient’s right to appropriate health care 
regardless of his age or mental condition, it would there­
fore be appropriate to institute all possible care, includ­
ing ventilation on an intensive care unit.
In practice:
The physician responsible for the patient’s care should 
consider the different courses of action suggested, but 
not determined, by these ethical analyses, explain the 
reasons for and against each course of action to the 
patient’s family and, if one of them is the patient’s legal 
surrogate, help that person come to a decision. Where 
there is no legal surrogate, the physician will have to 
reach a judgement about what is in the patient’s best 
interests, recognising that, while judgement is always 
fallible, whatever decision is made must be defensible if 
challenged on ethical or legal grounds. Decisions that 
are reached on the basis of ethical and moral reasoning 
will be relatively easy to defend.
In this case, further discussion of the relevant issues 
with the relatives and other members of the health-care 
team led to concordance. The patient was treated by 
artificial ventilation in the intensive care unit for 3 days. 
He made a good recovery and appeared grateful for the 
care he had received.
Medical law
The law impinges on medical practice in many ways. 
Although a description of specific laws in different coun­
tries is beyond the scope of this book, it is important for 
doctors to be familiar with local legislation. Some of the 
ethical principles described above are captured in legis­
lation, for example, in relation to informed consent 
(p. 10) and confidentiality (p. 11). Other laws enforce 
standard requirements for formal procedures, such 
as death certification. In many countries, regulatory 
authorities with statutory powers – for example, to 
license doctors to practise – also impose standards. The 
distinction and overlap between these domains are 
illustrated in Box 1.12.
Good medical practice
1 
14
A high-profile area of overlap between medicine and 
the law occurs in legal action (litigation) related to pro­
cesses of care. The latter frequently involves the concept 
of negligence. In the UK, the ‘Bolam test’ is often used 
to define whether medical care is or is not negligent. 
Care is measured against what any ‘ordinarily compe­
tent’ (or sometimes ‘reasonable’) doctor would have 
done in the same situation. In addition to this test, it 
must also be established that:
•	 there was a duty of care between the doctor and 
patient (this is usually straightforward)
•	 there was a causal link between any breach of duty 
and harm to the patient
•	 the harm was not too remote from the episode 
of care.
PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT
Good doctors never stop learning, and continue to 
develop their knowledge, skills and attributes through­
out their working lives, to the benefit of their patients 
and themselves. Many also participate actively in 
improving medical knowledge and practice through 
research. These activities have become an essential com­
ponent of clinical governance, which is a mechanism for 
ensuring high standards of clinical care (Box 1.13). Per­
sonal and professional development (PPD) requires a 
reflective and self-directed approach to the study and 
practice of medicine (Fig. 1.6), and will maximise both 
lifelong effectiveness and personal satisfaction. Linked 
to this is the concept of the novice–expert shift (Box 1.14).
PPD begins in the first days at medical school and 
continues through postgraduate training and subse­
quent professional practice. Maintaining competence 
and expertise requires continuous professional develop­
ment (CPD). In the UK, this is formally regulated 
by professional bodies such as the Royal Colleges, and 
is linked to processes of appraisal (Box 1.15) and 
re-accreditation for established practitioners.
To support this process, outcomes and competences 
for PPD are being defined at all levels of medical train­
ing, including undergraduate and postgraduate study. 
These sit alongside and complement curricula that focus 
on discipline-based knowledge and skills. As adult 
learners, doctors are expected to reflect on their own 
Fig. 1.6  The personal and professional development of a doctor. 
Propositional knowledge
Knowing what needs to be done
Can be taught and learned
Process knowledge
Knowing how to proceed
Gained tacitly by experience
Personal and professional
values
The doctor as an individual
Developed through reflection
and analysis
•	 Novices use pre-determined methods which they learn
•	 Advanced beginners recognise that these methods are not 
effective in all circumstances and can adapt them
•	 Competent professionals are able to make conscious, 
independent choices and can manage and regulate their own 
practice
•	 Proficient professionals make use of intuition based on 
experience, and integrate multiple aspects of practice into a 
holistic model
•	 Experts function largely through ‘unconscious competence’ 
and are inseparable from the tasks they undertake
1.14  The novice–expert shift
•	 Continuing education
•	 Clinical audit
•	 Clinical effectiveness
•	 Risk management
•	 Research and development
•	 Openness
1.13  Key components in clinical governance
Definition
In practice
Ethics
The science of morality; a branch of philosophy 
concerned with human character and conduct
Morally, what may be the best thing for me to do in this situation?
Law
Rules of action established by authority (normally, 
a community or state)
What must I do in this situation to avoid breaking the law?
Negligence
Omission of duty and such care for the interests 
of others as the law may require
What would any ‘ordinarily competent’ doctor do in this situation?
(Practice) 
guidance
Direction from another person or body
What do a group of experts say that I should do, supported by the 
best available evidence (e.g. guidelines, protocols)?
(Clinical) 
governance
Control, autonomy
What will I and the members of my medical team do, with due 
regard to ethics, law and practice guidelines?
1.12  Some definitions in ethics, law and regulation of medical practice
practice and identify their own particular learning or 
developmental needs. This recognises that doctors will 
have different learning needs throughout their career, 
which will be affected by their current clinical practice, 
their future career plans and any areas of educational 
need that have become apparent through the appraisal 
process.
Complementary and alternative medicine 
1 
15
•	 Formal, structured assessment (e.g. postgraduate 
examinations)
•	 360-degree assessment (surveying colleagues from  
medicine and other disciplines who work alongside the 
practitioner)
•	 Educational supervision and mentoring (a specific colleague 
has nominated responsibility to guide, and also assess, the 
practitioner)
•	 Logbooks (records of work undertaken and outcomes)
•	 Portfolio-based assessment (the practitioner accumulates a 
record of educational and clinical experiences, together with 
evidence of reflective practice)
1.15  Some techniques used in the 
appraisal process
Fig. 1.7  The clinical audit loop. 
Audit
loop
Define
standards
Compare
practice
with
standards
Evaluate
results
Implement
change
Each doctor has a duty to ensure that their clinical 
knowledge and skills are up to date and comparable 
with their peers. Clinical audit is one method of assess­
ing practice in this context.
Clinical audit
Clinical audit is the process by which the clinical prac­
tice of a doctor or medical team and the outcomes of 
that practice are evaluated against an agreed standard. 
Where practice fails to meet the standard, changes 
to practice are implemented; after a period, practice 
can be re-evaluated to identify any improvement. The 
continuing evaluation, implementation of change and 
re-evaluation process is known as the audit loop or cycle 
(Fig. 1.7). The standard against which practice is meas­
ured is usually an externally agreed one, rather than a 
local one. It is important to know that clinical care is 
comparable to that delivered elsewhere. For this reason, 
national standards are the norm in most countries, often 
set alongside national guidelines which signpost the 
practice necessary to achieve them. Clinical audit may 
be conducted by the doctor or team themselves, or by 
an external body. Outcome measures may include 
success rates or complication rates of clinical procedures 
such as surgical operations; process variables such as 
waiting times for clinical care; or the perspective of 
patients and relatives. In the UK, all practising clinicians 
are now expected to participate in audit, and it is an 
integral part of procedures for appraisal, revalidation 
and relicensing of doctors.
COMPLEMENTARY AND  
ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) refers 
to a group of medical and health-care systems, practices 
and products that are not considered to be part of con­
ventional medicine; as such, the relevant principles and 
skills are not included in the curricula of conventional 
medical education programmes. CAM covers an enor­
mous and ever-changing range of activities, from well-
established physical therapies such as osteopathy to 
spiritual measures such as prayer specifically for health. 
Proponents suggest that CAM focuses on the whole 
person: their lifestyle, environment, diet, and mental, 
emotional and spiritual health, as well as physical 
complaints.
‘Complementary medicine’ is the term used to 
describe the use of these treatments in conjunction 
with conventional medicine (e.g. acupuncture to reduce 
pain after surgery). ‘Alternative medicine’ describes 
their use in place of conventional medicine (e.g. reflexol­
ogy instead of anti-inflammatory drugs for arthritis). 
Clearly, most forms of treatment can be used in either 
way, so the term CAM is often used generically. ‘Inte­
grative medicine’ describes the use of conventional 
therapy in combination with one or more complemen­
tary therapies.
A variety of different taxonomies are used for CAM 
therapies. The National Center for Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine in the USA uses the following 
classification:
•	 Alternative medical systems. These have their own 
constructs of theory and practice, often based on 
ancient historical beliefs. Examples are homeopathy, 
naturopathy, traditional Chinese medicine and 
Ayurveda.
•	 Mind–body interactions. These rely on the mind’s 
capacity to influence physical function. Examples 
are meditation, biofeedback, prayer for healing, 
mental healing, music therapy and dance.
•	 Biologically based therapies. These involve the use or 
regulation of an extraneous agent or preparation. 
Examples include herbal medicine, dietary 
supplementation and nutritional medicine.
•	 Manipulative and body-based methods. These are based 
on manipulation or movement of parts of the body. 
They include osteopathy, chiropractic, reflexology 
and massage.
•	 Energy therapies. These involve use of energy fields. 
Examples include qigong, reiki and therapeutic 
touch.
Some forms of CAM are embedded in the cultural 
norms of particular social and ethnic groups, e.g. tradi­
tional Chinese medicine. In Western society, the use of 
CAM is extensive. For example, in 2007 in the USA, 38% 
of the adult population had used some form of CAM in 
the previous year (males 33.5%, females 42.8%); 12% of 
children had also used CAM. The most common medical 
conditions involved were back pain, neck pain, other 
joint pain/arthritis, anxiety, raised cholesterol, head or 
chest ‘colds’, headache, insomnia, stress and depression, 
and gastrointestinal symptoms.
The popularity of CAM may reflect a lack of confi­
dence in conventional medicine, particularly a belief that 
Good medical practice
1 
16
medicine, this constitutes an important barrier to inte­
grative medicine.
Integrated health care
There is a considerable impetus behind moves to inte­
grate CAM with conventional medicine and health care 
at the level of resource allocation, service design, clinical 
practice, education and research. Almost 50% of general 
practices in the UK and an increasing number of hospi­
tals offer some form of access to CAM. In many parts of 
Asia in particular, this kind of medical pluralism is the 
norm, and patients do not necessarily make a distinction 
between different systems of health care. Historically, in 
Western societies, patients using both types of therapy 
have often experienced conflicting advice and value 
judgements, poor or absent communication between 
practitioners, and even hostility or ridicule. They often 
revert to secrecy, an inherently undesirable and poten­
tially dangerous outcome. Integrated health care aims to 
understand and remove the barriers that create such 
dilemmas for patients. It aims to let them exercise their 
choice of treatment in an open environment character­
ised by good communication, respect, and due consid­
eration of autonomy, efficacy and risk.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.dh.gov.uk UK Department of Health guidance and policy 
on confidentiality and consent.
www.evidence.nhs.uk A UK National Health Service resource 
providing a searchable library of clinical guidelines from all 
sources.
www.gmc-uk.org UK General Medical Council. Includes access 
to guidance on professional conduct (Duties of a Doctor, Good 
Medical Practice) and guidance on medical education, such as 
‘Tomorrow’s Doctors’.
www.nice.org.uk National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence. Includes recommendations for evidence-based 
treatments.
www.rcplondon.ac.uk Royal College of Physicians. Includes 
access to a working party report: Doctors in Society: Medical 
Professionalism in a Changing World.
www.sign.ac.uk Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. 
Includes evidence-based guidelines for clinical practice.
www.who.int World Health Organization. Includes information 
relevant to global health and differences in medical practice.
Figure acknowledgements
Fig. 1.4 Edwards A, Elwyn G, Mulley A. Explaining risks: 
turning numerical data into meaningful pictures. BMJ 
2002; 324:827–830, reproduced with permission from the 
BMJ Publishing Group.
it will not help the condition or may cause harm. CAM 
is often used by cancer patients who have disease which 
is unresponsive to conventional medicines. In addition, 
it may reflect the increasing ease of access to information 
and therapies via the Internet. CAM is often perceived 
to be completely safe; patients may therefore be willing 
to experiment with it as a ‘no-lose’ measure. Many forms 
of CAM are inherently pleasurable, regardless of any 
therapeutic benefit.
Safety
Not all CAM therapies are safe; some are toxic in their 
own right (e.g. dietary supplements containing ephe­
drine alkaloids, now banned in the USA) and others 
are harmful if used in combination with conventional 
treatment (e.g. garlic supplements that interfere with 
the action of anti-HIV chemotherapy). Others have been 
associated with rare but serious side-effects, which can 
be life-threatening (e.g. bowel perforation from coffee 
enemas, hyponatraemia from noni juice).
There is also a potential for harm when alternative 
medicine is used to treat serious or life-threatening 
medical conditions, if the resultant delay in seeking con­
ventional treatment compromises clinical outcome.
On balance, however, the relative safety of most 
CAM therapies can be regarded as a positive feature; 
homeopathy is an example.
Evidence
In an era where EBM is the norm, practitioners and 
advocates of CAM are increasingly challenged to justify 
these treatments through independent, well-conducted, 
randomised controlled clinical trials. In some cases, this 
may be difficult (e.g. the placebo arm of a double-blind 
trial of acupuncture). In addition, it can be argued that 
different types and standards of evidence, focusing on 
patient satisfaction and subjective benefit rather than 
measurable clinical outcomes, may be more appropriate 
for CAM. The literature in this area is growing rapidly 
but, at present, only a minority of CAM therapies are 
supported by any evidence that would be acceptable for 
conventional medicine. These are primarily the ‘big five’ 
CAM therapies: osteopathy, chiropractic, acupuncture, 
homeopathy and herbal medicine. Moreover, where 
such positive evidence does exist, it is often outweighed 
by negative studies, and limited to a small subset of the 
clinical conditions for which the treatment is used.
Regulation
Many CAM therapies have professional regulatory 
frameworks in place and others are following suit. 
Nevertheless, for many CAM therapies, there is still 
no established structure of training, certification and 
accreditation, and practice is effectively open to all. Set 
against the demanding training and life-long continuous 
professional development that pertain to conventional 
17
2 
Principles of clinical pharmacology 18
Pharmacodynamics 18
Pharmacokinetics 21
Inter-individual variation in drug responses 23
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy 24
Adverse drug reactions 24
Drug interactions 28
Medication errors 29
Drug regulation and management 30
Drug development and marketing 30
Managing the use of medicines 31
Therapeutics and  
good prescribing
S. Maxwell
Prescribing in practice 33
Decision-making in prescribing 33
Prescribing in special circumstances 36
Writing prescriptions 37
Monitoring drug therapy 39
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
18
(that alter the biophysical properties of lipid mem-
branes). The following characteristics of the interaction 
of drugs with receptors illustrate some of the important 
determinants of the effects of drugs:
•	 Affinity describes the propensity for a drug to bind 
to a receptor and is related to the ‘molecular fit’  
and the strength of the chemical bond. Some 
drug–receptor interactions are irreversible, either 
because the affinity is so strong or because the drug 
modifies the structure of its molecular target.
•	 Selectivity describes the propensity for a drug to 
bind to one target rather than another. Selectivity is 
a relative term, not to be confused with absolute 
specificity. It is common for drugs targeted at a 
particular subtype of receptor to exhibit some effect 
at other subtypes. For example, β-adrenoceptors 
can be subtyped on the basis of their responsiveness 
to the endogenous agonist noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine): the concentration of noradrenaline 
required to cause bronchodilatation (via  
β2-adrenoceptors) is ten times higher than 
that required to cause tachycardia (via  
β1-adrenoceptors). ‘Cardioselective’ β-blockers have 
anti-anginal effects on the heart (β1) but may still 
cause bronchospasm in the lung (β2) and are 
contraindicated for asthmatic patients.
•	 Agonists bind to a receptor to produce a 
conformational change that is coupled to a 
biological response. As agonist concentration 
increases, so does the proportion of receptors 
occupied, and hence the biological effect. Partial 
agonists activate the receptor, but cannot produce a 
maximal signalling effect equivalent to that of a full 
agonist even when all available receptors are 
occupied.
•	 Antagonists bind to a receptor but do not produce 
the conformational change that initiates an 
intracellular signal. A competitive antagonist 
competes with endogenous ligands to occupy 
receptor binding sites, with the resulting 
antagonism depending on the relative affinities and 
concentrations of drug and ligand. Non-competitive 
Prescribing medicines is a major tool used by most 
doctors to restore or preserve the health of their patients. 
Medicines contain drugs (the specific chemical sub-
stances with pharmacological effects), either alone or in 
combination, in a formulation mixed with other ingre-
dients. The beneficial effects of medicines must be 
weighed against their cost and the risks of adverse drug 
reactions and interactions, often caused by injudicious 
prescribing decisions and by prescribing errors. The 
modern prescriber must meet the challenges posed by 
an increasing number of drugs and formulations avail-
able and of indications for prescribing them, and the 
greater complexity of treatment regimens followed by 
individual patients (‘polypharmacy’, a particular chal-
lenge in the ageing population). The purpose of this 
chapter is to elaborate on the principles and practice that 
underpin good prescribing (Box 2.1).
Fig. 2.1  Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. 
Dosage
regimen
Plasma
concentration
Concentration at
the site of action
Pharmacological
effects
Pharmacokinetics
‘what the body does
to a drug’
Monitoring
Measure plasma drug
concentration
‘what a drug does
to the body’
Monitoring
Measure clinical
effects
Time
Concentration
Pharmacodynamics
Concentration
Effect
*These steps in particular take the patient’s views into consideration to 
establish a therapeutic partnership.
• Make a diagnosis
• Consider factors influencing the patient’s responses to 
therapy (age, concomitant drug therapy, renal and liver 
function etc.)*
• Establish the therapeutic goal*
• Choose the therapeutic approach*
• Choose the drug and its formulation (the ‘medicine’)
• Choose the dose, route and frequency
• Choose the duration of therapy
• Write an unambiguous prescription (or ‘medication order’)
• Inform the patient about the treatment and its likely effects
• Monitor treatment effects, both beneficial and harmful
• Review/alter the prescription
2.1  Steps in good prescribing
PRINCIPLES OF CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY
Prescribers need to understand what the drug does to 
the body (pharmacodynamics) and what the body does 
to the drug (pharmacokinetics) (Fig. 2.1). Although this 
chapter is focused on the most common drugs, which 
are synthetic small molecules, the same principles apply 
to the increasingly numerous ‘biological’ therapies 
(sometimes abbreviated to ‘biologics’) now in use, which 
include peptides, proteins, enzymes and monoclonal 
antibodies (p. 74).
Pharmacodynamics
Drug targets and mechanisms  
of action
Modern drugs are usually discovered by screening com-
pounds for activity either to stimulate or to block the 
function of a specific molecular target, which is pre-
dicted to have a beneficial effect in a particular disease 
(Box 2.2). Other drugs have useful but less selective 
chemical properties, such as chelators (e.g. for treatment 
of iron or copper overload), osmotic agents (used as 
diuretics in cerebral oedema) or general anaesthetics 
Principles of clinical pharmacology
2
19
Fig. 2.2  Dose–response curve. The green curve 
represents the beneficial effect of the drug. The 
maximum response on the curve is the Emax and the 
dose (or concentration) producing half this value 
(Emax/2) is the ED50 (or EC50). The red curve illustrates 
the dose–response relationship for the most 
important adverse effect of this drug. This occurs at 
much higher doses; the ratio between the ED50 for 
the adverse effect and that for the beneficial effect is 
the ‘therapeutic index’, which indicates how much 
margin there is for prescribers when choosing a dose 
that will provide beneficial effects without also 
causing this adverse effect. Adverse effects that 
occur at doses above the therapeutic range (yellow 
area) are normally called ‘toxic effects’, while those 
occurring within the therapeutic range are 
‘side-effects’ and those below it are ‘hyper-
susceptibility effects’. 
Hypersusceptibility
Side-effects
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Therapeutic index
100/0.1 = 1000
Drug dose (mg)
 Response (% of maximum)
Toxic effects
Adverse
effect
ED50 =100 mg
Beneficial
effect
ED50 =0.1 mg
Emax 
ED50
ED50
antagonists inhibit the effect of an agonist by 
mechanisms other than direct competition for 
receptor binding with the agonist (e.g. by affecting 
post-receptor signalling).
Dose–response relationships
Plotting the logarithm of drug dose against drug 
response typically produces a sigmoidal dose–response 
curve (Fig. 2.2). Progressive increases in drug dose 
(which for most drugs is proportional to the plasma 
drug concentration) produce increasing response, but 
only within a relatively narrow range of dose; further 
increases in dose beyond this range produce little extra 
effect. The following characteristics of the drug response 
are useful in comparing different drugs:
•	 Efficacy describes the extent to which a drug can 
produce a target-specific response when all 
available receptors or binding sites are occupied  
Drug target
Description
Examples
Receptors
Channel-linked 
receptors
Ligand binding controls a linked ion channel, known as ‘ligand-
gated’ (in contrast to ‘voltage-gated’ channels that respond to 
changes in membrane potential)
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor
Sulphonylurea receptor
G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs)
Ligand binding affects one of a family of ‘G-proteins’ that mediate 
signal transduction either by activating intracellular enzymes (such 
as adenylate or guanylate cyclase, producing cyclic AMP or GMP, 
respectively) or by controlling ion channels
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
β-adrenoceptors
Dopamine receptors
Serotonin receptors
Opioid receptors
Kinase-linked 
receptors
Ligand binding activates an intracellular protein kinase that triggers 
a cascade of phosphorylation reactions
Insulin receptor
Cytokine receptors
Transcription factor 
receptors
Intracellular and also known as ‘nuclear receptors’; ligand binding 
promotes or inhibits gene transcription and hence synthesis of new 
proteins
Steroid receptors
Thyroid hormone receptors
Vitamin D receptors
Retinoid receptors
PPARγ and α receptors
Other targets
Voltage-gated ion 
channels
Mediate electrical signalling in excitable tissues (muscle and 
nervous system)
Na+ channels
Ca2+ channels
Enzymes
Catalyse biochemical reactions. Drugs interfere with binding of 
substrate to the active site or of co-factors
Cyclo-oxygenase
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
Xanthine oxidase
Transporter proteins
Carry ions or molecules across cell membranes
Serotonin re-uptake transporter
Na+/K+ ATPase
(AMP = adenosine monophosphate; ATPase = adenosine triphosphatase; GMP = guanosine monophosphate; PPAR = peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor)
2.2  Examples of target molecules for drugs
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
20
therapeutic index is greater than 100 but there are some 
notable exceptions with therapeutic indices less than 10 
(e.g. digoxin, warfarin, insulin, phenytoin, opioids). The 
doses of such drugs have to be titrated carefully for 
individual patients to maximise benefits but avoid 
adverse effects.
Desensitisation and  
withdrawal effects
Desensitisation refers to the common situation in which 
the biological response to a drug diminishes when it is 
given continuously or repeatedly. It may be possible to 
restore the response by increasing the dose of the drug 
but, in some cases, the tissues may become completely 
refractory to its effect.
•	 Tachyphylaxis describes desensitisation that occurs 
very rapidly, sometimes with the initial dose.  
This rapid loss of response implies depletion of 
chemicals that may be necessary for the 
pharmacological actions of the drug (e.g. a stored 
neurotransmitter released from a nerve terminal) or 
receptor phosphorylation.
•	 Tolerance describes a more gradual loss of response 
to a drug that occurs over days or weeks. This 
slower change implies changes in receptor numbers 
or the development of counter-regulatory 
physiological changes that offset the actions of the 
drug (e.g. accumulation of salt and water in 
response to vasodilator therapy).
•	 Drug resistance is a term normally reserved for 
describing the loss of effectiveness of an 
antimicrobial (p. 151) or cancer chemotherapy drug.
•	 In addition to these pharmacodynamic causes of 
desensitisation, reduced response may be the 
consequence of lower plasma and tissue drug 
concentrations as a result of altered pharmacokinetics 
(see below).
(i.e. Emax on the dose–response curve). A full agonist 
can produce the maximum response of which the 
receptor is capable, while a partial agonist at the 
same receptor will have lower efficacy. Therapeutic 
efficacy describes the effect of the drug on a desired 
biological endpoint, and can be used to compare 
drugs that act via different pharmacological 
mechanisms (e.g. loop diuretics induce a greater 
diuresis than thiazide diuretics and therefore have 
greater therapeutic efficacy).
•	 Potency describes the amount of drug required for a 
given response. More potent drugs produce 
biological effects at lower doses, so they have a 
lower ED50. A less potent drug can still have an 
equivalent efficacy if it is given in higher doses.
The dose–response relationship varies between patients 
because of variations in the many determinants of phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics. In clinical prac-
tice, the prescriber is unable to construct a dose–response 
curve for each individual patient. Therefore, most drugs 
are licensed for use within a recommended range of 
doses that is expected to reach close to the top of the 
dose–response curve for most patients. However, it is 
sometimes possible to achieve the desired therapeutic 
efficacy at doses towards the lower end of, or even 
below, the recommended range.
Therapeutic index
The adverse effects of drugs are often dose-related in a 
similar way to the beneficial effects, although the dose–
response curve for these adverse effects is normally 
shifted to the right (see Fig. 2.2). The ratio of the ED50 for 
therapeutic efficacy and for a major adverse effect is 
known as the ‘therapeutic index’. In reality, drugs have 
multiple potential adverse effects but the concept of 
therapeutic index is usually reserved for those requiring 
dose reduction or discontinuation. For most drugs, the 
Drug
Symptoms
Signs
Treatment
Alcohol
Anxiety, panic, paranoid 
delusions, visual and auditory 
hallucinations
Agitation, restlessness, confusion, 
tremor, tachycardia, ataxia, 
disorientation, seizures
Treat immediate withdrawal 
syndrome with benzodiazepines
Barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines
Similar to alcohol
Similar to alcohol
Transfer to long-acting 
benzodiazepine then gradually 
reduce dosage
Corticosteroids
Weakness, fatigue, decreased 
appetite, weight loss, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal 
pain
Hypotension, hypoglycaemia
Prolonged therapy suppresses the 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal 
axis and causes adrenal 
insufficiency requiring 
corticosteroid replacement. 
Withdrawal should be gradual after 
prolonged therapy (p. 776)
Opioids
Rhinorrhoea, sneezing, yawning, 
lacrimation, abdominal and leg 
cramping, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea
Dilated pupils
Transfer addicts to long-acting 
agonist methadone
Selective serotonin 
re-uptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)
Dizziness, sweating, nausea, 
insomnia, tremor, confusion, 
nightmares
Tremor
Reduce SSRIs slowly to avoid 
withdrawal effects
2.3  Examples of drugs associated with withdrawal effects
Principles of clinical pharmacology
2
21
(e.g. organic nitrates for angina pectoris, triptans for 
migraine, opioid analgesics).
•	 Rectal (PR). The rectal mucosa is occasionally used 
as a site of drug administration when the oral route 
is compromised because of nausea and vomiting or 
unconsciousness (e.g. diazepam in status 
epilepticus).
Parenteral administration
These routes avoid absorption via the gastrointestinal 
tract and first-pass metabolism in the liver:
•	 Intravenous (IV). The IV route enables all of a dose 
to enter the systemic circulation reliably, without 
any concerns about absorption or first-pass 
metabolism (i.e. the dose is 100% bioavailable), and 
rapidly achieve a high plasma concentration. It is 
ideal for very ill patients when a rapid, certain 
effect is critical to outcome (e.g. benzylpenicillin for 
meningococcal meningitis).
•	 Intramuscular (IM). IM administration is easier 
to achieve than the IV route (e.g. adrenaline 
(epinephrine) for acute anaphylaxis) but absorption 
is less predictable and depends on muscle  
blood flow.
•	 Subcutaneous (SC). The SC route is ideal for drugs 
that have to be administered parenterally because of 
low oral bioavailability, are absorbed well from 
subcutaneous fat, and might ideally be injected by 
patients themselves (e.g. insulin, heparin).
•	 Transdermal. A transdermal patch can enable a drug 
to be absorbed through the skin and into the 
circulation (e.g. oestrogens, testosterone, nicotine, 
nitrates).
Other routes of administration
•	 Topical application of a drug involves direct 
administration to the site of action (e.g. skin, eye, 
ear). This has the advantage of achieving sufficient 
concentration at this site while minimising systemic 
exposure and the risk of adverse effects elsewhere.
•	 Inhaled (INH) administration allows drugs to be 
delivered directly to a target in the respiratory tree, 
usually the small airways (e.g. salbutamol, 
When drugs induce chemical, hormonal and physiologi-
cal changes that offset their actions, discontinuation may 
allow these changes to cause ‘rebound’ withdrawal 
effects (Box 2.3).
Pharmacokinetics
Understanding ‘what the body does to the drug’ (Fig. 
2.3) is extremely important for prescribers because this 
forms the basis on which the optimal route of adminis-
tration and dose regimen are chosen and explains the 
majority of inter-individual variation in the response to 
drug therapy.
Drug absorption and routes  
of administration
Absorption is the process by which drug molecules 
gain access to the blood stream. The rate and extent of 
drug absorption depend on the route of administration 
(see Fig. 2.3).
Enteral administration
These routes involve administration via the gastrointes-
tinal tract:
•	 Oral. This is the commonest route of administration 
because it is simple, convenient and readily used  
by patients to self-administer their medicines. 
Absorption after an oral dose is a complex process 
that depends on the drug being swallowed, 
surviving exposure to gastric acid, avoiding 
unacceptable food binding, being absorbed across 
the small bowel mucosa into the portal venous 
system, and surviving metabolism by gut wall or 
liver enzymes (‘first-pass metabolism’). As a 
consequence, absorption is frequently incomplete 
following oral administration. The term 
‘bioavailability’ describes the proportion of the dose 
that reaches the systemic circulation intact.
•	 Buccal, intranasal and sublingual (SL). These routes 
have the advantage of enabling rapid absorption 
into the systemic circulation without the 
uncertainties associated with oral administration 
Fig. 2.3  Pharmacokinetics summary. Most 
drugs are taken orally, are absorbed from the 
intestinal lumen and enter the portal venous 
system to be conveyed to the liver, where they may 
be subject to first-pass metabolism and/or 
excretion in bile. Active drugs then enter the 
systemic circulation, from which they may diffuse 
(or sometimes be actively transported) in and out 
of the interstitial and intracellular fluid 
compartments. Drug that remains in circulating 
plasma is subject to liver metabolism and renal 
excretion. Drugs excreted in bile may be 
reabsorbed, creating an enterohepatic circulation. 
First-pass metabolism in liver is avoided if drugs 
are administered via the buccal or rectal mucosa, 
or parenterally (e.g. by intravenous injection). 
I
n
t
e
r
s
t
i
t
i
a
l
 
f
l
u
i
d
Intracellular
fluid
Kidney
Liver
Parenteral
Mouth
Stomach
Small
intestine
Large
intestine
Rectum
Buccal
Excretion
in urine
Excretion
in faeces
Portal
venous system
Intestinal wall enzymes
          Liver enzymes
Metabolism
Circulating
plasma
Rectal
Oral
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
22
members of the cytochrome P450 family of membrane-
bound enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum of 
hepatocytes.
Phase II metabolism involves combining phase I 
metabolites with an endogenous substrate to form an 
inactive conjugate that is much more water-soluble. 
Reactions include glucuronidation, sulphation, acetyla-
tion or methylation, and conjugation with glutathione. 
This is necessary to enable renal excretion because lipid-
soluble metabolites will simply diffuse back into the 
body after glomerular filtration (p. 430).
Drug excretion
Excretion is the process by which drugs and their metab-
olites are removed from the body.
Renal excretion is the usual route of elimination 
for drugs or their metabolites that are of low molecu-
lar weight and sufficiently water-soluble to avoid 
reabsorption from the renal tubule. Drugs bound to 
plasma proteins are not filtered by the glomeruli. The 
pH of the urine is more acidic than that of plasma, so 
that some drugs (e.g. salicylates) become un-ionised 
and tend to be reabsorbed. Alkalination of the urine 
can hasten excretion (e.g. after a salicylate overdose). 
For some drugs, active secretion into the proximal 
tubule lumen, rather than glomerular filtration, is the 
pre­dominant mechanism of excretion (e.g. methotrex-
ate, penicillin).
Faecal excretion is the predominant route of elimina-
tion for drugs with high molecular weight, including 
those that are excreted in the bile after conjugation with 
glucuronide in the liver, and any drugs that are not 
absorbed after enteral administration. Molecules of 
drug or metabolite that are excreted in the bile enter the 
small intestine, where they may, if they are sufficiently 
lipid-soluble, be reabsorbed through the gut wall and 
return to the liver via the portal vein (see Fig. 2.3). This 
recycling between the liver, bile, gut and portal vein is 
known as ‘enterohepatic circulation’ and can signifi-
cantly prolong the residence of drugs in the body.
Elimination kinetics
The net removal of drug from the circulation results 
from a combination of drug metabolism and excretion, 
and is usually described as ‘clearance’, i.e. the volume 
of plasma that is completely cleared of drug per 
unit time.
For most drugs, elimination is a high-capacity pro­
cess that does not become saturated, even at high 
dosage. The rate of elimination is therefore directly 
proportional to the drug concentration because of the 
‘law of mass action’, whereby higher drug concentra-
tions will drive faster metabolic reactions and support 
higher renal filtration rates. This results in ‘first-order’ 
kinetics, when a constant fraction of the drug remaining 
in the circulation is eliminated in a given time and the 
decline in concentration over time is exponential (see 
Fig. 2.4A). This elimination can be described by the 
drug’s half-life (t1/2), i.e. the time taken for the plasma 
drug concentration to halve, which remains constant 
throughout the period of drug elimination. The signifi-
cance of this phenomenon for prescribers is that the 
effect of increasing doses on plasma concentration is 
predictable – a doubled dose leads to a doubled concen-
tration at all time points.
beclometasone). However, a significant proportion 
of the inhaled dose may be absorbed from the lung 
or is swallowed and can reach the systemic 
circulation. The most common mode of delivery is 
the metered-dose inhaler but its success depends on 
some degree of manual dexterity and timing (see 
Fig. 19.23, p. 670). Patients who find these difficult 
may use a ‘spacer’ device to improve drug delivery. 
A special mode of inhaled delivery is via a 
nebulised solution created by using pressurised 
oxygen or air to break up solutions and suspensions 
into small aerosol droplets that can be directly 
inhaled from the mouthpiece of the device.
Drug distribution
Distribution is the process by which drug molecules 
transfer into and out of the blood stream. This is influ-
enced by the drug’s molecular size and lipid solubility, 
the extent to which it binds to proteins in plasma, its 
susceptibility to drug transporters expressed on cell sur-
faces, and its binding to its molecular target and to other 
cellular proteins (which can be irreversible). Most drugs 
diffuse passively across capillary walls down a concen-
tration gradient into the interstitial fluid until the con-
centration of free drug molecules in the interstitial fluid 
is equal to that in the plasma. As drug molecules in the 
blood are removed by metabolism or excretion, the 
plasma concentration falls and drug molecules diffuse 
back from the tissue compartment into the blood, and 
eventually all will be eliminated. Note that this reverse 
movement of drug away from the tissues will be pre-
vented if further drug doses are administered and 
absorbed into the plasma.
Volume of distribution
The apparent volume of distribution (Vd) is the volume 
into which a drug appears to have distributed following 
intravenous injection. It is calculated from the equation
V
D/C
d
o
=
where D is the amount of drug given and C0 is the initial 
plasma concentration (Fig. 2.4A). Drugs that are highly 
bound to plasma proteins may have a Vd below 10 L (e.g. 
warfarin, aspirin), while those that diffuse into the inter-
stitial fluid but do not enter cells because they have low 
lipid solubility may have a Vd between 10 and 30 L (e.g. 
gentamicin, amoxicillin). It is an ‘apparent’ volume 
because those drugs that are lipid-soluble and highly 
tissue-bound may have a Vd of greater than 100 L (e.g. 
digoxin, amitriptyline). Drugs with a larger Vd are elimi-
nated more slowly from the body.
Drug elimination
Drug metabolism
Metabolism is the process by which drugs are chemi-
cally altered from a lipid-soluble form suitable for 
absorption and distribution to a more water-soluble 
form that is necessary for excretion. Some drugs, known 
as ‘pro-drugs’, are inactive in the form in which they are 
administered, but are converted to an active metabolite 
in vivo.
Phase I metabolism involves oxidation, reduction or 
hydrolysis to make drug molecules suitable for phase II 
reactions or for excretion. Oxidation is much the com-
monest form of phase I reaction and chiefly involves 
Principles of clinical pharmacology
2
23
several days (e.g. antibiotics) or even for months or years 
(e.g. antihypertensives, lipid-lowering drugs, thyroid 
hormone replacement therapy). This goal is rarely 
achieved with single doses, so prescribers have to plan 
a regimen of repeated doses. This involves choosing the 
size of each individual dose and the frequency of dose 
administration.
As illustrated in Figure 2.4B, the time taken to 
reach drug concentrations within the therapeutic 
range depends on the half-life of the drug. Typically, 
with doses administered regularly, it takes approxi-
mately 5 half-lives to reach a ‘steady state’ in which 
the rate of drug elimination is equal to the rate of 
drug administration. This applies when starting new 
drugs and when adjusting doses of current drugs. 
With appropriate dose selection, steady state drug 
concentrations will be maintained within the thera-
peutic range. This is important for prescribers because 
it means that the effects of a new prescription, or dose 
titration, for a drug with a long half-life (e.g. digoxin 
– 36 hours) may not be known for a few days. In 
contrast, drugs with a very short half-life (e.g. dob-
utamine – 2 minutes) have to be given continuously 
by infusion but reach a new steady state within 
minutes.
For drugs with a long half-life, if it is unacceptable to 
wait for 5 half-lives until concentrations within the ther-
apeutic range are maintained, then an initial ‘loading 
dose’ can be given that is much larger than the mainte-
nance dose, and equivalent to the amount of drug 
required in the body at steady state. This achieves a peak 
plasma concentration close to the plateau concentration, 
which can then be maintained by successive mainte-
nance doses.
‘Steady state’ actually involves fluctuations in drug 
concentrations, with peaks just after administration fol-
lowed by troughs just prior to the next administration. 
The manufacturers of medicines recommend dosing 
regimens that predict that, for most patients, these oscil-
lations result in troughs within the therapeutic range 
and peaks that are not high enough to cause adverse 
effects. The optimal dose interval is a compromise 
between convenience for the patient and a constant 
level of drug exposure. More frequent administration 
(e.g. 25 mg 4 times daily) achieves a smoother plasma 
concentration profile than 100 mg once daily but is 
much more difficult for patients to sustain. A solution to 
this need for compromise in dosing frequency for drugs 
with half-lives of less than 24 hours is the use of 
‘modified-release’ formulations. These allow drugs to 
be absorbed more slowly from the gastrointestinal tract 
and reduce the oscillation in plasma drug concentra­
tion profile, which is especially important for drugs 
with a low therapeutic index (e.g. levodopa).
Inter-individual variation in  
drug responses
Prescribers have numerous sources of guidance about 
how to use drugs appropriately (e.g. dose, route, fre-
quency, duration) for many conditions. However, this 
advice is based on average dose–response data derived 
from observations in many individuals. When applying 
this information to an individual patient, prescribers 
For a few drugs in common use (e.g. phenytoin, 
alcohol), elimination capacity is exceeded (saturated) 
within the usual dose range. This is called ‘zero-order’ 
kinetics. Its significance for prescribers is that, if the rate 
of administration exceeds the maximum rate of elimina-
tion, the drug will accumulate progressively, leading to 
serious toxicity.
Repeated dose regimens
The goal of therapy is usually to maintain drug concen-
trations within the therapeutic range (see Fig. 2.2) over 
Fig. 2.4  Drug concentrations in plasma following single and 
multiple drug dosing.  A In this example of first-order kinetics following 
a single intravenous dose, the time period required for the plasma drug 
concentration to halve (half-life, t1/2) remains constant throughout the 
elimination process.  B After multiple dosing, the plasma drug 
concentration rises if each dose is administered before the previous dose 
has been entirely cleared. In this example, the drug’s half-life is 30 hours, 
so that with daily dosing the peak, average and trough concentrations 
steadily increase as drug accumulates in the body (black line). Steady state 
is reached after approximately 5 half-lives, when the rate of elimination 
(the product of concentration and clearance) is equal to the rate of drug 
absorption (the product of rate of administration and bioavailability). The 
long half-life in this example means that it takes 6 days for steady state to 
be achieved and, for most of the first 3 days of treatment, plasma drug 
concentrations are below the therapeutic range (yellow-shaded area). This 
problem can be overcome if a larger loading dose (red line) is used to 
achieve steady state drug concentrations more rapidly. 
Time (hours)
A constant fraction of drug
is cleared in unit time
t1/2= 8 hours
C0
Plasma drug concentration
6
12
18
24
A
Loading
dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Subtherapeutic
Dose interval = 24 hours
Time (days)
Plasma drug concentration
1
2
3
4
5
6
Therapeutic range
Adverse effects
t1/2= 30 hours
B
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
24
reduced at a given dose in patients with renal impair-
ment, while confusion caused by opioid analgesics is 
more likely in the elderly. However, differences in phar-
macokinetics more commonly account for different 
drug responses. Examples of factors influencing the 
absorption, metabolism and excretion of drugs are 
shown in Box 2.4.
It is hoped that a significant proportion of the inter-
individual variation in drug responses can be explained 
by studying genetic differences in single genes (‘phar-
macogenetics’) (Box 2.5) or the effects of multiple gene 
variants (‘pharmacogenomics’). The aim is to identify 
those patients most likely to benefit from specific 
treatments and those most susceptible to adverse effects. 
In this way, it may be possible to select drugs and 
dose regimens for individual patients to maximise the 
benefit:hazard ratio (‘personalised medicine’).
ADVERSE OUTCOMES OF  
DRUG THERAPY
The decision to prescribe a drug always involves a 
judgement of the balance between therapeutic benefits 
and risk of an adverse outcome. Both prescribers and 
patients tend to be more focused on the former but a 
truly informed decision requires consideration of both.
Adverse drug reactions
Some important definitions for the adverse effects of 
drugs are:
•	 Adverse event. A harmful event that occurs while a 
patient is taking a drug, irrespective of whether the 
drug is suspected of being the cause.
•	 Adverse drug reaction (ADR). An unwanted or 
harmful reaction that is experienced following the 
administration of a drug or combination of drugs 
under normal conditions of use and is suspected to 
be related to the drug. An ADR will usually require 
the drug to be discontinued or the dose reduced.
•	 Side-effect. Any effect caused by a drug other than 
the intended therapeutic effect, whether beneficial, 
neutral or harmful. The term ‘side-effect’ is often 
used interchangeably with ‘ADR’, although the 
former usually implies an effect that is less harmful, 
is predictable and may not require discontinuation 
of therapy (e.g. ankle oedema with vasodilators).
•	 Drug toxicity. Adverse effects of a drug that occur 
because the dose or plasma concentration has risen 
above the therapeutic range, either unintentionally 
or intentionally (drug overdose, see Fig. 2.2, p. 19).
•	 Drug abuse. The misuse of recreational or 
therapeutic drugs that may lead to addiction or 
dependence, serious physiological injury (such as 
liver damage), psychological harm (abnormal 
behaviour patterns, hallucinations, memory loss) or 
death (p. 240).
Prevalence of ADRs
ADRs are a common cause of illness, accounting in 
the United Kingdom (UK) for approximately 3% of 
consultations in primary care and 7% of emergency 
must take account of inter-individual variability in 
response. Some of this variability is predictable and 
good prescribers are able to anticipate it and adjust their 
prescriptions accordingly to maximise the chances of 
benefit and minimise harm. Inter-individual variation in 
responses also mandates that effects of treatment should 
be monitored (p. 39).
Some inter-individual variation in drug response 
is accounted for by differences in pharmacodynamics. 
For example, the beneficial natriuresis produced by 
the loop diuretic furosemide is often significantly 
Age
• Drug metabolism is low in the fetus and newborn, may be 
enhanced in young children, and becomes less effective with 
advancing age
• Drug excretion falls with the age-related decline in renal 
function
Sex
• Women have a greater proportion of body fat than men, 
increasing volume of distribution and half-life of lipid-soluble 
drugs
Body weight
• Obesity increases volume of distribution and half-life of 
lipid-soluble drugs
• Patients with higher lean body mass have larger body 
compartments into which drugs are distributed and may 
require higher doses
Liver function
• Metabolism of most drugs depends on several cytochrome 
P450 enzymes that are impaired in patients with advanced 
liver disease
• Hypoalbuminaemia influences the distribution of drugs that 
are highly protein-bound
Kidney function
• Renal disease and the decline in renal function with ageing 
may lead to drug accumulation
Gastrointestinal function
• Small intestinal absorption of oral drugs may be delayed by 
reduced gastric motility
• Absorptive capacity of the intestinal mucosa may be reduced 
in disease (e.g. Crohn’s disease, coeliac disease) or after 
surgical resection
Food
• Food in the stomach delays gastric emptying and reduces 
the rate (but not usually the extent) of drug absorption
• Some food constituents bind to certain drugs and prevent 
their absorption
Smoking
• Tar in tobacco stimulates the oxidation of certain drugs
Alcohol
• Regular alcohol consumption stimulates liver enzyme 
synthesis, while binge drinking may temporarily inhibit drug 
metabolism
Drugs
• Drug–drug interactions cause marked variation in 
pharmacokinetics (see Box 2.11, p. 28)
2.4  Patient-specific factors that influence 
pharmacokinetics
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy 
2
25
bleeding episodes and 2000 deaths. In many cases, the 
patients were at increased risk due to their age, interact-
ing drugs (e.g. aspirin, warfarin) or a past history of 
peptic ulcer disease. Drugs that commonly cause ADRs 
are listed in Box 2.8.
Prescribers and their patients ideally want to know 
the frequency with which ADRs occur for a specific 
drug. Although this may be well characterised for more 
common ADRs observed in clinical trials, it is less clear 
for rarely reported ADRs when the total numbers of 
reactions and patients exposed are not known. The 
words used to describe frequency can be misinterpreted 
by patients, but widely accepted meanings include: 
very common (10% or more), common (1–10%), uncommon 
(0.1–1%), rare (0.01–0.1%) and very rare (0.01% or less).
Classification of ADRs
ADRs have traditionally been classified into two major 
groups:
•	 Type A (‘augmented’) ADRs. These are predictable 
from the known pharmacodynamic effects of the 
drug, and are dose-dependent, common (detected 
early in drug development) and usually mild. 
admissions to hospital, and affecting around 15% of 
hospital inpatients. Many ‘disease’ presentations are 
eventually attributed to ADRs, emphasising the impor-
tance of always taking a careful drug history (Box 2.6). 
Factors accounting for the rising prevalence of ADRs 
are the increasing age of patients, polypharmacy (higher 
risk of drug interactions), increasing availability of 
over-the-counter medicines, increase in use of herbal 
or traditional medicines, and increase in medicines 
available via the Internet. Risk factors for ADRs are 
shown in Box 2.7.
ADRs are important because they reduce quality of 
life for patients, reduce adherence to and therefore 
efficacy of beneficial treatments, cause diagnostic 
confusion, undermine the confidence of patients in their 
health-care professional(s), and consume health-care 
resources.
Retrospective analysis of ADRs has shown that more 
than half could have been avoided if the prescriber had 
taken more care in anticipating the potential hazards of 
drug therapy. Each year in the UK, non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drug (NSAID) use alone accounts for 
65 000 emergency admissions, 12 000 gastrointestinal 
Genetic variant
Drug affected
Clinical outcome
Pharmacokinetic
Aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 
deficiency
Ethanol
Elevated blood acetaldehyde causes facial flushing and increased heart 
rate in ~50% of Japanese, Chinese and other Asian populations
Acetylation
Isoniazid, hydralazine, 
procainamide
Increased responses in slow acetylators, up to 50% of some populations
Oxidation (CYP2D6)
Nortriptyline
Increased risk of toxicity in poor metabolisers
Codeine
Reduced responses with slower conversion of codeine to more active 
morphine in poor metabolisers, 10% of European populations
Increased risk of toxicity in ultra-fast metabolisers, 3% of Europeans but 
40% of North Africans
Oxidation (CYP2C18)
Proguanil
Reduced efficacy with slower conversion to active cycloguanil in poor 
metabolisers
Oxidation (CYP2C9)
Warfarin
Polymorphisms known to influence dosages
Oxidation (CYP2C19)
Clopidogrel
Reduced enzymatic activation results in reduced antiplatelet effect 
Sulphoxidation
Penicillamine
Increased risk of toxicity in poor metabolisers
HLA-B*1502
Carbamazepine
Increased risk of serious dermatological reactions (e.g. Stevens–
Johnson syndrome) for 1 in 2000 in Caucasian populations (much 
higher in some Asian countries)
Pseudocholinesterase 
deficiency
Suxamethonium 
(succinylcholine)
Decreased drug inactivation leads to prolonged paralysis and sometimes 
persistent apnoea requiring mechanical ventilation until the drug can be 
eliminated by alternate pathways in 1 in 1500 people
Pharmacodynamic
Glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency
Oxidant drugs including 
antimalarials (e.g. chloroquine, 
primaquine)
Risk of haemolysis in G6PD deficiency
Acute intermittent porphyria
Enzyme-inducing drugs
Increased risk of an acute attack
SLC01B1 polymorphism
Statins
Increased risk of rhabdomyolysis
HLA-B*5701 polymorphism
Abacavir
Increased risk of skin hypersensitivity reactions
HLA-B*5801 polymorphism
Allopurinol
Increased risk of rashes in Han Chinese
HLA-B*1502 polymorphism
Carbamazepine
Increased risk of skin hypersensitivity reactions in Han Chinese
(HLA = human leucocyte antigen)
2.5  Examples of pharmacogenetic variations that influence drug response
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
26
‘hyper-susceptible’ because of unpredictable 
immunological or genetic factors (e.g. anaphylaxis 
caused by penicillin, peripheral neuropathy caused 
by isoniazid in poor acetylators).
This simple classification has shortcomings and a 
more detailed classification based on dose (see Fig. 2.2, 
p. 19), timing and susceptibility (DoTS) is now used by 
those analysing ADRs in greater depth (Box 2.9). The AB 
classification can be extended as a reminder of some 
other types of ADR:
•	 Type C (‘chronic/continuous’) ADRs. These occur only 
after prolonged continuous exposure to a drug. 
Examples include osteoporosis caused by 
corticosteroids, retinopathy caused by chloroquine, 
and tardive dyskinesia caused by phenothiazines.
•	 Type D (‘delayed’) ADRs. These are delayed until 
long after drug exposure, making diagnosis 
difficult. Examples include malignancies that may 
emerge after immunosuppressive treatment post 
transplantation (e.g. azathioprine, tacrolimus) and 
vaginal cancer occurring many years after exposure 
to diethylstilboestrol.
Examples include constipation caused by opioids, 
hypotension caused by antihypertensives and 
dehydration caused by diuretics.
•	 Type B (‘bizarre’) ADRs. These are not predictable, 
are not obviously dose-dependent in the therapeutic 
range, and are rare (remaining undiscovered until 
the drug is marketed) and often severe. Patients 
who experience type B reactions are generally  
Information from the patient (or carer)
Use language that patients will understand (e.g. ‘medicines’ 
rather than ‘drugs’, which may be mistaken for drugs of abuse) 
while gathering the following information:
• Current prescribed drugs, including formulations (e.g. 
modified-release tablets), doses, routes of administration, 
frequency and timing, duration of treatment
• Other medications that are often forgotten (e.g. over-the-
counter drugs, herbal remedies, vitamins)
• Drugs that have been taken in the recent past and reasons 
for stopping them
• Previous drug hypersensitivity reactions, their nature and 
time course (e.g. rash, anaphylaxis)
• Previous ADRs, their nature and time course (e.g. muscle 
aches with simvastatin)
• Adherence to therapy (e.g. ‘are you taking your medication 
regularly?’)
Information from the general practitioner (GP) medical records 
and/or pharmacist
• Up-to-date list of medications
• Previous ADRs
• Last order dates for each medication
Inspection of medicines
• Drugs and their containers (e.g. blister packs, bottles, vials) 
should be inspected for name, dosage, and the number of 
dosage forms taken since dispensed
(ADR = adverse drug reaction)
2.6  How to take a drug history
Drug or drug class
Common ADRs
ACE inhibitors (e.g. lisinopril)
Renal impairment
Hyperkalaemia
Antibiotics (e.g. amoxicillin)
Nausea
Diarrhoea
Anticoagulants 
(e.g. warfarin, heparin)
Bleeding
Antipsychotics 
(e.g. haloperidol)
Falls
Sedation
Confusion
Aspirin
Gastrotoxicity (dyspepsia, 
gastrointestinal bleeding)
Benzodiazepines 
(e.g. diazepam)
Drowsiness
Falls
β-blockers (e.g. atenolol)
Cold peripheries
Bradycardia
Calcium channel blockers 
(e.g. amlodipine)
Ankle oedema
Digoxin
Nausea and anorexia
Bradycardia
Diuretics (e.g. furosemide, 
bendroflumethiazide)
Dehydration
Electrolyte disturbance 
(hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia)
Hypotension
Renal impairment
Insulin
Hypoglycaemia
NSAIDs (e.g. ibuprofen)
Gastrotoxicity (dyspepsia, 
gastrointestinal bleeding)
Renal impairment
Opioid analgesics 
(e.g. morphine)
Nausea and vomiting
Confusion
Constipation
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAID = non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drug)
2.8  Drugs that are common causes of ADRs
Patient factors
• Elderly age (e.g. low physiological reserve)
• Gender (e.g. ACE inhibitor-induced cough in women)
• Polypharmacy (e.g. drug interactions)
• Genetic predisposition (see Box 2.5)
• Hypersensitivity/allergy (e.g. β-lactam antibiotics)
• Diseases altering pharmacokinetics (e.g. hepatic or renal 
impairment) or pharmacodynamic responses (e.g. bladder 
instability)
• Adherence problems (e.g. cognitive impairment)
Drug factors
• Steep dose–response curve (e.g. insulin)
• Low therapeutic index (e.g. digoxin, cytotoxic drugs)
Prescriber factors
• Inadequate understanding of principles of clinical 
pharmacology
• Inadequate knowledge of the prescribed drug
• Inadequate instructions and warnings provided to patients
• Inadequate monitoring arrangements planned
2.7  Risk factors for ADRs
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy 
2
27
this information by placing restrictions on the licensed 
indications, reducing the recommended dose range, 
adding special warnings and precautions for prescribers 
in the product literature, writing to all health-care pro-
fessionals, or withdrawing the product from the market.
Voluntary reporting systems allow health-care pro-
fessionals and patients to report suspected ADRs to the 
regulatory authorities. A good example is the ‘Yellow 
Card’ scheme that was set up in the UK in response to 
the thalidomide tragedy. Reports are analysed to assess 
the likelihood that they represent a true ADR (Box 2.10). 
Although voluntary reporting is a continuously operat-
ing and effective early warning system for previously 
unrecognised rare ADRs, its weaknesses include low 
reporting rates (only 3% of all ADRs and 10% of serious 
ADRs are ever reported), an inability to quantify risk 
(because the ratio of ADRs to prescriptions is unknown), 
and the influence of prescriber awareness on likelihood 
of reporting (reporting rates rise rapidly following pub-
licity about potential ADRs).
More systematic approaches to collecting informa-
tion on ADRs include ‘prescription event monitoring’, 
in which a sample of prescribers of a particular drug 
are issued with questionnaires concerning the clinical 
outcome for their patients, and the collection of popula-
tion statistics. Many health-care systems routinely collect 
patient identifiable data on prescriptions (a surrogate 
marker of exposure to a drug), health-care events (e.g. 
hospitalisation, operations, new clinical diagnoses) and 
other clinical data (e.g. haematology, biochemistry). As 
these records are linked, with appropriate safeguards 
for confidentiality and data protection, they are provid-
ing a much more powerful mechanism for assessing 
both the harms and benefits of drugs.
All prescribers will inevitably see patients experienc-
ing ADRs caused by prescriptions written by themselves 
or their colleagues. It is important that these are recog-
nised early. In addition to the features in Box 2.10, fea-
tures that should raise suspicion of an ADR and the need 
to respond (by drug withdrawal, dosage reduction or 
reporting to the regulatory authorities) include:
•	 concern expressed by a patient that a drug has 
harmed him/her
•	 abnormal clinical measurements (e.g. blood 
pressure, temperature, pulse, blood glucose and 
•	 Type E (‘end of treatment’) ADRs. These occur after 
abrupt drug withdrawal (see Box 2.3, p. 20).
A teratogen is a drug with the potential to affect 
the development of the fetus in the first 10 weeks of 
intrauterine life (e.g. phenytoin, warfarin). The thalido-
mide disaster in the early 1960s highlighted the risk of 
teratogenicity and led to mandatory testing of all new 
drugs. Congenital defects in a live infant or aborted fetus 
should lead to the suspicion of an ADR and a careful 
exploration of drug exposures (including self-medication 
and herbal remedies).
Detecting ADRs 
– pharmacovigilance
Type A ADRs become apparent early in the develop-
ment of a new drug. However, by the time a new drug 
is licensed and launched on to a possible worldwide 
market, hundreds rather than thousands of patients may 
have been exposed to it, so that rarer but potentially 
serious type B ADRs may remain undiscovered. Phar-
macovigilance is the process of detecting (‘signal genera-
tion’) and evaluating ADRs in order to help prescribers 
and patients to be better informed about the risks of 
drug therapy. Drug regulatory agencies may respond to 
Category
Example
Dose
Below therapeutic dose
Anaphylaxis with penicillin
In the therapeutic dose range
Nausea with morphine
At high doses
Hepatotoxicity with 
paracetamol
Timing
With the first dose
Anaphylaxis with penicillin
Early stages of treatment
Hyponatraemia with diuretics
On stopping treatment
Benzodiazepine withdrawal 
syndrome
Significantly delayed
Clear cell cancer with 
diethylstilboestrol
Susceptibility
See patient factors in Box 2.7
(INR = international normalised ratio)
2.9  DoTS classification of ADRs
Factor
Key question
Comment
Temporal relationship
What is the time interval between the start 
of drug therapy and the reaction?
Most ADRs occur soon after starting treatment and within 
hours in the case of anaphylactic reactions
Re-challenge
What happens when the patient is 
re-challenged with the drug?
Re-challenge is rarely possible because of the need to avoid 
exposing patients to unnecessary risk
Exclusion
Have concomitant drugs and other non-drug 
causes been excluded?
ADR is a diagnosis of exclusion following clinical 
assessment and relevant investigations for non-drug causes
Novelty
Has the reaction been reported before?
The suspected ADR may already be recognised and 
mentioned in the SPC approved by the regulatory authorities
De-challenge
Does the reaction improve when the drug is 
withdrawn or the dose is reduced?
Most, but not all, ADRs improve on drug withdrawal, 
although recovery may be slow
(SPC = Summary of Product Characteristics)
2.10  TREND analysis of suspected ADRs
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
28
practice and some important examples are given in 
Box 2.11.
Pharmacokinetic interactions occur when the admin-
istration of a second drug alters the concentration of the 
first at its site of action. There are numerous potential 
mechanisms:
•	 Absorption interactions. Drugs that either delay (e.g. 
anticholinergic drugs) or enhance (e.g. prokinetic 
drugs) gastric emptying influence the rate of rise in 
plasma concentration of other drugs but not the 
total amount of drug absorbed. Drugs that bind to 
form insoluble complexes or chelates (e.g. 
aluminium-containing antacids binding with 
ciprofloxacin) can reduce drug absorption.
•	 Distribution interactions. Co-administration of drugs 
that compete for protein binding in plasma (e.g. 
phenytoin and diazepam) can increase the unbound 
drug concentration, but the effect is usually 
short-lived due to increased elimination and hence 
restoration of the pre-interaction equilibrium.
•	 Metabolism interactions. Many drugs rely on 
metabolism by different isoenzymes of cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) in the liver. CYP enzyme inducers (e.g. 
phenytoin, rifampicin) generally reduce plasma 
concentrations of other drugs, although they may 
enhance activation of prodrugs. CYP enzyme 
inhibitors (e.g. clarithromycin, cimetidine, grapefruit 
weight) or laboratory results (e.g. abnormal liver or 
renal function, low haemoglobin white cell count) 
while on drug therapy
•	 new therapy started which could be in response to 
an ADR (e.g. omeprazole, allopurinol, naloxone)
•	 the presence of risk factors for ADRs (see Box 2.7).
Drug interactions
A drug interaction has occurred when the administra-
tion of one drug increases or decreases the beneficial 
or adverse responses to another drug. Although the 
number of potential interacting drug combinations 
is very large, only a small number are common in 
clinical practice. Important drug interactions are most 
likely to occur when the affected drug has a low thera-
peutic index, steep dose–response curve, high first- 
pass or saturable metabolism, or single mechanism of 
elimination.
Mechanisms of drug interactions
Pharmacodynamic interactions occur when two drugs 
produce additive, synergistic or antagonistic effects at 
the same drug target (e.g. receptor, enzyme) or physio-
logical system (e.g. electrolyte excretion, heart rate). 
These are the most common interactions in clinical 
Mechanism
Result
Object drug
Precipitant drug
Pharmaceutical*
Chemical reaction
Sodium bicarbonate
Calcium gluconate
Precipitation of insoluble calcium carbonate
Pharmacokinetic
Reduced absorption
Tetracyclines
Calcium, aluminium, and 
magnesium salts
Reduced tetracycline absorption
Reduced protein binding
Phenytoin
Aspirin
Increased unbound and reduced total phenytoin 
plasma concentration
Reduced metabolism
  CYP3A4
Terfenadine
Grapefruit juice
Cardiac arrhythmias because of prolonged QT 
interval (p. 570)
Warfarin
Clarithromycin
Enhanced anticoagulation
  CYP2C19
Phenytoin
Omeprazole
Phenytoin toxicity
  CYP2D6
Clozapine
Paroxetine
Clozapine toxicity
  Xanthine oxidase
Azathioprine
Allopurinol
Azathioprine toxicity
  Monoamine oxidase
Catecholamines
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors
Hypertensive crisis due to monoamine toxicity
Increased metabolism 
(enzyme induction)
Ciclosporin
St John’s wort
Loss of immunosuppression
Reduced renal elimination
Lithium
Diuretics
Lithium toxicity
Methotrexate
NSAIDs
Methotrexate toxicity
Pharmacodynamic
Direct antagonism at same 
receptor
Opiates
Naloxone
Reversal of opiate effects used therapeutically
Salbutamol
Atenolol
Inhibits bronchodilator effect
Direct potentiation in same 
organ system
Benzodiazepines
Alcohol
Increased sedation
ACE inhibitors
NSAIDs
Increased risk of renal impairment
Indirect potentiation
Digoxin
Diuretics
Digoxin toxicity enhanced because of hypokalaemia
Warfarin
Aspirin, NSAIDs
Increased risk of bleeding because of gastrotoxicity 
and antiplatelet effects
*Pharmaceutical interactions are related to the formulation of the drugs and occur before drug absorption.
2.11  Common drug interactions
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy 
2
29
calculating doses adjusted for body weight, or planning 
appropriate monitoring after drug administration), and 
by health-care systems providing clinical pharmacist 
support (e.g. for checking the patient’s previous medica-
tions and current prescriptions) and electronic prescrib-
ing (which avoids errors due to illegibility or serious 
dosing mistakes, and may be combined with a clinical 
decision support system to take account of patient char-
acteristics and drug history and provide warnings of 
potential contraindications and drug interactions).
Responding when an error 
is discovered
All prescribers will make errors. When they do, their 
first duty is to protect the patient’s safety. This will 
involve a clinical review and taking any steps that will 
reduce harm (e.g. remedial treatment, monitoring, 
recording the event in the notes, informing colleagues). 
Patients should be informed if they have been exposed 
to potential harm. For errors that do not reach the 
patient, it is the prescriber’s duty to report them, so that 
juice) have the opposite effect. Enzyme induction 
effects usually take a few days to manifest because 
of the need to synthesise new CYP enzyme, in 
contrast with the rapid effects of enzyme inhibition.
•	 Excretion interactions. These primarily affect renal 
excretion. For example, drug-induced reduction in 
glomerular filtration rate (e.g. diuretic-induced 
dehydration, ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs) can reduce 
the clearance and increase the plasma concentration 
of many drugs, including some with a low 
therapeutic index (e.g. digoxin, lithium, 
aminoglycoside antibiotics). Less commonly, 
interactions may be due to competition for a 
common tubular organic anion transporter (e.g. 
methotrexate excretion may be inhibited by 
competition with NSAIDs).
Avoiding drug interactions
Drug interactions are increasing as patients are pre-
scribed more medicines (polypharmacy). Prescribers can 
avoid the adverse consequences of drug–drug interac-
tions by taking a careful drug history (see Box 2.6) before 
prescribing additional drugs, only prescribing for clear 
indications, and taking special care when prescribing 
drugs with a narrow therapeutic index (e.g. warfarin). 
When prescribing an interacting drug is unavoidable, 
good prescribers will seek further information and anti­
cipate the potential risk. This will allow them to provide 
special warnings for the patient and arrange for moni-
toring, either of the clinical effects (e.g. coagulation tests 
for warfarin) or of plasma concentration (e.g. digoxin).
Medication errors
A medication error is any preventable event that may 
lead to inappropriate medication use or patient 
harm while the medication is in the control of the 
health-care professional or patient. Errors may occur 
in prescribing, dispensing, preparing solutions, admin-
istration or monitoring. Many ADRs are considered 
in retrospect to have been ‘avoidable’ with more care 
or forethought; in other words, an adverse event 
considered by one prescriber to be an unfortunate 
ADR might be considered by another to be a prescrib-
ing error.
Medication errors are very common. Several thou-
sand medication orders are dispensed and administered 
each day in a medium-sized hospital. Recent UK studies 
suggest that 7–9% of hospital prescriptions contain an 
error, and most are written by junior doctors. Common 
prescribing errors in hospitals include omission of medi-
cines (especially failure to prescribe regular medicines 
at the point of admission or discharge, i.e. ‘medicines 
reconciliation’), dosing errors, unintentional prescribing 
and poor use of documentation (Box 2.12).
Most prescription errors result from a combination of 
failures by the individual prescriber and the health-
service systems in which they work (Box 2.13). Health-
care organisations increasingly encourage reporting of 
errors within a ‘no blame culture’ so that they can be 
subject to ‘root cause analysis’ using human error 
theory (Fig. 2.5). Prevention is targeted at the factors in 
Box 2.13, and can be supported by prescribers commu-
nicating and cross-checking with colleagues (e.g. when 
Error type
Approximate % 
of total
Omission on admission
30
Underdose
11
Overdose
8
Strength/dose missing
7
Omission on discharge
6
Administration times incorrect/missing
6
Duplication
6
Product or formulation not specified
4
Incorrect formulation
4
No maximum dose
4
Unintentional prescribing
3
No signature
2
Clinical contraindication
1
Incorrect route
1
No indication
1
IV instructions incorrect/missing
1
Drug not prescribed but indicated
1
Drug continued for longer than needed
1
Route of administration missing
1
Start date incorrect/missing
1
Risk of drug interaction
< 0.5
Controlled drug requirements incorrect/
missing
< 0.5
Daily dose divided incorrectly
< 0.5
Significant allergy
< 0.5
Drug continued in spite of adverse effects
< 0.5
Premature discontinuation
< 0.5
Failure to respond to out-of-range drug level
< 0.5
2.12  Hospital prescribing errors
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
30
others can learn from the experience, and take the 
opportunity to reflect on how a similar incident might 
be avoided in the future.
DRUG REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT
Given the powerful beneficial and potentially adverse 
effects of drugs, the production and use of medicines are 
strictly regulated (e.g. by the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration in the United States (US), Medicines and Health-
care Products Regulatory Agency in the UK, and Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation in India). Regula-
tors are responsible for licensing medicines, monitoring 
their safety (pharmacovigilance, p. 27), approving clini-
cal trials, and inspecting and maintaining standards of 
drug development and manufacture.
In addition, because of the high costs of drugs and 
of their adverse effects, health-care services must 
prioritise their use in light of the evidence of their 
benefit and harm, a process referred to as ‘medicines 
management’.
Drug development and marketing
Naturally occurring products have been used to treat 
illnesses for thousands of years and some remain in 
common use today. Examples include morphine from 
the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum), digitalis from the 
foxglove (Digitalis purpurea), curare from the bark of a 
South American tree, and quinine from another bark 
(Cinchona species). Although plants and animals remain 
a source of discovery, the majority of new drugs come 
from drug discovery programmes that aim to identify 
Fig. 2.5  Human error theory. Unintended errors may occur because 
the prescriber fails to complete the prescription correctly (a slip) (e.g. 
writes the dose in ‘mg’ not ‘micrograms’) or forgets part of the action that 
is important for success (a lapse) (e.g. forgets to co-prescribe folic acid 
with methotrexate); prevention requires the system to provide appropriate 
checking routines. Intended errors occur when the prescriber acts 
incorrectly due to lack of knowledge (a mistake) (e.g. prescribes atenolol 
for a patient with known severe asthma because of ignorance about the 
contraindication); prevention must focus on training the prescriber. 
Planned
action
Prescribing
Intended
action
Correct
action
Intended
outcome
Unintended
action
Lapse
Slip
Wrong plan selected
(Causes include
poor training and
lack of experience)
Correct plan known
but not executed
(Causes include
workload, time
pressures, distractions)
Prescription not
as intended
Prescriber unaware
Prescription incomplete
or forgotten
Prescriber may remember
Violation
Mistake
Prescription as intended
but written based on
the wrong principles or
lack of knowledge
Prescriber unaware
Deliberate deviations
from standard practice
Prescriber aware
Systems factors
• Working hours of prescribers (and others)
• Patient throughput
• Professional support and supervision by colleagues
• Availability of information (medical records)
• Design of prescription forms
• Distractions
• Decision support available
• Checking routines (e.g. clinical pharmacy)
• Reporting and reviewing of incidents
Prescriber factors
Knowledge
• Clinical pharmacology principles
• Drugs in common use
• Therapeutic problems commonly encountered
• Knowledge of workplace systems
Skills
• Taking a good drug history
• Obtaining information to support prescribing
• Communicating with patients
• Numeracy and calculations
• Prescription writing
Attitudes
• Coping with risk and uncertainty
• Monitoring of prescribing
• Checking routines
2.13  Causes of prescribing errors
Phase I
• Healthy volunteers (20–80). These involve initial single-dose, 
‘first-into-man’ studies, followed by repeated-dose studies. 
They aim to establish the basic pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic properties, and short-term safety. 
Duration: 6–12 months
Phase II
• Patients (100–200). These investigate clinical effectiveness 
(‘proof of concept’), safety and dose–response relationship, 
often with a surrogate clinical endpoint, in the target patient 
group to determine the optimal dosing regimen for larger 
confirmatory studies. Duration: 1–2 years
Phase III
• Patients (100s–1000s). These are large, expensive clinical 
trials that confirm safety and efficacy in the target patient 
population, using relevant clinical endpoints. They may be 
placebo-controlled studies or comparisons with other active 
compounds. Duration: 1–2 years
Phase IV
• Patients (100s–1000s). These are undertaken after the 
medicine has been marketed for its first indication to 
evaluate new indications, new doses or formulations, 
long-term safety or cost-effectiveness
2.14  Clinical development of new drugs
Drug regulation and management
2
31
small-molecule compounds with specific interactions 
with a molecular target that will induce a predicted bio-
logical effect.
The usual pathway for development of these small 
molecules includes: identifying a plausible molecular 
target by investigating pathways in disease; screening 
a large library of compounds for those that interact 
with the molecular target in vitro; conducting exten­
sive medicinal chemistry to optimise the properties of 
lead compounds; testing efficacy and toxicity of these 
compounds in vitro and in animals; and undertaking a 
clinical development programme (Box 2.14). This process 
typically takes longer than 10 years and may cost up to 
$1 billion. Manufacturers have a defined period of exclu-
sive marketing of the drug while it remains protected by 
an original patent, typically 10–15 years, during which 
time they must recoup the costs of developing the drug. 
Meanwhile, competitor companies will often produce 
similar ‘me too’ drugs of the same class. Once the drug’s 
patent has expired, ‘generic’ drug manufacturers may 
step in to produce cheaper formulations.
The number of new drugs produced by the pharma-
ceutical industry has declined in recent years. The tradi-
tional approach of targeting membrane-bound receptors 
and enzymes with small molecules (see Box 2.2) is now 
giving way to new targets such as complex second 
messenger systems, cytokines, nucleic acids and cellular 
networks. These require novel therapeutic agents which 
present new challenges for ‘translational medicine’, the 
discipline of converting scientific discoveries into a 
useful medicine with a well-defined benefit–risk profile 
(Box 2.15).
Licensing new medicines
New drugs are given a ‘market authorisation’ based on 
the evidence of quality, safety and efficacy presented 
by the manufacturer. The regulator will not only approve 
the drug but will also take great care to ensure that the 
accompanying information reflects the evidence that has 
been presented. The summary of product characteristics 
(SPC), or ‘label’, provides detailed information about 
indications, dosage, adverse effects, warnings, monitor-
ing etc. If approved, drugs can be made available with 
different levels of restriction:
•	 Controlled drug (CD). These drugs are subject to 
strict legal controls on supply and possession, 
usually due to their abuse potential (e.g. opioid 
analgesics).
•	 Prescription-only medicine (PoM). These are only 
available from a pharmacist and can only be 
supplied if prescribed by an appropriate 
practitioner.
•	 Pharmacy (P). These are only available from a 
pharmacist but can be supplied without a 
prescription.
•	 General sales list (GSL). These medicines may be 
bought ‘over the counter’ (OTC) from any shop and 
without a prescription.
Drug marketing
The marketing activities of the pharmaceutical industry 
are well resourced and are important in the process of 
recouping the massive costs of drug development. In 
some countries, such as the US, it is possible to promote 
a new drug by direct-to-consumer advertising, although 
this is illegal in the countries of the European Union. A 
major focus is on promotion to prescribers via educa-
tional events, sponsorship of meetings, adverts in 
journals, involvement with opinion leaders, and direct 
contact by company representatives. Such largesse has 
the potential to cause significant conflicts of interest, 
and might tempt prescribers to favour one drug over 
another, even in the face of evidence on effectiveness 
or cost-effectiveness.
Managing the use of medicines
Many medicines meet the three key regulatory require-
ments of quality, safety and efficacy. Although prescrib-
ers are legally entitled to prescribe any of them, it is 
desirable to limit the choice so that treatments for spe-
cific diseases can be focused on the most effective and 
cost-effective options, prescribers (and patients) gain 
familiarity with a smaller number of medicines, and 
pharmacies can concentrate stocks on them.
The process of ensuring optimal use of available 
medicines is known as ‘medicines management’ or 
‘quality use of medicines’. It involves careful evaluation 
of the evidence of benefit and harm from using the medi-
cine, an assessment of cost-effectiveness, and support for 
processes to implement the resulting recommendations. 
Approaches
Therapeutic indications
Challenges
Monoclonal antibodies: targeting of 
receptors or other molecules with 
relatively specific antibodies
Cancer
Chronic inflammatory diseases (e.g. 
rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel 
disease)
Selectivity of action
Complex manufacturing process
Small interfering RNA (siRNA): inhibits 
gene expression
Macular degeneration
Delivery to target
Gene therapy: delivery of modified genes 
that supplement or alter host DNA
Cystic fibrosis
Cancer
Cardiovascular disease
Delivery to target
Adverse effects of delivery vector (e.g. 
virus)
Stem cell therapy: stem cells 
differentiate and replace damaged host 
cells
Parkinson’s disease
Spinal cord injury
Ischaemic heart disease
Delivery to target
Immunological compatibility
Long-term effects unknown
2.15  Novel therapeutic alternatives to conventional small-molecule drugs
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
32
usefully be applied to assess both benefit (NNTB) and 
harm (NNTH).
Evaluating cost-effectiveness
New drugs often represent an incremental improvement 
over the current standard of care but are usually more 
expensive. The principles for evaluating and comparing 
cost-effectiveness of treatment are described on page 9. 
A major challenge is to compare the value of interven-
tions for different clinical outcomes. One method is 
to calculate the quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) 
gained if the new drug is used rather than standard 
treatment. This analysis involves estimating the ‘utility’ 
of various health states between 1 (perfect health) and 0 
(dead). If the additional costs and any savings are 
known, then it is possible to derive the incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio (ICER) in terms of cost/QALY. These 
principles are exemplified in Box 2.16. However, there 
are inherent weaknesses in this kind of analysis: it 
usually depends on modelling future outcomes well 
beyond the duration of the clinical trial data that are 
available; it assumes that QALYs gained at all ages are 
of equivalent value; and the appropriate standard care 
against which the new drug should be compared is often 
uncertain.
These pharmacoeconomic assessments are challeng-
ing and resource-intensive, and are undertaken at 
national level in most countries: for example in the UK 
by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excel-
lence (NICE).
Implementing recommendations
Many recommendations about drug therapy are 
included in clinical guidelines written by an expert 
group after systematic review of the evidence. As 
described on page 8, these provide recommendations 
rather than obligations for prescribers, and are helpful 
in promoting more consistent and higher-quality 
These activities usually involve both national and local 
organisations.
Evaluating evidence
The principles of evidence-based medicine are described 
on page 8. Drugs are often evaluated in high-quality 
randomised controlled trials, the results of which can be 
considered by systematic review (Fig. 2.6). Ideally, data 
are available not only for comparison with placebo but 
also in ‘head-to-head’ comparison with alternative ther-
apies. However, trials are conducted in selected patient 
populations and are not representative of every clinical 
scenario, so extrapolation to individual patients is not 
always straightforward.
Clinical trials typically report the percentage reduc-
tion in risk of a primary outcome, such as a stroke. 
However, if the absolute risk of stroke for a given 
patient is low, then even an apparently substantial per-
centage reduction in risk may not be worthwhile. As an 
aid to interpreting the results of clinical trials, it is often 
helpful to consider the number needed to treat (NNT). 
For example, in a systematic review of warfarin therapy 
to prevent stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, 
strokes occurred in 133 of 1450 patients given placebo 
and in 53 of 1450 patients given warfarin. This repre-
sents a relative risk of 0.40, i.e. a 60% reduction. It 
equates to an NNT of 18, i.e. 18 patients would need to 
be treated for 1 year to prevent 1 stroke; NNT is calcu-
lated as the inverse of the difference in absolute rate of 
stroke = 1/[(133/1450) − (53/1450)]. However, if the 
absolute risk of stroke were halved, the relative risk 
reduction with warfarin would still be 60%, but the NNT 
would increase to 1/[(67/1450) − (27/1450)] = 36, i.e. 36 
patients would need to be treated for 1 year to prevent 
1 stroke, with a consequent increase in cost and risk 
of adverse effects compared with benefit. NNT can 
Fig. 2.6  Systematic review of the evidence from randomised 
controlled clinical trials. This forest plot shows the effect of warfarin 
compared with placebo on likelihood of stroke in patients with atrial 
fibrillation in five randomised controlled trials that passed the quality 
criteria required for inclusion in a meta-analysis. For each trial, the purple 
box is proportionate to the number of participants. The tick marks show 
the mean odds ratio, and the black lines indicate its 95% confidence 
intervals. Note that not all the trials showed statistically significant effects 
(i.e. the confidence intervals cross 1.0). However, the meta-analysis, 
represented by the black diamond, confirms a highly significant statistical 
benefit. The overall odds ratio is approximately 0.4, indicating a mean 60% 
risk reduction with warfarin treatment in patients with the characteristics of 
the participants in these trials. 
Odds ratio
Favours treatment
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
Favours placebo
A clinical trial lasting 2 years compares two interventions for the 
treatment of colon cancer:
• Treatment A: standard treatment, cost £1000/year, oral 
therapy
• Treatment B: new treatment, cost £6000/year, monthly IV 
infusions often followed by a week of nausea.
The new treatment (B) significantly increases the average 
time to progression (18 months versus 12 months) and reduces 
overall mortality (40% versus 60%). The health economist 
models the survival curves from the trial in order to undertake a 
cost–utility analysis and concludes that:
• Intervention A: allows a patient to live for 2 extra years at a 
utility 0.7 = 1.4 QALYs (cost £2000)
• Intervention B: allows a patient to live for 3 extra years at a 
utility 0.6 = 1.8 QALYs (cost £18 000).
The health economists conclude that Treatment B provides 
an extra 0.4 QALYs at an extra cost of £16 000, meaning that 
the ICER = £40 000/QALY. They recommend that the new 
treatment should not be funded on the basis that their threshold 
for cost acceptability is £30 000/QALY.
(ICER = incremental cost-effectiveness ratio; QALY = quality-adjusted 
life year)
2.16  Cost-effectiveness analysis
Prescribing in practice
2
33
prescribing. However, guidelines are often written 
without concern for cost-effectiveness, and may be 
limited by the quality of available evidence. Guidelines 
cannot anticipate the extent of the variation between 
individual patients who may, for example, have unex-
pected contra­indications to recommended drugs or 
choose different priorities for treatment. However, when 
deviating from respected national guidance, prescribers 
should be able to justify their practice.
Additional recommendations for prescribing are 
often implemented locally or imposed by bodies respon-
sible for paying for health care. Most health-care units 
have a drug and therapeutics committee (or equivalent) 
comprised of senior and junior medical staff, pharma-
cists and nurses, as well as managers (because of the 
implications of the committee’s work for governance 
and resources). This group typically develops local pre-
scribing policy and guidelines, maintains a local drug 
formulary and evaluates requests to use new drugs. The 
local formulary contains a more limited list than any 
national formulary (e.g. British National Formulary) 
because the latter lists all licensed medicines that can be 
prescribed legally, while the former contains only those 
which the health-care organisation has approved for 
local use. The local committee may also be involved, 
with local specialists, in providing explicit protocols for 
management of clinical scenarios (p. 9).
PRESCRIBING IN PRACTICE
Decision-making in prescribing
Prescribing should be based on a rational approach to a 
series of challenges (see Box 2.1, p. 18).
Making a diagnosis
Ideally, prescribing should be based on a confirmed 
diagnosis but, in reality, many prescriptions are based 
on the balance of probability, taking into account the 
differential diagnosis (e.g. proton pump inhibitors for 
post-prandial retrosternal discomfort).
Establishing the therapeutic goal
The goals of treatment are usually clear, particularly 
when relieving symptoms (e.g. pain, nausea, constipa-
tion). Sometimes the goal is less obvious to the patient, 
especially when aiming to prevent future events (e.g. 
ACE inhibitors to prevent hospitalisation and extend life 
in chronic heart failure). Prescribers should be clear 
about the therapeutic goal against which they will judge 
success or failure of treatment. It is also important to 
establish that the value placed on this goal by the pre-
scriber is shared by the patient.
Choosing the therapeutic approach
For many clinical problems, drug therapy is not abso-
lutely mandated. Having taken the potential benefits 
and harms into account, prescribers must consider 
whether drug therapy is in the patient’s interest and 
is preferred to no treatment or one of a range of alter­
natives (e.g. physiotherapy, psychotherapy, surgery). 
Assessing the balance of benefit and harm is often com-
plicated and depends on various features associated 
with the patient, disease and drug (Box 2.17).
Choosing a drug
For most common clinical indications (e.g. type 2 diabe-
tes, depression), more than one drug is available, often 
from more than one drug class. Although prescribers 
often have guidance about which represents the rational 
choice for the average patient, they still need to consider 
whether this is the optimal choice for the individual 
patient. Certain factors may influence the choice of drug:
Absorption.  Patients may find some formulations easier 
to swallow than others or may be vomiting and require 
a drug available for parenteral administration.
Distribution.  Distribution of a drug to a particular 
tissue sometimes dictates choice (e.g. tetracyclines and 
rifampicin are concentrated in the bile, and lincomycin 
and clindamycin in bones).
Metabolism.  Drugs that are extensively metabolised 
should be avoided in severe liver disease (e.g. opioid 
analgesics).
Excretion.  Drugs that depend on renal excretion for 
elimination (e.g. digoxin, aminoglycoside antibiotics) 
should be avoided in patients with impaired renal func-
tion if suitable alternatives exist.
Efficacy.  Prescribers normally choose drugs with the 
greatest efficacy in achieving the goals of therapy (e.g. 
proton pump inhibitors rather than histamine2 receptor 
antagonists). However, it may be appropriate to com-
promise on efficacy if other drugs are more convenient, 
safer to use or less expensive.
Avoiding adverse effects.   Prescribers should be wary of 
choosing drugs that are more likely to cause adverse 
effects (e.g. cephalosporins rather than alternatives for 
patients allergic to penicillin) or worsen coexisting con-
ditions (e.g. β-blockers as treatment for angina in patients 
with asthma).
Features of the disease.   This is most obvious when choos-
ing antibiotic therapy, which should be based on the 
known or suspected sensitivity of the infective organism 
(p. 149).
Severity of disease.  The choice of drug should be appro-
priate to disease severity (e.g. paracetamol for mild pain, 
morphine for severe pain).
Coexisting diseases  may be either an indication or a con-
traindication to therapy. Hypertensive patients might be 
prescribed a β-blocker if they also have left ventricular 
impairment but not if they have asthma.
Avoiding adverse drug interactions.  Prescribers should 
avoid giving combinations of drugs that might interact, 
either directly or indirectly (see Box 2.11).
Patient adherence to therapy.  Prescribers should choose 
drugs with a simple dosing schedule or easier adminis-
tration (e.g. the ACE inhibitor enalapril once daily rather 
than captopril 3 times daily for hypertension).
Cost.  Prescribers should choose the cheaper drug if two 
drugs are of equal efficacy and safety. Even if cost is not 
• Seriousness of the disease or symptom
• Efficacy of the drug
• Seriousness of potential adverse effects
• Likelihood of adverse effects
• Efficacy of alternative drugs or non-drug therapies
• Safety of alternative drugs or non-drug therapies
2.17  Factors to consider when balancing benefits 
and harms of drug therapy
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
34
pharmacokinetic or therapeutic reasons for giving drugs 
at particular times (Box 2.19).
Formulation.  For some drugs there is a choice of formu-
lation, some for use by different routes. Some are easier 
to ingest, particularly by children (e.g. elixirs). The for-
mulation is important when writing repeat prescriptions 
for drugs with a low therapeutic index that come in dif-
ferent formulations (e.g. lithium, phenytoin, theophyl-
line). Even if the prescribed dose remains constant, 
another formulation may differ in its absorption and 
bioavailability, and hence plasma drug concentration. 
These are examples of the small number of drugs that 
should be prescribed by specific brand name rather than 
‘generic’ International Non-proprietary Name (INN).
Duration.   Some drugs require a single dose (e.g. throm-
bolysis post myocardial infarction), while for others the 
duration of the course of treatment is certain at the 
outset (e.g. antibiotics). For most, the duration will be 
largely at the prescriber’s discretion and will depend on 
response and disease progression (e.g. analgesics, anti-
depressants). For many, the treatment will be long-term 
(e.g. insulin, antihypertensives, levothyroxine).
Involving the patient
Patients should, whenever possible, be engaged in 
making choices about drug therapy. Their beliefs and 
a concern for the individual patient, it is important to 
remember that unnecessary expenditure will ultimately 
limit choices for other prescribers and patients. Some-
times a more costly drug may be appropriate (e.g. if it 
yields improved adherence).
Genetic factors.  There are already a small number of 
examples where genotype influences the choice of drug 
therapy (see Box 2.5).
Choosing a dosage regimen
Prescribers have to choose a dose, route and frequency 
of administration (dosage regimen) to achieve a steady-
state drug concentration that provides sufficient expo-
sure of the target tissue without producing toxic effects. 
Manufacturers draw up dosage recommendations based 
on average observations in many patients but the 
optimal regimen that will maximise the benefit/harm 
ratio for an individual patient is never certain. Rational 
prescribing involves treating each prescription as an 
experiment and gathering sufficient information to 
amend it if necessary. There are some general principles 
that should be followed:
Dose titration.  Prescribers should generally start with a 
low dose and titrate this slowly upwards as necessary. 
This cautious approach is particularly important if the 
patient is likely to be more sensitive to adverse pharma-
codynamic effects (e.g. confusion or postural hypoten-
sion in the elderly) or have altered pharmacokinetic 
handling (e.g. renal or hepatic impairment), and when 
using drugs with a low therapeutic index (e.g. benzodi-
azepines, lithium, digoxin). However, there are some 
exceptions. Some drugs must achieve therapeutic con-
centration quickly because of the clinical circumstance 
(e.g. antibiotics, glucocorticoids, carbimazole). When 
early effect is important but there may be a delay in 
achieving steady state because of a drug’s long half-life 
(e.g. digoxin, warfarin, amiodarone), an initial loading 
dose is given prior to establishing the appropriate main-
tenance dose (see Fig. 2.4, p. 23).
If adverse effects occur, the dose should be reduced 
or an alternative drug prescribed; in some cases, a lower 
dose may suffice if it can be combined with another 
synergistic drug (e.g. the immunosuppressant azathio-
prine reduces glucocorticoid requirements in patients 
with inflammatory disease). It is important to remember 
that the shape of the dose–response curve (see Fig. 2.2, 
p. 19) means that higher doses may produce little 
added therapeutic effect and might increase the chances 
of toxicity.
Route.  There are many reasons for choosing a particular 
route of administration (Box 2.18).
Frequency.   Frequency of doses is usually dictated by a 
manufacturer’s recommendation. Less frequent doses 
are more convenient for patients but result in greater 
fluctuation between peaks and troughs in drug concen-
tration (see Fig. 2.4, p. 23). This is relevant if the peaks 
are associated with adverse effects (e.g. dizziness with 
antihypertensives) or the troughs are associated with 
troublesome loss of effect (e.g. anti-Parkinsonian drugs). 
These problems can be tackled either by splitting the 
dose or by employing a modified-release formulation, if 
available.
Timing.  For many drugs the time of administration 
is unimportant. However, there are occasionally 
Reason
Example
Only one route 
possible
Dobutamine (IV)
Gliclazide (oral)
Patient adherence
Phenothiazines and thioxanthenes  
(2 weekly IM depot injections rather 
than daily tablets in schizophrenia)
Poor absorption
Furosemide (IV rather than oral, in 
severe heart failure)
Rapid action
Haloperidol (IM rather than oral, in 
acute behavioural disturbance)
Vomiting
Phenothiazines (PR or buccal  
rather than oral, in nausea)
Avoiding first-pass 
metabolism
Glyceryl trinitrate (SL, in angina 
pectoris)
Certainty of effect
Amoxicillin (IV rather than oral, in 
acute chest infection)
Direct access to the 
site of action (avoiding 
unnecessary systemic 
exposure)
Bronchodilators (INH rather than 
oral, in asthma)
Local application of drugs to skin, 
eyes etc.
Ease of access
Diazepam (PR, if IV access is 
difficult in status epilepticus)
Adrenaline (epinephrine) (IM, if IV 
access is difficult in acute 
anaphylaxis)
Comfort
Morphine (SC rather than IV in 
terminal care)
(IM = intramuscular; INH = by inhalation; IV = intravenous; PR = per 
rectum; SC = subcutaneous; SL = sublingual)
2.18  Factors influencing the route 
of drug administration
Prescribing in practice
2
35
Drug
Recommended timing
Reasons
Diuretics (e.g. furosemide)
Once in the morning
Night-time diuresis undesirable
Statins (e.g. simvastatin)
Once at night
HMG CoA reductase activity is greater at night
Antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline)
Once at night
Allows adverse effects to occur during sleep
Salbutamol
Before exercise
Reduces symptoms in exercise-induced asthma
Glyceryl trinitrate
Paracetamol
When required
Relief of acute symptoms only
Regular nitrate therapy (e.g. 
isosorbide mononitrate)
Eccentric dosing regimen (e.g. twice 
daily at 8 a.m. and 2 p.m.)
Reduces development of nitrate tolerance by 
allowing drug-free period each night
Aspirin
With food
Minimises gastrotoxic effects
Alendronate
Once in the morning before breakfast, 
sitting upright
Minimises risk of oesophageal irritation
Tetracyclines
2 hours before or after food or 
antacids
Divalent and trivalent cations chelate tetracyclines, 
preventing absorption
Hypnotics (e.g. temazepam)
Once at night
Maximises therapeutic effect and minimises 
daytime sedation
Antihypertensive drugs (e.g. 
amlodipine)
Once in the morning
Blood pressure is higher during the daytime
(HMG CoA = 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A)
2.19  Factors influencing the timing of drug therapy
expectations affect the goals of therapy and help in 
judging the acceptable benefit/harm balance when 
selecting treatments. Very often, patients may wish to 
defer to the professional expertise of the prescriber. 
Nevertheless, they play key roles in adherence to 
therapy and in monitoring treatment, not least by pro-
viding early warning of adverse events. It is important 
that they are provided with the necessary information 
to understand the choice that has been made, what to 
expect from the treatment, and any measurements that 
must be undertaken (Box 2.20).
A major drive to include patients has been the recog-
nition that up to half of the drug doses for chronic 
preventative therapy are not taken. This is often termed 
‘non-compliance’ but is more appropriately called 
‘non-adherence’, to reflect a less paternalistic view of the 
doctor–patient relationship; it may or may not be 
intentional. Non-adherence to the dose regimen reduces 
the likelihood of benefits to the patient and can be costly 
in terms of wasted medicines and unnecessary health-
care episodes. An important reason may be a failure of 
concordance with the prescriber about the goals of 
treatment. A more open and shared decision-making 
process might resolve any misunderstandings at the 
outset and foster improved adherence as well as 
improved satisfaction with health-care services and 
confidence in prescribers.
Writing the prescription
The culmination of the planning described above is 
writing an accurate and legible prescription so that the 
drug will be dispensed and administered as planned 
(see ‘Writing prescriptions’ below).
Knowledge
Comment
The reason for taking the medicine
Reinforces the goals of therapy
How the medicine works
How to take the medicine
May be important for the effectiveness (e.g. inhaled salbutamol in asthma) and safety (e.g. 
alendronate for osteoporosis) of treatment
What benefits to expect
May help to support adherence or prompt review because of treatment failure
What adverse effects might occur
Discuss common and mild effects that may be transient and might not require discontinuation
Mention rare but serious effects that might influence the patient’s consent
Precautions that improve safety
Explain symptoms to report that might allow serious adverse effects to be averted, monitoring 
that will be required and potentially important drug–drug interactions
When to return for review
This will be important to enable monitoring
*Many medicines are provided with patient information leaflets, which the patient should be encouraged to read.
2.20  What patients need to know about their medicines*
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
36
Monitoring treatment effects
Rational prescribing involves monitoring for the benefi-
cial and adverse effects of treatment so that the balance 
remains in favour of a positive outcome (see ‘Monitoring 
drug therapy’ below).
Stopping drug therapy
It is also important to review long-term treatment at 
regular intervals to assess whether continued treatment 
is required. Elderly patients are keen to reduce their 
medication burden and are often prepared to compro-
mise on the original goals of long-term preventative 
therapy to achieve this.
Prescribing in special circumstances
Prescribing for patients with  
renal disease
Patients with renal impairment are readily identified 
by having a low estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(eGFR < 60 mL/min) based on their serum creatinine, 
age, sex and ethnic group (p. 466). This group includes 
a large proportion of elderly patients. If a drug (or its 
active metabolites) is eliminated predominantly by the 
kidneys, it will tend to accumulate and so the mainte-
nance dose must be reduced. For some drugs, renal 
impairment makes patients more sensitive to their 
adverse pharmacodynamic effects. Examples of drugs 
that require extra caution in patients with renal disease 
are listed in Box 2.21.
Prescribing for patients with 
hepatic disease
The liver has a large capacity for drug metabolism and 
hepatic insufficiency has to be advanced before drug 
dosages need to be modified. Patients who may have 
impaired metabolism include those with jaundice, 
ascites, hypoalbuminaemia, malnutrition or encepha-
lopathy. Hepatic drug clearance may also be reduced in 
acute hepatitis, in hepatic congestion due to cardiac 
failure, and if there is intrahepatic arteriovenous 
shunting (for example, in hepatic cirrhosis). There are 
no good tests of hepatic drug-metabolising capacity or 
of biliary excretion, so dosage should be guided by the 
therapeutic response and careful monitoring for adverse 
effects. The presence of liver disease also increases the 
susceptibility to adverse pharmacological effects of 
drugs. Some drugs that require extra caution in patients 
with hepatic disease are listed in Box 2.21.
Prescribing for elderly patients
See Box 2.22.
Kidney disease
Liver disease
Pharmacodynamic effects enhanced
ACE inhibitors and ARBs (renal 
impairment, hyperkalaemia)
Metformin (lactic acidosis)
Spironolactone 
(hyperkalaemia)
NSAIDs (impaired renal 
function)
Sulphonylureas 
(hypoglycaemia)
Insulin (hypoglycaemia)
Warfarin (increased 
anticoagulation because of 
reduced clotting factor 
synthesis)
Metformin (lactic acidosis)
Chloramphenicol (bone 
marrow suppression)
NSAIDs (gastrointestinal 
bleeding, fluid retention)
Sulphonylureas 
(hypoglycaemia)
Benzodiazepines (coma)
Pharmacokinetic handling altered (reduced clearance)
Aminoglycosides (e.g. 
gentamicin)
Vancomycin
Digoxin
Lithium
Other antibiotics (e.g. 
ciprofloxacin)
Atenolol
Allopurinol
Cephalosporins
Methotrexate
Opioids (e.g. morphine)
Phenytoin
Rifampicin
Propranolol
Warfarin
Diazepam
Lidocaine
Opioids (e.g. morphine)
(ARB = angiotensin receptor blocker)
2.21  Some drugs that require extra caution in 
patients with renal or hepatic disease
• Reduced drug elimination: partly due to impaired renal 
function.
• Increased sensitivity to drug effects: notably in the brain 
(leading to sedation or delirium) and as a result of 
comorbidities.
• More drug interactions: largely as a result of polypharmacy.
• Lower starting doses and slower dose titration: often 
required, with careful monitoring of drug effects.
• Drug adherence: may be poor because of cognitive 
impairment, difficulty swallowing (dry mouth) and complex 
polypharmacy regimens. Supplying medicines in pill 
organisers (e.g. dosette boxes or calendar blister packs), 
providing automatic reminders, and regularly reviewing and 
simplifying the drug regimen can help.
• Some drugs that require extra caution, and their 
mechanisms:
Digoxin: increased sensitivity of Na+/K+ pump; 
hypokalaemia due to diuretics; renal impairment favours 
accumulation → increased risk of toxicity
Antihypertensive drugs: reduced baroreceptor function  
→ increased risk of postural hypotension
Antidepressants, hypnotics, sedatives, tranquillisers: 
increased sensitivity of the brain; reduced metabolism  
→ increased risk of toxicity
Warfarin: increased tendency to falls and injury and to 
bleeding from intra- and extracranial sites; increased 
sensitivity to inhibition of clotting factor synthesis  
→ increased risk of bleeding
Clomethiazole, lidocaine, nifedipine, phenobarbital, 
propranolol, theophylline: metabolism reduced  
→ increased risk of toxicity
NSAIDs: poor renal function → increased risk of renal 
impairment; susceptibility to gastrotoxicity → increased 
risk of upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
2.22  Prescribing in old age
Prescribing for women who are 
pregnant or breastfeeding
Prescribing in pregnancy should be avoided if possible 
to minimise the risk of adverse effects in the fetus. 
Prescribing in practice
2
37
However, drug therapy in pregnancy may be required 
either for a pre-existing problem (e.g. epilepsy, asthma, 
hypothyroidism) or for problems that arise during preg-
nancy (e.g. morning sickness, anaemia, prevention of 
neural tube defects, gestational diabetes, hypertension). 
About 35% of women take drug therapy at least once 
during pregnancy and 6% take drug therapy during 
the first trimester (excluding iron, folic acid and vita-
mins). The most commonly used drugs are simple 
analgesics, antibacterial drugs and antacids. Some con-
siderations when prescribing in pregnancy are listed in 
Box 2.23.
Drugs that are excreted in breast milk may cause 
adverse effects in the baby. Prescribers should always 
consult the summary of product characteristics for each 
drug or a reliable formulary when treating a pregnant 
woman or breastfeeding mother.
Writing prescriptions
A prescription is a means by which a prescriber com-
municates the intended plan of treatment to the phar-
macist who dispenses a medicine and to a nurse or 
patient who administers it. It should be precise, accu-
rate, clear and legible. The two main kinds of prescrip-
tion are those written, dispensed and administered in 
hospital and those written in primary care (in the UK by 
a GP), dispensed at a community pharmacy and self-
administered by the patient. The information supplied 
must include:
•	 the date
•	 identification of the patient
•	 the name of the drug
•	 the formulation
•	 the dose
•	 the frequency of administration
•	 the route and method of administration
•	 the amount to be supplied (primary care only)
•	 instructions for labelling (primary care only)
•	 the prescriber’s signature.
Prescribing in hospital
Although GP prescribing is increasingly electronic, most 
hospital prescribing continues to be based around the 
prescription and administration record (the ‘drug 
chart’). A variety of charts is in use and prescribers 
must familiarise themselves with the local version. Most 
contain the following sections:
•	 Basic patient information. Will usually include name, 
age, date of birth, hospital number and address. 
These details are often ‘filled in’ using a sticky 
addressograph label, but this increases the risk of 
serious error.
•	 Previous adverse reactions/allergies. Communicates 
important patient safety information based on a 
careful drug history and/or the medical record.
•	 Other medicines charts. Notes any other hospital 
prescription documents that contain current 
prescriptions being received by the patient (e.g. 
anticoagulants, insulin, oxygen, fluids).
•	 Once-only medications. For prescribing medicines to be 
used infrequently, such as single-dose prophylactic 
antibiotics and other pre-operative medications.
•	 Regular medications. For prescribing medicines to be 
taken for a number of days or continuously, such as 
a course of antibiotics, antihypertensive drugs etc.
•	 ‘As required’ medications. For prescribing for 
symptomatic relief, usually to be administered at 
the discretion of the nursing staff (e.g. antiemetics, 
analgesics).
Prescribers should be aware of the risks of prescription 
error (Box 2.24 and Box 2.13, p. 30), ensure they have 
considered the rational basis for their prescribing deci-
sion described above, and then follow the rules in Box 
2.25 in order to write the prescription. It is a basic prin-
ciple that a prescription will be followed by a judgement 
as to its success or failure and appropriate changes 
made, often by discontinuing one prescription and 
writing another.
Hospital discharge (‘to take out’) medicines
Most patients will be prescribed a short course of their 
medicines at discharge. This prescription is particularly 
important because it usually informs future therapy at 
the point of transfer of prescribing responsibility to 
primary care. Great care is required to ensure that this 
list is accurate and that any hospital medicines to be 
stopped are not included or are identified as of specified 
short duration. It is also important that any significant 
ADRs experienced in hospital are recorded and that any 
specific monitoring or review is identified.
Prescribing in primary care
Most of the considerations above are equally applicable 
to primary care (GP) prescriptions. In many health-care 
systems, community prescribing is electronic, making 
issues of legibility irrelevant and often providing basic 
decision support to limit the range of doses that can 
be written and highlight potential drug interactions. 
• Teratogenesis: a potential risk, especially when drugs are 
taken between 2 and 8 weeks of gestation. Common 
teratogens include retinoids (e.g. isotretinoin), cytotoxic 
drugs, ACE inhibitors, corticosteroids, antiepileptics and 
warfarin. If there is inadvertent exposure, then the timing of 
conception should be established, counselling given and 
investigations undertaken for fetal abnormalities.
• Adverse fetal effects in late gestation: for example, 
tetracyclines stain growing teeth and bones; sulphonamides 
displace fetal bilirubin from plasma proteins, potentially 
causing kernicterus; opioids given during delivery suppress 
the neonate’s respiration.
• Altered maternal pharmacokinetics: extracellular fluid 
volume and Vd increase. Plasma albumin falls but other 
binding globulins (e.g. for thyroid and steroid hormones) 
increase. Glomerular filtration increases by approximately 
70%, enhancing renal clearance. Placental metabolism 
contributes to increased clearance, e.g. of thyroxine and 
corticosteroids.
• In practice:
Avoid any drugs unless the benefit to the mother greatly 
outweighs the risk to the fetus
Use drugs for which there is some record of safety
Use the lowest dose for the shortest time possible
Choose the least harmful drug if alternatives are available
2.23  Prescribing in pregnancy
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
38
• Trying to amend an active prescription (e.g. altering the dose/timing) – always avoid and start again
• Writing up drugs in the immediate presence of more than one prescription chart or set of notes – avoid
• Allowing one’s attention to be diverted in the middle of completing a prescription – avoid
• Prescribing ‘high risk’ drugs (e.g. anticoagulants, opioids, insulin, sedatives) – ask for help if necessary
• Prescribing parenteral drugs – take care
• Rushing prescribing (e.g. in the midst of a busy ward round) – avoid
• Prescribing unfamiliar drugs – consult the formulary and ask for help if necessary
• Transcribing multiple prescriptions from an expired chart to a new one – take care
• Writing prescriptions based on information from another source such as a referral letter (the list may contain errors  
and some of the medicines may be the cause of the patient’s illness) – review the justification for each as if it is a 
new prescription
• Writing up ‘to take out’ drugs (because these will become the patient’s regular medication for the immediate future)  
– take care and seek advice if necessary
• Calculating drug doses – ask a colleague to perform an independent calculation
• Prescribing sound-alike or look-alike drugs (e.g. chlorphenamine and chlorpromazine) – take care
2.24  High-risk prescribing moments
• Write in block capitals, legibly, with black ballpoint pen. Do not amend what is already written: if a mistake is made, then start 
again
• Ensure there is clear and unambiguous labelling to identify the patient. Write the patient’s name, hospital number and date of birth 
(with age if under 12 years) on every sheet. The patient’s weight and height may be required to calculate safe doses for many drugs 
with narrow therapeutic indices
• Check the drug sensitivities/allergies box and obtain further details of the drug history if there are any doubts
• Use the generic International Non-proprietary Name (INN) rather than brand name (e.g. write ‘SIMVASTATIN’, not 
‘ZOCOR®’). The only exceptions are when variation occurs in the properties of alternative branded formulations (e.g. 
modified-release preparations of drugs such as lithium, theophylline, phenytoin and nifedipine) or when the drug is a  
combination product with no generic name (e.g. Kliovance®). Do not use abbreviations, e.g. write ‘ISOSORBIDE MONONITRATE’ 
not ‘ISMN’
• Write the drug dose. The only acceptable abbreviations are ‘g’ and ‘mg’. ‘Units’ (e.g. of insulin or heparin) and ‘micrograms’ must 
always be written in full, never as ‘U’ or ‘µg’ (nor ‘mcg’, nor ‘ug’). Avoid decimal points (i.e. 500 mg not 0·5 g) or, if unavoidable, 
put a ‘0’ in front of it (e.g. ‘0·5 micrograms’ not ‘·5 micrograms’). Do not use a decimal point for round numbers (e.g. ‘7 mg’ not 
‘7·0 mg’). For liquid preparations write the dose in mg; ‘mL’ can only be written for a combination product (e.g. Gaviscon® liquid) or if 
the strength is not expressed in weight (e.g. adrenaline (epinephrine) 1 in 1000). Use numbers/figures (e.g. 1 or ‘one’) to denote use 
of a sachet/enema but avoid prescribing numbers of tablets without specifying their strength. Always include the dose of inhaled 
drugs in addition to stating numbers of ‘puffs’, as strengths can vary. For some drugs a maximum dose may need to be stated (e.g. 
colchicine in gout)
• Write the route and method of administration. Widely accepted abbreviations are: intravenous – ‘IV’; intramuscular 
– ‘IM’; subcutaneous – ‘SC’; sublingual – ‘SL’; per rectum – ‘PR’; per vaginam – ‘PV’; nasogastric – ‘NG’; inhaled  
– ‘INH’; and topical – ‘TOP’. ‘ORAL’ is preferred to per oram – ‘PO’. Never abbreviate ‘INTRATHECAL’. Care should  
be taken in specifying ‘RIGHT’ or ‘LEFT’ for eye and ear drops. It may be necessary to specify the method of giving a  
medicine intravenously (e.g. as a single undiluted bolus injection, or as an infusion in a specified volume of saline over a  
specified time)
• Indicate the frequency and timing of administration clearly. For example: furosemide 40 mg once daily; amoxicillin 250 mg 
3 times daily. Widely accepted Latin abbreviations for dose frequency are: once daily – ‘OD’; twice daily – ‘BD’; 3 times daily – ‘TDS’; 
4 times daily – ‘QDS’; as required – ‘PRN’; in the morning – ‘OM’ (omni mane); at night – ‘ON’ (omni nocte); and immediately 
– ‘stat’. Alternatives are, for example, 6-hourly and 8-hourly, but these are less precise. The hospital chart usually requires specific 
times to be identified for regular medicines that coincide with nursing drug rounds. If treatment is for a known time period, cross off 
subsequent days when the medicine is not required. Similarly, if a drug is not to be given every day, cross off the days when it is not 
required. For ‘as required’ medicines describe the indication, frequency, minimal time interval between doses, and maximum dose 
in any 24-hour period
• Use the space provided for added information, e.g. whether a medicine should be taken with food, type of inhaler device used, and 
anything else that the drug dispenser should know. State here the times for peak/trough plasma levels for drugs requiring therapeutic 
monitoring
• Sign and print your name clearly so that you can be identified by colleagues. The prescription should be dated
• Discontinue a prescription by drawing a vertical line at the point of discontinuation, horizontal lines through the remaining days on 
the chart, and diagonal lines through the drug details and administration boxes. Sign and date this action and consider writing a 
supplementary note to explain it (e.g. describing any adverse effect)
2.25  How to write a drug prescription
Prescribing in practice
2
39
Important additional issues more relevant to GP pre-
scribing are:
•	 Formulation. The prescription needs to carry 
information about the formulation for the 
dispensing pharmacist (e.g. tablets or oral 
suspension).
•	 Amount to be supplied. In the hospital the pharmacist 
will organise this. Elsewhere it must be specified 
either as the precise number of tablets or as the 
duration of treatment. Creams and ointments 
should be specified in grams and lotions in mL.
•	 Controlled drugs. Prescriptions for ‘controlled’ drugs 
(e.g. opioid analgesics, with potential for drug 
abuse) are subject to additional legal requirements. 
In the UK they must contain the address of the 
patient and prescriber (not necessary on most 
hospital forms), the form and the strength of the 
preparation, and the total quantity of the 
preparation/number of dose units in both words 
and figures.
•	 ‘Repeat prescriptions’. A large proportion of GP 
prescribing involves ‘repeat prescriptions’ for 
chronic medication. These are often generated 
automatically, although the prescriber remains 
responsible for regular review and for ensuring that 
the benefit to harm ratio remains favourable.
Monitoring drug therapy
Prescribers should measure the effects of the drug, both 
beneficial and harmful, to inform decisions about dose 
titration (up or down), discontinuation or substitution 
of treatment. Monitoring can be achieved subjectively by 
asking the patient about symptoms or more objectively 
by measuring a clinical effect. Alternatively, if the phar-
macodynamic effects of the drug are difficult to assess, 
then the plasma drug concentration may be measured 
on the basis that it will be closely related to the effect of 
the drug (see Fig. 2.2, p. 19).
Clinical and surrogate endpoints
Ideally, clinical endpoints are measured directly and 
the drug dosage titrated to achieve the therapeutic goal 
and avoid toxicity (e.g. control of ventricular rate in a 
patient with atrial fibrillation). Sometimes this is imprac-
tical because the clinical endpoint is a future event 
(e.g. prevention of myocardial infarction by statins or 
resolution of a chest infection with antibiotics); in these 
circumstances it may be possible to select a ‘surrogate’ 
endpoint that will predict success or failure. This 
may be an intermediate step in the pathophysiological 
process (e.g. serum cholesterol as a surrogate for risk of 
myocardial infarction) or a measurement which follows 
the pathophysiology even if it is not a key factor in its 
progression (e.g. serum C-reactive protein as a surrogate 
for resolution of inflammation in chest infection). Such 
surrogates are sometimes termed ‘biomarkers’.
Plasma drug concentration
The following criteria must be met to justify routine 
monitoring by plasma drug concentration:
•	 Clinical endpoints and other pharmacodynamic 
(surrogate) effects are difficult to monitor.
•	 The relationship between plasma concentration and 
clinical effects is predictable.
•	 The therapeutic index is low. For drugs with a high 
therapeutic index any variability in plasma 
concentrations is likely to be irrelevant clinically.
Some examples of drugs that fulfil these criteria are 
listed in Box 2.26.
Measurement of plasma concentration may be useful 
in planning adjustments of drug dose and frequency of 
administration; to explain an inadequate therapeutic 
Drug
Half-life (hrs)*
Comment
Digoxin
36
Steady state takes several days to achieve. Samples should be taken 6 hrs post dose. 
Measurement is useful to confirm the clinical impression of toxicity or non-adherence but 
clinical effectiveness is better assessed by ventricular heart rate. Risk of toxicity increases 
progressively at concentrations > 1.5 µg/L, and is likely at concentrations > 3.0 µg/L (toxicity 
is more likely in the presence of hypokalaemia)
Gentamicin
2
Measure pre-dose trough concentration (should be < 1 µg/mL) to ensure that accumulation 
(and the risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity) is avoided; see p. 156
Levothyroxine
> 120
Steady state may take up to 6 wks to achieve (p. 743)
Lithium
24
Steady state takes several days to achieve. Samples should be taken 12 hrs post dose. Target 
range 0.4–1 mmol/L
Phenytoin
24
Measure pre-dose trough concentration (should be 10–20 mg/L) to ensure that accumulation is 
avoided. Good correlation between concentration and toxicity. Concentration may be misleading 
in the presence of hypoalbuminaemia
Theophylline 
(oral)
6
Steady state takes 2–3 days to achieve. Samples should be taken 6 hrs post dose. Target 
concentration is 10–20 mg/L but its relationship with bronchodilator effect and adverse effects 
is variable
Vancomycin
6
Measure pre-dose trough concentration (should be 10–15 mg/L) to ensure clinical efficacy and 
that accumulation and the risk of nephrotoxicity is avoided
*Half-lives vary considerably with different formulations and between patients.
2.26  Drugs commonly monitored by plasma drug concentration
Therapeutics and good prescribing 
2
40
Further information
Websites
www.bnf.org The British National Formulary (BNF) is a key 
reference resource for UK NHS prescribers, with a list of 
licensed drugs, chapters on prescribing in renal failure, liver 
disease, pregnancy and during breastfeeding, and appendices on 
drug interactions
www.cochrane.org The Cochrane Collaboration is a leading 
international collaboration to provide evidence-based reviews 
(over 4000 so far)
www.evidence.nhs.uk NHS Evidence provides a wide range 
of health information relevant to delivering quality patient  
care
www.icp.org.nz The Interactive Clinical Pharmacology site is 
designed to increase understanding of principles in clinical 
pharmacology
www.medicines.org/emc/ The electronic Medicines 
Compendium (eMC) contains up-to-date, easily  
accessible information about medicines licensed by  
the UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory  
Agency (MHRA) and the European Medicines  
Agency (EMA)
www.nice.org.uk The UK National Institute for Health 
and Clinical Excellence makes recommendations to the  
UK NHS on new and existing medicines, treatments and 
procedures
www.who.int/medicines/en/ The World Health 
Organization Essential Medicines and Pharmaceutical  
Policies
response (by identifying subtherapeutic concentration 
or incomplete adherence); to establish whether a sus-
pected ADR is likely to be caused by the drug; and to 
assess and avoid potential drug interactions.
Timing of samples in relation to doses
The concentration of drug rises and falls during the 
dosage interval (see Fig. 2.4B, p. 23). Measurements 
made during the initial absorption and distribution 
phases are unpredictable because of the rapidly chang-
ing concentration, so samples are usually taken at the 
end of the dosage interval (a ‘trough’ or ‘pre-dose’ con-
centration). This measurement is normally made in 
steady state, which usually takes five half-lives to 
achieve after the drug is introduced or the dose changed 
(unless a loading dose has been given).
Interpreting the result
A target range is provided for many drugs, based on 
average thresholds for therapeutic benefit and toxicity. 
Inter-individual variability means that these can only be 
used as a guide. For instance, a patient who describes 
symptoms that could be consistent with toxicity but 
has a drug concentration in the top half of the target 
range should still be suspected of suffering toxic 
effects. Another important consideration is that some 
drugs are heavily protein-bound (e.g. phenytoin) but 
only the unbound drug is pharmacologically active. 
Therefore, patients with hypoalbuminaemia may have a 
therapeutic or even toxic concentration of unbound 
drug, despite a low ‘total’ concentration.
41
3 
Functional anatomy and physiology 42
Genetic disease and inheritance 50
Meiosis 50
Patterns of disease inheritance 51
Classes of genetic variant 53
Consequences of genetic variation 57
Constitutional genetic disease 58
Somatic genetic disease 59
Investigation of genetic disease 60
General principles of diagnosis 60
Genetic testing in pregnancy and  
pre-implantation genetic testing 62
Genetic testing in children 63
Identifying a disease gene in families 63
Genetic investigation in populations 64
Predictive genetic testing 64
Molecular and genetic 
factors in disease
Research frontiers in molecular  
medicine 69
Gene therapy 69
Induced pluripotent stem cells and 
regenerative medicine 69
Pathway medicine 70
D.R. FitzPatrick
J.R. Seckl
Presenting problems in genetic disease 64
Major categories of genetic disease 64
Inborn errors of metabolism 64
Neurological disorders 65
Connective tissue disorders 65
Learning disability, dysmorphism and 
malformations 66
Familial cancer syndromes 66
Genetic counselling 67
Genetics of common diseases 68
Measuring the genetic contribution to complex 
disease 68
Genetic testing in complex disease 69
Pharmacogenomics 69
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
42
Almost all diseases have a genetic component. In chil-
dren and young adults in particular, many of the disor-
ders causing long-term morbidity and mortality are 
genetically determined. The molecular basis of most 
Mendelian (or ‘single-gene’) diseases has now been 
determined, and our understanding of the abnormalities 
in cell function responsible for the clinical presentation 
is improving. It has also become clear that variants in 
many genes contribute to the pathogenesis of several 
common diseases such as asthma, rheumatoid arthritis 
and osteoporosis. In this chapter, we review key princi-
ples of cell biology, cellular signalling and molecular 
genetics, with emphasis on the diagnosis and assess-
ment of patients with genetic diseases.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
Cell and molecular biology
All human cell types are derived from a single totipotent 
stem cell, the zygote (the fertilised ovum). During devel-
opment, organs and tissues are formed by the integra-
tion of four closely regulated cellular processes: cell 
division, migration, differentiation and programmed 
cell death. In many adult tissues such as skin, liver and 
the intestine, these processes continue throughout life, 
mediated by populations of stem cells that are responsi-
ble for tissue maintenance and repair. Cell biology is the 
study of these processes and of intracellular compart-
ments, called organelles, which maintain cellular homeo­
stasis. Dysfunction of any of these processes may lead 
to disease.
DNA, chromosomes and  
chromatin
The nucleus is a membrane-bound compartment found 
in all cells except erythrocytes and platelets. The human 
nucleus contains 46 chromosomes, each a single linear 
molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) complexed 
with proteins to form chromatin. The basic protein unit 
of chromatin is the nucleosome, comprising 147 base 
pairs (bp) of DNA wound round a core of four different 
histone proteins. The vast majority of chromosomal 
DNA is double-stranded, with the exception of the ends 
of chromosomes, where ‘knotted’ domains of single-
stranded DNA, called telomeres, are found. Telomeres 
prevent degradation and accidental fusion of chromo-
somal DNA.
The genome comprises approximately 3.1 billion bp 
of DNA. Humans are diploid organisms, meaning that 
each nucleus contains two copies of the genome, visible 
microscopically as 22 identical chromosomal pairs – the 
autosomes – named 1 to 22 in descending size order (see 
Fig. 3.11, p. 57), and two sex chromosomes (XX in 
females and XY in males). Each DNA strand consists of 
a linear sequence of four bases – guanine (G), cytosine 
(C), adenine (A) and thymine (T) – covalently linked by 
phosphate bonds. The sequence of one strand of double-
stranded DNA determines the sequence of the opposite 
strand because the helix is held together by hydrogen 
bonds between adenine and thymine or guanine and 
cytosine nucleotides.
Genes and transcription
Genes are functional elements on the chromosome that 
are capable of transmitting information from the DNA 
template via the production of messenger ribonucleic 
acid (mRNA) to the production of proteins. The human 
genome contains an estimated 21 500 genes, although 
many of these are inactive or silenced in different cell 
types. For example, although the gene for parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) is present in every cell, activation of 
gene expression and production of PTH mRNA is virtu-
ally restricted to the parathyroid glands. Genes that 
are active in different cells undergo transcription, which 
requires binding of an enzyme called RNA polymerase 
II to a segment of DNA at the start of the gene termed 
the promoter. Once bound, RNA polymerase II moves 
along one strand of DNA, producing an RNA molecule 
that is complementary to the DNA template. A DNA 
sequence close to the end of the gene, called the poly­
adenylation signal, acts as a signal for termination of 
the RNA transcript (Fig. 3.1). The activity of RNA 
polymerase II is regulated by transcription factors. 
These proteins bind to specific DNA sequences at the 
promoter, or to enhancer elements that may be many 
thousands of base pairs away from the promoter. A loop 
in the chromosomal DNA brings the enhancer close to 
the promoter, enabling the bound proteins to interact.
The human genome encodes approximately 1200 dif-
ferent transcription factors, and mutations in many of 
these can cause genetic diseases (Fig. 3.2). Mutation of 
the transcription factor binding sites within promoters 
or enhancers also causes genetic disease. For example, 
the blood disorder alpha-thalassaemia can result from 
loss of an enhancer located more than 100 000 bp from 
the alpha-globin gene promoter, leading to greatly 
reduced transcription. Similarly, variation in the pro-
moter of the gene encoding intestinal lactase determines 
whether or not this is ‘shut off’ in adulthood, producing 
lactose intolerance.
The accessibility of promoters to RNA polymerase II 
depends on the structural configuration of chromatin. 
Transcriptionally active regions have decondensed (or 
‘open’) chromatin (euchromatin). Conversely, tran­
scriptionally silent regions are associated with densely 
packed chromatin called heterochromatin. Chemical 
modification of both the DNA and core histone proteins 
allows heterochromatic regions to be distinguished 
from open chromatin. DNA can be modified by addition 
of a methyl group to cytosine molecules (methylation). 
In promoter regions, this silences transcription, since 
methyl cytosines are usually not available for tran­
scription factor binding or RNA transcription. The 
core histones can also be modified via methylation, 
phosphorylation, acetylation or sumoylation at specific 
amino acid residues in a pattern that reflects the func-
tional state of the chromatin; this is called the histone 
code – reflecting an emerging understanding of the 
‘rules’ by which specific modifications mark transcrip-
tionally activating (trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone 
H3; acetylation of many histone residues) or silencing 
(methylation of lysine 9 on histone H4; deacetylation of 
many histone residues) effects. Such DNA and protein 
modifications are termed epigenetic, as they do not 
alter the primary sequence of the DNA code but have 
biological significance in chromosomal function. Abnor-
mal epigenetic changes are increasingly recognised as 
Functional anatomy and physiology 
3
43
Fig. 3.1  RNA synthesis and its translation into protein. Gene 
transcription involves binding of RNA polymerase II to the promoter of 
genes being transcribed with other proteins (transcription factors) that 
regulate the transcription rate. The primary RNA transcript is a copy of  
the whole gene and includes both introns and exons, but the introns  
are removed within the nucleus by splicing and the exons are joined to 
form the messenger RNA (mRNA). Prior to export from the nucleus, a 
methylated guanosine nucleotide is added to the 5′ end of the RNA (‘cap’) 
and a string of adenine nucleotides is added to the 3′ (‘poly A tail’). This 
protects the RNA from degradation and facilitates transport into the 
cytoplasm. In the cytoplasm, the mRNA binds to ribosomes and forms a 
template for protein production. 
Protein product
N-term
C-term
CAP
Messenger RNA
(mRNA)
Messenger RNA
(mRNA)
AAAAA
tRNAs
Ribosome
Nuclear
membrane
Primary RNA
transcript
Spliceosome
RNA export
to cytoplasm
CAP
CAP
AAAAA
PolyA tail
3'UTR
5'UTR
Nuclear pore
AAAAA
Splicing
Transcription
3'
5'
3'
Sense strand
Enhancer
Transcription
factors
RNA
polymerase II
Exon 1
Intron 2
Intron 1
Exon 2
Exon 3
Exon 1
Exon 2
Exon 3
Promoter
Nucleolus
Nuclear
membrane
Gene A
Gene B
Gene C
Active 
gene
RNA
Nucleus
Translation
important events in the progression of cancer, allowing 
expression of genes which are normally silenced during 
development to support cancer cell de-differentiation 
(see Box 3.3, p. 54). They also afford therapeutic targets. 
For instance, the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat 
has been successfully used to treat cutaneous T-cell lym-
phoma, due to the re-expression of genes that had previ-
ously been silenced in the tumour. These genes encode 
transcription factors which promote T-cell cell differen-
tiation as opposed to proliferation, thereby causing 
tumour regression.
RNA splicing, editing and 
degradation
Transcription produces an RNA molecule that is a copy 
of the whole gene, termed the primary or nascent tran-
script. RNA differs from DNA in three main ways:
•	 RNA is single-stranded.
•	 The sugar residue within the nucleotide is ribose, 
rather than deoxyribose.
•	 Uracil (U) is used in place of thymine (T).
The nascent RNA molecule then undergoes splicing, 
to generate the shorter, ‘mature’ mRNA molecule, which 
provides the template for protein production. Splicing 
removes the regions of the nascent RNA molecule that 
are not required to make protein (intronic regions), and 
retains and rejoins those segments that are necessary for 
protein production (exonic regions). Splicing is a highly 
regulated process that is carried out by a multimeric 
protein complex called the spliceosome. Following spli­
cing, the mRNA molecule is exported from the nucleus 
and used as a template for protein synthesis. It should 
be noted that many genes produce more than one form 
of mRNA (and thus protein) by a process termed alter-
native splicing. Different proteins from the same gene 
can have entirely distinct functions. For example, in 
thyroid C cells the calcitonin gene produces mRNA 
encoding the osteoclast inhibitor calcitonin (p. 738), 
but in neurons the same gene produces an mRNA 
with a different complement of exons via alternative 
splicing, which encodes the neurotransmitter calcitonin-
gene-related peptide.
The portion of the mRNA molecule that directs syn-
thesis of a protein product is called the open reading 
frame (ORF). This comprises a contiguous series of three 
sequential bases (codons), which specify that a particular 
amino acid should be incorporated into the protein. 
There are 64 different codons; 61 of these specify incorpo-
ration of one of the 20 amino acids, whereas the remain-
ing three codons – UAA, UAG and UGA (stop codons) 
– cause termination of the growing polypeptide chain. In 
humans, most ORF start with the amino acid methionine, 
which is specified by the codon AUG. All mRNA mol­
ecules have domains before and after the ORF called the 
5′ untranslated region (5′UTR) and 3′UTR, respectively. 
The start of the 5′UTR contains a cap structure that pro-
tects mRNA from enzymatic degradation, and other 
elements within the 5′UTR are required for efficient 
translation. The 3′UTR also contains elements that regu-
late efficiency of translation and mRNA stability, includ-
ing a stretch of adenine bases known as a polyA tail.
However, there are approximately 4500 genes in 
humans in which the transcribed RNA molecules do 
not code for proteins. There are various categories of 
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
44
synthesised protein can be assembled in a stepwise 
fashion. Individual tRNA molecules bind a specific 
amino acid and ‘read’ the mRNA ORF via an ‘anti­
codon’ of three nucleotides that is complementary to the 
codon in mRNA. A proportion of ribosomes are bound 
to the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a 
complex tubular structure that surrounds the nucleus. 
Proteins synthesised on these ribosomes are translocated 
into the lumen of the ER, where they undergo folding 
and processing. From here the protein may be trans-
ferred to the Golgi apparatus, where it undergoes 
post-translational modifications, such as glycosylation 
(covalent attachment of sugar moieties), to form the 
mature protein that can be exported into the cytoplasm 
or packaged into vesicles for secretion. The clinical 
importance of post-translational modification of pro-
teins is shown by the severe developmental, neurologi-
cal, haemostatic and soft-tissue abnormalities that occur 
in patients with mutations of the enzymes that catalyse 
the addition of chains of sugar moieties to proteins. An 
example is phosphomannose isomerase deficiency, in 
non-coding RNA (ncRNA), including transfer RNA 
(tRNA), ribosomal RNA (rRNA), ribozymes and micro-
RNA (miRNA). There are more than 1000 miRNAs that 
bind to various target mRNAs, typically in the 3′UTR, 
to affect mRNA stability. This usually results in enhanced 
degradation of the target mRNA, leading to transla-
tional gene silencing. Together, miRNAs affect over half 
of all human genes and have important roles in normal 
development, cancer and common degenerative disor-
ders. This is the subject of considerable research interest 
at present.
Translation and protein production
Following splicing and export from the nucleus, mRNAs 
associate with ribosomes, which are the sites of protein 
production (see Fig. 3.1). Each ribosome consists of two 
subunits (40S and 60S), which comprise non-coding 
rRNA molecules complexed with proteins. During 
translation, tRNA binds to the ribosome. The tRNAs 
deliver amino acids to the ribosome so that the newly 
Fig. 3.2  Examples of genetic diseases caused by mutations in genes encoding either transcription factors or receptors. 
Transcription factor diseases
SOX2 / 3q27
Anophthalmia
IRF6 / 1q32
Cleft lip and palate ± lip pits
PAX8 / 2q12
Thyroid dysgenesis
RUNX2 / 6p21
Cleidocranial dysostosis
NKX2E / 5q34
Atrial septal defect and conduction defects
TBXS / 12q24
Atrial septal defect and radial hypoplasia
GCR (Glucocorticoid receptor) / 5q31
         Glucocorticoid resistance
MLR (Mineralocorticoid receptor) / 4q31
         Pseudohypoaldosteronism
WT1 / 11p13
Wilms tumour and gonadal dysgenesis
AR (Androgen receptor) / Xq12
         Androgen insensitivity
SOX9 / 17q24
XY sex reversal and skeletal dysplasia
PAX6 / 11p13
Aniridia
FGFR2 / 10q26
Craniosynostosis (Crouzon’s syndrome)
TSHR (Thyroid-stimulating hormone
receptor) / 14q31
Congenital non-goitrous hypothyroidism
AVPR2 (Vasopressin V2 receptor) / Xq28
Congenital nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus
ACHRB (Acetylcholine receptor) / 17p12
Congenital myasthenia gravis
RYR1 (Ryanodine receptor 1) / 19q13
Malignant hyperthermia   
GRM6 (Metabotropic glutamate
receptor 6) / 5q35
Congenital stationary night-blindness
Receptor diseases
Functional anatomy and physiology 
3
45
Mitochondria and energy 
production
The mitochondrion is the main site of energy pro­
duction within the cell. Mitochondria arose during 
evolution via the symbiotic association with an intra­
cellular bacterium. They have a distinctive structure 
with functionally distinct inner and outer membranes. 
Mitochondria produce energy in the form of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP). ATP is mostly derived from the 
metabolism of glucose and fat (Fig. 3.3). Glucose cannot 
which there is a defect in the conversion of fructose-6-
phosphate to mannose-6-phosphate. This results in a 
defect in supply of D-mannose derivatives for glycosyla-
tion of a variety of proteins, resulting in a multi-system 
disorder characterised by protein-losing enteropathy, 
hepatic fibrosis, coagulopathy and hypoglycaemia. Post-
translational modifications can also be disrupted by 
the synthesis of proteins with abnormal amino acid 
sequences. For example, the most common mutation in 
cystic fibrosis (ΔF508) results in an abnormal protein that 
cannot be exported from the ER and Golgi.
Fig. 3.3  Mitochondria.  A Mitochondrial structure. There is a smooth outer membrane surrounding a convoluted inner membrane, which has inward 
projections called cristae. The membranes create two compartments: the inter-membrane compartment, which plays a crucial role in the electron transport 
chain, and the inner compartment (or matrix), which contains mitochondrial DNA and the enzymes responsible for the citric acid (Krebs) cycle and the fatty 
acid β-oxidation cycle.  B Mitochondrial DNA. The mitochondrion contains several copies of a circular double-stranded DNA molecule, which has a 
non-coding region, and a coding region which encodes the genes responsible for energy production, mitochondrial tRNA molecules and mitochondrial rRNA 
molecules.  ATP = adenosine triphosphate; NADH = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.  C Mitochondrial energy production. Fatty acids enter the 
mitochondrion conjugated to carnitine by carnitine-palmityl transferase type 1 (CPT I) and, once inside the matrix, are unconjugated by CPT II to release 
free fatty acids (FFA). These are broken down by the β-oxidation cycle to produce acetyl-CoA. Pyruvate can enter the mitochondrion directly and is 
metabolised by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) to produce acetyl-CoA. The acetyl-CoA enters the Krebs cycle, leading to the production of NADH and 
flavine adenine dinucleotide (reduced form) (FADH2), which are used by proteins in the electron transport chain to generate a hydrogen ion gradient across 
the inter-membrane compartment. Reduction of NADH and FADH2 by proteins I and II respectively releases electrons (e), and the energy released is used to 
pump protons into the inter-membrane compartment. As these electrons are exchanged between proteins in the chain, more protons are pumped across 
the membrane, until the electrons reach complex IV (cytochrome oxidase), which uses the energy to reduce oxygen to water. The hydrogen ion gradient is 
used to produce ATP by the enzyme ATP synthase, which consists of a proton channel and catalytic sites for the synthesis of ATP from ADP. When the 
channel opens, hydrogen ions enter the matrix down the concentration gradient, and energy is released that is used to make ATP. 
L
 
s
t
r
a
n
d
H
 
s
t
r
a
n
d
Outer
membrane
Inner
membrane
NADH
NAD
I
II
III
Q
Cyt
C
IV
NADH
FADH2
Fatty acid
β-oxidation
cycle
Citric acid
(Krebs)
cycle
H+
e
2e
FADH2
FADH2
Lactate
Pyruvate
PDH
Acetyl-CoA
Glucose
22 tRNAs
NADH dehydrogenase 7
subunits
Cytochrome B/C oxidase 4
subunits
2 ribosomal RNA subunits
2 ATP synthase subunits
Intragenic DNA
Inner
membrane
Cristae
Matrix
Outer
membrane
FFA
CPT I
CPT II
Carnitine
Carnitine-FA ester
C
A
B
FFA
FAD
2H+
H2O
O2
ATP
ADP
+ Pi
H+
H+
ATP
synthase
Carnitine
e
e
e
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
46
Protein degradation
The cell uses several different systems to degrade pro-
teins and other molecules that are damaged, are poten-
tially toxic or have simply served their purpose. The 
proteasome is the main site of protein degrada­tion 
within the cell. The first step in proteasomal degradation 
is ubiquitination – the covalent attachment of a protein 
called ubiquitin as a side chain to the target protein. 
Ubiquitination is carried out by a large group of enzymes 
called E3 ligases, whose function is to recognise specific 
proteins that should be targeted for degradation by the 
proteasome. The E3 ligases ubiquitinate their target 
protein, which is then transported to a large multi­
protein complex called the 26S proteasome, where it 
is degraded. There is mounting evidence that defects 
in the proteasome contribute to the pathogenesis of 
many diseases, particularly degenerative diseases of the 
nervous system like Parkinson’s disease and some types 
of dementia that are characterised by formation of 
abnormal protein aggregates (inclusion bodies) within 
neurons. At least one inherited disease, termed Angel-
man’s syndrome, is due to a mutation affecting the UBE3 
E3 ligase.
Proteins with complex post-translational modifica-
tions are degraded in membrane-bound structures 
called lysosomes, which have an acidic pH and contain 
proteolytic enzymes that degrade proteins. There are 
many inherited defects in lysosomal enzymes that result 
in failure to degrade intracellular toxic substances. For 
instance, in Gaucher’s disease, mutations of the gene 
encoding lysosomal (acid) β-glucosidase lead to undi-
gested lipid accumulating in macrophages, producing 
hepatosplenomegaly and, if severe, deposition in the 
brain and mental retardation.
Lysosomes are also crucial for the process of auto­
phagy, a process of self-cannibalisation that allows the 
cell to adapt to periods of starvation by recycling cellular 
components. Autophagy is triggered by metabolic stress 
and begins with the formation of a membrane-bound 
vesicle called the autophagosome, which contains tar-
geted cellular components such as long-lived proteins 
enter mitochondria directly but is first metabolised 
to pyruvate via glycolysis. Pyruvate is then imported 
into the mitochondrion and metabolised to acetyl-
coenzyme A (CoA). Fatty acids are transported into 
the mitochondria following conjugation with carnitine 
and are sequentially catabolised by a process called 
β-oxidation to produce acetyl-CoA. The acetyl-CoA 
from both pyruvate and fatty acid oxidation is used in 
the citric acid (Krebs) cycle – a series of enzymatic reac-
tions that produces CO2, NADH and FADH2. Both 
NADH and FADH2 then donate electrons to the respira-
tory chain. Here these electrons are transferred via a 
complex series of reactions resulting in the formation of 
a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane. The gradient is used by an inner mitochondrial 
membrane protein, ATP synthase, to produce ATP, 
which is then transported to other parts of the cell. 
Dephosphorylation of ATP is used to produce the 
energy required for many cellular processes.
Each mitochondrion contains 2–10 copies of a 16 kilo-
base (kB) double-stranded circular DNA molecule 
(mtRNA). mtDNA contains 13 protein-coding genes, all 
involved in the respiratory chain, and the ncRNA genes 
required for protein synthesis within the mitochondria 
(see Fig. 3.3). The mutational rate of mtDNA is relatively 
high due to the lack of protection by chromatin. Several 
mtDNA diseases characterised by defects in ATP pro-
duction have been described. mtDNA diseases are 
inherited exclusively via the maternal line (see Fig. 3.7, 
p. 51). This unusual inheritance pattern exists because 
all mtDNA in an individual is derived from that per-
son’s mother via the egg cell, as sperm contribute no 
mitochondria to the zygote. Mitochondria are most 
numerous in cells with high metabolic demands, such as 
muscle, retina and the basal ganglia, and these tissues 
tend to be the ones most severely affected in mitochon-
drial diseases (Box 3.1). There are many other mitochon-
drial diseases that are caused by mutations in nuclear 
genes, which encode proteins that are then imported 
into the mitochondrion and are critical for energy pro-
duction: for example, Leigh’s syndrome and complex I 
deficiency.
Complex
Enzyme
nDNA subunits1
mtDNA subunits2
Diseases
I
NADH 
dehydrogenase
38
7
MELAS, bilateral striatal necrosis, LHON, myopathy and 
exercise intolerance, Parkinsonism, Leigh’s disease, exercise 
myoglobinuria, leucodystrophy/myoclonic epilepsy
II
Succinate 
dehydrogenase
4
0
Phaeochromocytoma
III
Cytochrome 
bc1 complex
10
1
Parkinsonism/MELAS, cardiomyopathy, myopathy, exercise 
myoglobinuria
IV
Cytochrome c 
oxidase
10
3
Sideroblastic anaemia, myoclonic ataxia, deafness, 
myopathy, MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, motor 
neuron disease-like, exercise myoglobinuria
V
ATP synthase
14
2
Leigh’s disease, NARP, bilateral striatal necrosis
1nDNA subunits
2mtDNA subunits = number of different protein subunits in each complex that are encoded in the nDNA and mtDNA respectively.
(LHON = Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MELAS = myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; MERRF = myoclonic epilepsy and 
ragged red fibres; mtDNA = mitochondrial DNA; NARP = neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa; nDNA = nuclear DNA)
3.1  The structure of the respiratory chain complexes and the diseases associated with their dysfunction
Functional anatomy and physiology 
3
47
Fig. 3.4  An archetypal human cell. The basic cell components required for function within a tissue: (1) cell-to-cell communication taking place via gap 
junctions and the various types of receptor that receive signals from the extracellular environment and transduce these into intracellular messengers;  
(2) the nucleus containing the chromosomal DNA; (3) intracellular organelles, including the mechanisms for proteins and lipid catabolism; (4) the cellular 
mechanisms for import and export of molecules across the cell membrane. (ABC = ATP-binding cassette transporters; ATP = adenosine triphosphate: 
cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CFTR = cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator; CREB = cAMP response element-binding protein; GDP/GTP = 
guanine diphosphate/triphosphate; LDL = low-density lipoproteins; LH/FSH = luteinising hormone/follicle-stimulating hormone; PTH = parathyroid hormone; 
TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone) 
Active transport
e.g. Na+, K+, ATPase
CFTR
Ribosome
Mitochondria
Golgi
apparatus
Secretion
Degradation of
ingested toxic
substances
Protein
Modified
protein
K+
Na+
Ion channels
Gated by ligand
(e.g. acetylcholine
or voltage)
Facilitated diffusion
(carrier proteins)
e.g. glucose
Endocytosis
e.g. LDL
Clathrin
coating
Receptors
Fusion with
(e.g.) lysosomes
IMPORT/
EXPORT
ATP
ADP
Tight
junction
Gap
junction
Peroxisome
Cytoskeleton
Thyroid hormones
Glucocorticoids
1,25(OH)2D3
Retinoic acid
Growth factors
Insulin
TSH
Prostaglandins
PTH
LH/FSH
Adenyl
cyclase
CELL-TO-CELL
COMMUNICATION
WASTE
DISPOSAL
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Lysosome
Receptor
tyrosine
kinases
Activated signalling
cascade
G-protein-
coupled
receptors
Nuclear
hormone
receptors
Proteasome
Transcription
factors
mRNA
DNA
Protein
Amino
acids
Amino acids
Very long-chain 
fatty acids
βγ
GTP
α
GDP
and organelles. The autophagosome then fuses with 
the lysosome to start the degradation and recycling 
process. Mutations in proteins that are crucial for forma-
tion of the autophagosome lead to neurodegenerative 
diseases in humans, such as juvenile neuronal ceroid 
lipofuscinosis (Batten’s disease), caused by autosomal 
recessive mutations in CLN3.
Peroxisomes are small, single membrane-bound 
cytoplasmic organelles containing many different oxi-
dative enzymes such as catalase. Peroxisomes degrade 
hydrogen peroxide, bile acids and amino acids. 
However, the β-oxidation of very long-chain fatty acids 
appears to be their most important function, since 
mutations in the peroxisomal β-oxidation enzymes 
(or the proteins that import these enzymes into the 
peroxisome) result in the same severe congenital disor-
der as mutations that cause complete failure of peroxi-
somal biogenesis. This group of disorders is called 
Zellweger’s syndrome (cerebrohepatorenal syndrome) 
and is characterised by severe developmental delay, sei-
zures, hepatomegaly and renal cysts; the biochemical 
diagnosis is made on the basis of elevated plasma levels 
of very long-chain fatty acids.
The cell membrane and 
cytoskeleton
The cell membrane is a phospholipid bilayer, with 
hydrophilic surfaces and a hydrophobic core (Fig. 3.4). 
The cell membrane is, however, much more than a 
simple wall. Cholesterol-rich ‘rafts’ float within the 
membrane, and proteins are anchored to them via the 
post-translational addition of complex lipid moieties. 
The membrane also hosts a series of transmembrane 
proteins that function as receptors, pores, ion channels, 
pumps and associated energy suppliers. These proteins 
allow the cell to monitor the extracellular milieu, import 
crucial molecules for function, and exclude or exchange 
unwanted substances. Many protein–protein interac-
tions within the cell membrane are highly dynamic, and 
individual peptides will associate and disassociate to 
effect specific roles.
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
48
Fig. 3.5  The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) signalling pathway. 
TNF binds to its receptor, forming a trimeric complex in the cell 
membrane. Various receptor-associated factors are attracted to the 
intracellular domain of the receptor, including TNF-receptor-associated 
protein 6 (TRAF6) and tumour necrosis factor receptor type 1-associated 
death domain protein (TRADD). These proteins modulate activity of 
downstream signalling proteins, the most important of which are IKKγ 
(which in turn modulates activity of IKKα and IKKβ). These proteins cause 
phosphorylation of IκB, which is targeted for degradation by the 
proteasome, releasing NFκB, which translocates to the nucleus to activate 
gene expression. The signalling pathway is further regulated in a negative 
manner by cylindromatosis (CYLD), which de-ubiquitinates TRAF6, thereby 
impairing its ability to activate downstream signalling. 
TNF
TNF receptor
Plasma
membrane
TRAF
TRADD
CYLD
IKKα
IκB
NFκB
NFκB
IKKβ
IKK
Nuclear
membrane
DNA
Response genes
There are many different signalling pathways; for 
example, in nuclear steroid hormone signalling, the 
ligands (steroid hormones or thyroid hormone) bind 
to their cognate receptor in the cytoplasm of target 
cells and the receptor/ligand complex then enters the 
nucleus, where it acts as a transcription factor to regulate 
the expression of target genes (Box 3.2). However, the 
most diverse and abundant types of receptor are located 
at the cell surface, and these activate gene expression 
and cellular responses indirectly. Activation of a cell 
surface receptor by its ligand results in a series of intra-
cellular events, involving a cascade of phosphorylation 
of specific residues in target proteins by an important 
group of enzymes called kinases. This cascade typically 
culminates in phosphorylation and activation of tran-
scription factors, which bind DNA and modulate gene 
expression.
Figure 3.5 depicts some of the signalling molecules 
downstream of the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) recep-
tor. On activation of the receptor by the ligand (in this 
case, TNF), other molecules, including TNF-receptor-
associated proteins (TRAFs), are recruited to the intra­
cellular domain of the receptor. These regulate the 
activity of a kinase termed IKKγ, which in turn regulates 
activity of two further kinases termed IKKα and 
IKKβ. These regulate degradation of an inhibitory 
protein called IκB, which normally binds to the effector 
protein NFκB, holding it in the cytoplasm. On receptor 
activation, a signal is transmitted through TRAFs 
and the IKK proteins to cause phosphorylation and 
The cell membrane is permeable to hydrophobic sub-
stances, such as anaesthetic gases. Water is able to pass 
through the membrane via a pore formed by aquaporin 
proteins; mutations of an aquaporin gene cause congeni-
tal nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (p. 794). Most other 
molecules must be actively transported using either 
channels or pumps. Channels are responsible for the 
transport of ions and other small molecules across the 
cell membrane. They open and close in a highly regu-
lated manner. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane con-
ductance regulator (CFTR) is an example of an ion 
channel that is responsible for transport of chloride ions 
across epithelial cell membranes. Mutation of the CFTR 
chloride channel, highly expressed in the lung and gut, 
leads to defective chloride transport, producing cystic 
fibrosis. Pumps are highly specific for their substrate 
and often use energy (ATP) to drive transport against a 
concentration gradient.
Endocytosis is a cellular process that allows internali-
sation of larger complexes and molecules by invagina-
tion of plasma membrane to create intracellular vesicles. 
This process is typically mediated by specific binding 
of the particle to surface receptors. An important 
example is the binding of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
cholesterol-rich particles to the LDL receptor (LDLR) in 
a specialised region of the membrane called a clathrin 
pit. In some cases of familial hypercholesterolaemia 
(p. 453), LDLR mutations cause failure of this binding 
and thus reduce cellular uptake of LDL. Other LDLR 
mutations change a specific tyrosine in the intracellular 
tail of the receptor, preventing LDLR from concentrating 
in clathrin-coated pits and hence impairing uptake of 
LDL, even though LDLR bound to LDL is present else-
where in the cell membrane.
The shape and structure of the cell are maintained by 
the cytoskeleton, which consists of a series of proteins 
which form microfilaments (actin), microtubules (tubu-
lins) and intermediate filaments (keratins, desmin, 
vimentin, laminins) that facilitate cellular movement 
and provide pathways for intracellular transport. Dys-
function of the cytoskeleton may result in a variety of 
human disorders. For instance, some keratin genes 
encode intermediate filaments in epithelia. In epidermo-
lysis bullosa simplex (p. 1292), mutations in keratin 
genes (KRT5, KRT14) lead to cell fragility, producing the 
characteristic blistering on mild trauma.
Receptors, cellular communication 
and intracellular signalling
Several mechanisms exist that allow cells to communi-
cate with one another. Direct communication between 
adjacent cells occurs through gap junctions. These are 
pores formed by the interaction of ‘hemichannels’ in 
the membrane of adjacent cells. Many diseases are due 
to mutations in gap junction proteins, including the 
most common form of autosomal recessive hearing loss 
(GJB2) and the X-linked form of Charcot–Marie–Tooth 
disease (GJB1).
Communication between cells that are not directly in 
contact with each other occurs through hormones, 
cytokines and growth factors, which bind to and activate 
receptors on the target cell. Receptors then bind to 
various other proteins within the cell termed signalling 
molecules, which directly or indirectly activate gene 
expression to produce a cellular response.
Functional anatomy and physiology 
3
49
situs inversus (left–right laterality reversal) as a result 
of failure of a specific signalling process in very early 
embryogenesis. Mutations in proteins that are essential 
for non-motile cilia formation or function are responsi-
ble for a large number of autosomal recessive disorders 
known collectively as ciliopathies, which are commonly 
associated with intellectual disability, renal cystic dys-
plasia and retinal degeneration. For example, in the 
Bardet–Biedl syndrome, mutations in a series of genes 
encoding ciliary structure cause polydactyly, obesity, 
hypogonadism, retinitis pigmentosa and renal failure.
Cell division, differentiation  
and migration
In normal tissues, molecules such as hormones, growth 
factors and cytokines provide the signal to activate the 
cell cycle, a controlled programme of biochemical events 
that culminates in cell division. During the first phase, 
G1, synthesis of the cellular components necessary to 
complete cell division occurs. In S phase, the cell pro-
duces an identical copy of each chromosome – which 
carries the cell’s genetic information – via a process 
called DNA replication. The cell then enters G2, when 
any errors in the replicated DNA are repaired before 
proceeding to mitosis, in which identical copies of all 
chromosomes are segregated to the daughter cells. The 
progression from one phase to the next is tightly con­
trolled by cell cycle checkpoints. For example, the check-
point between G2 and mitosis ensures that all damaged 
DNA is repaired prior to segregation of the chromo-
somes. Failure of these control processes is a crucial 
driver in the pathogenesis of cancer, as discussed in 
Chapter 11 (p. 262).
Receptor
Receptor type
Ligands
Signal transduction
Clinical significance
TNFR1
TNF receptor 
superfamily
TNF
TRAF2/5, TRADD, IKK, IκB, NFκB, 
CYLD, RANK
Mediator of inflammatory diseases 
and immune responses
RANK
TNF receptor 
superfamily
RANKL
TRAF6, IKK, IκB, NFκB
Regulates bone resorption
Insulin receptor
Receptor tyrosine 
kinase
Insulin
IRS1, PI3K, PIP3, PKB, PDK1, 
mTORC2, GSK3
Regulation of energy homeostasis 
and glucose metabolism
Erythropoietin 
receptor
Receptor tyrosine 
kinase
Erythropoietin
JAK2, STAT5, c-Jun, c-Fos, Src PI3K, 
PIP3, PDK1, PKB
Regulates erythropoiesis
THRα and THRβ
Nuclear receptor 
superfamily
T3
Ligand/receptor complex
Regulates differentiation and 
function of many cells and tissues
ERα and ERβ
Nuclear receptor 
superfamily
Oestrogen
Ligand/receptor complex
Important for fertility, reproduction 
and bone health
GnRHR
GPCR
GnRH
Gq/G11, PLCbetal, PLA(2), PLD, PKC, 
MAPK
Regulates fertility
PTHR1
GPCR
PTH, PTHLP
Gs, adenyl cyclase, cAMP, PKA, CREB, 
Gq/G11, PLC, DAG, IP3, PKC, Ca++
Regulates calcium homeostasis 
and bone turnover
(cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CREB = Ca++ intracellular calcium; CYLD = cylindromatosis; DAG = diacylglycerol; ER = (o)estrogen receptor; 
GnRHR = gonadotrophin releasing hormone receptor; GPCR = G protein-coupled receptor; Gq/G11/Gs = guanine nucleotide binding proteins; GSK3 = glycogen 
synthetase kinase 3; IκB = inhibitor of kappa B; IKK = I kappa B kinase; IP3 = D-myo-inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate; IRS1 = insulin receptor substrate 1; 
JAK2 = Janus activated kinase 2; MAPK = mitogen-activated kinase; mTOR = mammalian target of rapamycin; NFκB = nuclear factor kappa B; PDK1 = 
phosphoinosotide-dependent kinase 1; PIP3 = phosphoinosotol triphosphate; PI3K = phosphoinosotol 3 kinase; PKA/PKB/PKC = protein kinase A/B/C; PLA/PLC/
PLD = phospholipase A/C/D; PTHR1 = parathyroid hormone receptor 1; PTHLP = parathyroid hormone-like protein; RANK = receptor activator of nuclear factor 
kappa B; STAT5 = signal transducer and activator of transcription; TNF = tumour necrosis factor; TNFR1 = TNF receptor 1; TRAF = TNF receptor-associated 
factors; TRADD = tumour necrosis factor receptor type 1-associated death domain protein; TRH = thyrotrophin releasing hormone)
3.2  Examples of molecules involved in specific signalling cascades
degradation of IκB, allowing NFκB to translocate to the 
nucleus and activate gene expression. The system also 
has negative regulators, including the cylindromatosis 
(CYLD) enzyme, which regulates the activity of TRAFs 
by de-ubiquitination. Other transmembrane receptors 
can be grouped into:
•	 ion channel-linked receptors (glutamate and the 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor)
•	 G protein-coupled receptors (GnRH, rhodopsin, 
olfactory receptors, parathyroid hormone receptor)
•	 receptors with kinase activity (insulin receptor, 
erythropoietin receptor, growth factor receptors)
•	 receptors which have no kinase activity, but interact 
with kinases via their intracellular domain when 
activated by ligand (TNF receptor) (see Figure 3.5 
and Box 3.2).
Many receptors can signal only when they assemble 
as a multimeric complex. Mutations which interfere 
with assembly of the functional receptor multimer can 
result in disease. For example, mutations of the insulin 
receptor that inhibit dimerisation lead to childhood 
insulin resistance and growth failure. Conversely, some 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene muta-
tions cause dimerisation in the absence of ligand binding, 
leading to bone overgrowth and an autosomal dominant 
form of craniosynostosis called Crouzon’s syndrome.
It is becoming clear that specialised projections on 
the cell surface known as cilia are essential for normal 
signalling in many tissues. Cilia can be motile or non-
motile. Motile cilia are crucial for normal respiratory 
tract function, with primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) 
resulting in early-onset bronchiectasis due to failure to 
clear lung secretions. PCD is commonly associated with 
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
50
Fig. 3.6  Meiosis and gametogenesis. The main chromosomal stages 
of meiosis in both males and females. A single homologous pair of 
chromosomes is represented in different colours. The final step is the 
production of haploid germ cells. Each round of meiosis in the male results 
in four sperm cells; in the female, however, only one egg cell is produced, 
as the other divisions are sequestered on the periphery of the mature egg 
as peripheral polar bodies. 
Egg
Sperm
Father
Mother
Meiotic cell divisions
1st
polar bodies
2nd
polar body
DNA replication
Sister chromatids
Homologous pairing
Swapping of
genetic material
between homologues:
Recombination
Individual chromosome
pair (homologues)
Non-disjunction of
chromosomes is a common
error in human meiosis,
resulting in trisomy of
individual chromosomes
or uniparental disomy
(both chromosomes from
single parent)
During development, cells must become progres-
sively less like a stem cell and acquire the morphological 
and biochemical configuration of the tissue to which 
they will contribute. This process is called differentiation 
and it is achieved by activation of tissue-specific genes 
and inactivation or silencing of genes that maintain the 
cell in a progenitor state. This epigenetic process enables 
cells containing the same genetic material to have very 
different structures and functions. The programme of 
differentiation is often deranged or partially reversed in 
cancer cells. A similar mechanism allows adult stem 
cells to maintain and repair tissues. Cell migration is a 
process that is also necessary for development and 
wound healing. Migration also requires the activation of 
a specific set of genes, such as the transcription factor 
TWIST, that give the cell polarity and enable the leading 
edge of the cell to interact with the extracellular environ-
ment to control the speed and direction of travel. Again, 
this process can be reactivated in cancer cells and is 
thought to facilitate tumour metastasis.
Cell death, apoptosis and 
senescence
With the exception of stem cells, human cells have 
only a limited capacity for cell division. The Hayflick 
limit is the number of divisions a cell population can go 
through in culture before division stops and the cell 
enters a state known as senescence. This ‘biological 
clock’ is of great interest in the study of the normal 
ageing process. Rare human diseases associated with 
premature ageing, called progeric syndromes, have been 
very helpful in identifying the importance of DNA 
repair mechanisms in senescence (p. 168). For example, 
in Werner syndrome, a DNA helicase (an enzyme that 
separates the two DNA strands) is mutated, leading to 
failure of DNA repair and premature ageing. A distinct 
mechanism of cell death is seen in apoptosis, or pro-
grammed cell death.
Apoptosis is an active process that occurs in normal 
tissues and plays an important role in development, 
tissue remodelling and the immune response. The signal 
that triggers apoptosis is specific to each tissue or cell 
type. This signal activates enzymes, called caspases, 
which actively destroy cellular components, including 
chromosomal DNA. This degradation results in cell 
death, but the cellular corpse contains characteristic 
vesicles called apoptotic bodies. The corpse is then rec-
ognised and removed by phagocytic cells of the immune 
system, such as macrophages, in a manner that does not 
provoke an inflammatory response.
A third mechanism of cell death is necrosis. This is a 
pathological process in which the cellular environment 
loses one or more of the components necessary for cell 
viability. Hypoxia is probably the most common cause 
of necrosis.
GENETIC DISEASE AND INHERITANCE
Meiosis
Meiosis is a special form of cell division that only occurs 
in the post-pubertal testis and the fetal and adult ovary 
(Fig. 3.6). Meiosis differs from mitosis in two main ways; 
there are two separate cell divisions and before the first 
of these there is extensive swapping of genetic material 
between homologous chromosomes, a process known 
as recombination. The result of recombination is that 
each chromosome that a parent passes to his or her off-
spring is a mix of the chromosomes that the parent 
inherited from his or her own mother and father. The 
Genetic disease and inheritance
3
51
end products of meiosis are sperm and egg cells 
(gametes), which contain only 23 chromosomes: one of 
each homologous pair of autosomes and a sex chromo-
some. When a sperm cell fertilises the egg, the resulting 
zygote will thus return to a diploid chromosome com-
plement of 46 chromosomes. The sperm determines the 
sex of the offspring, since 50% of sperm will carry an X 
chromosome and 50% a Y chromosome, while each egg 
cell carries an X chromosome.
The individual steps in meiotic cell division are 
similar in males and females. However, the timing of the 
cell divisions is very different (see Fig. 3.6). In females, 
meiosis begins in fetal life but does not complete until 
after ovulation. A single meiotic cell division can thus 
take more than 40 years to complete. In males, meiotic 
division does not begin until puberty and continues 
throughout life. In the testes, both meiotic divisions are 
completed in a matter of days.
Patterns of disease inheritance
Five modes of genetic disease inheritance are discussed 
below and illustrated in Figures 3.7 and 3.8.
Autosomal dominant inheritance
Autosomal dominant disorders result from a genetic 
abnormality in one of the two copies (alleles) of a single 
gene. The risk of an affected individual transmitting an 
autosomal disease to his or her offspring is 50% for each 
pregnancy, since half the affected individual gametes 
(sperm or egg cells) will contain the affected chromo-
some and half will contain the normal chromosome. 
However, even within a family, individuals with the 
same mutation rarely have identical patterns of disease 
due to variable penetrance and/or expressivity. Pene-
trance is defined as the proportion of individuals bearing 
a mutated allele who develop the disease phenotype. 
The mutation is said to be fully penetrant if all individu-
als who inherit a mutation develop the disease. Expres-
sivity describes the level of severity of each aspect of 
the disease phenotype. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1, 
neurofibromin, 17q11.2) is an example of a disease that 
is fully (100%) penetrant but which shows extremely 
variable expressivity. The environmental factors and/or 
variation in other genes that act as modifiers of the 
mutated gene’s function are mostly unknown. A good 
example of an environmental influence that can pro-
foundly influence expression of autosomal dominant 
Fig. 3.7  Drawing a pedigree and patterns of inheritance.  A The main symbols used to represent pedigrees in diagrammatic form.  B The main 
modes of disease inheritance (see text for details). 
SB
Male
Clinically affected
Deceased
individual
(with age at death)
Separated
Consanguinity
Clinically affected, 
several diagnoses
Carrier
Positive pre-
symptomatic test
Monozygotic twins
Dizygotic twins
Stillbirth
(with gestation)
Termination
Miscarriage,
affected 
(with gestation)
Unknown sex
Female 
Partners
Recessive inheritance
Dominant inheritance
Mitochondrial DNA disorder
X-linked recessive inheritance
Transmission to 50% of offspring
independent of gender
Consanguinity
Affected males related through 
unaffected females
Both sexes affected but only
inherited through female meiosis
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
V
I
II
III
IV
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
3
6
7
5
6
7
8
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
d. 50 y
30 wk
SB
39 wk
16 wk
A
B
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
52
Fig. 3.8  Genomic imprinting and associated diseases. Several regions of the genome exhibit the phenomenon of imprinting, whereby expression 
of one or a group of genes is influenced by whether the chromosome is derived from the mother or the father; one such region lies on chromosome 15. 
 A Normal imprinting. Under normal circumstances, expression of several genes is suppressed (silenced) on the maternal chromosome (red), whereas 
these genes are expressed normally by the paternal chromosome (blue). However, two genes in the paternal chromosome (UBE3 and ATP10A) are 
silenced.  B In sporadic Prader–Willi syndrome, there is a non-disjunction defect on chromosome 15, and both copies of the chromosomal region are 
derived from the mother (maternal uniparental disomy). In this case, Prader–Willi syndrome occurs because there is loss of function of several paternally 
expressed genes, including MKRN3, MAGEK2, NDN, PWRN2, C15ORF2 and SNURF-SNRNP. C In sporadic Angelman’s syndrome, both chromosomal 
regions are derived from the father (paternal uniparental disomy) due to non-disjunction during paternal meiosis. As a result, both copies of the UBE3 gene 
are silenced and this causes Angelman’s syndrome. Note that the syndrome can also be caused by deletion of this region on the maternal chromosome or 
a loss-of-function mutation on the maternal copy of UBE3, causing an inherited form of Angelman’s, as illustrated in panel D.  D Pedigree of a family with 
inherited Angelman’s syndrome due to a loss-of-function mutation in UBE3. Inheriting this mutation from a father causes no disease (because the gene is 
normally silenced in the paternal chromosome) (see individuals I-1, II-1, II-3, III-6), but the same mutation inherited from the mother causes the syndrome 
(individuals III-3, III-4, IV-4), as this is the only copy expressed and the UBE3 gene is mutated. 
1
I
II
III
IV
2
1
2
3
4
2
1
4
3
5
6
3
4
1
2
Maternal
chromosome 15
Paternal
chromosome 15
Paternal
chromosome 15
MKRN3
Centromeric
Imprinting centre
Telomeric
MAGEK2
NDN
PWRN2
PWRN1
C15ORF2
SNURF-SNRPN
UBE3
ATP10A
GABRB3
Maternally silenced region
Maternally
silenced region
Paternally
silenced region
Paternally
silenced region
Maternally partially
silenced region
CH3
CH3
CH3
Maternal
chromosome 15
CH3
CH3
CH3
Maternal
chromosome 15
CH3
CH3
CH3
Paternal
chromosome 15
Normal
Sporadic Angelman’s syndrome
Sporadic Prader–Willi syndrome
A
C 
Inherited Angelman’s syndrome
D 
B
Genetic disease and inheritance
3
53
disease is seen in the triggering of malignant hyper­
pyrexia by anaesthetic agents in the presence of RYR1 
mutations. Autosomal dominant disorders may be the 
result of either loss or gain of function of the affected 
gene. For example, adult polycystic kidney disease type 
1 is caused by loss-of-function mutations in PKD1, which 
encodes polycystin I on 16p13.1. Hereditary motor and 
sensory neuropathy type 1 is caused by increased 
number of copies (resulting in increased gene dosage) 
of PMP22, encoding peripheral myelin protein 22 on 
17p11.2.
Autosomal recessive inheritance
In autosomal recessive disorders, both alleles of a gene 
must be mutated before the disease is manifest in an 
individual, and an affected individual must inherit one 
mutant allele from each parent. What distinguishes 
autosomal dominant and recessive diseases is that 
carrying one mutant allele does not produce a disease 
phenotype. Autosomal recessive disorders are rare in 
most populations. For example, the most common 
serious autosomal recessive disorder in the UK is cystic 
fibrosis, which has a birth incidence of 1 : 2000. The fre-
quency of autosomal recessive disorders increases with 
the degree of inbreeding of a population because the risk 
of inheriting the same mutant allele from both parents 
(homozygosity) is increased. Genetic risk calculation 
for a fully penetrant autosomal recessive disorder is 
straightforward. Each subsequent pregnancy of a couple 
who have had a previous child affected by an autosomal 
recessive disorder will have a 25% (1 : 4) risk of being 
affected; a healthy individual who has a sibling with an 
autosomal recessive disorder will have 2/3 chance of 
being a carrier. The risk of an affected individual having 
children with the same condition is usually low but is 
dependent on the carrier rate of the mutant allele in the 
population.
X-linked inheritance
Genetic diseases caused by mutations on the X chro-
mosome have specific characteristics. X-linked diseases 
are mostly recessive and restricted to males who carry 
the mutant allele. This is because males have only one 
X chromosome, whereas females have two. Thus 
females who carry a single mutant allele are generally 
unaffected. Occasionally, female carriers may exhibit 
signs of an X-linked disease due to a phenomenon 
called skewed X-inactivation. All female embryos, at 
about 100 cells in size, stably inactivate one of their 
two X chromosomes in each cell. This process is 
random in each cell but if, by chance, there is a dis-
proportionate inactivation of normal X chromosomes 
carrying the normal allele, then an affected female 
carrier will be more likely, an extreme example being 
the rare cases of carrier females affected with Duch-
enne muscular dystrophy. X-linked recessive disorders 
have a recognisable pattern of inheritance, with trans-
mission of the disease from carrier females to affected 
males and absence of father-to-son transmission. The 
risk of a female carrier having an affected child is 25% 
(1 : 4; half of her male offspring). If the carrier status of 
a woman is unclear, then the risk may be altered by 
conditional information, as discussed in the autosomal 
dominant disease section above. Bayes’ theorem is 
commonly used to calculate such modified risks and 
this is discussed in more detail later in this chapter 
(p. 68).
Mitochondrial inheritance
The inheritance of mtDNA disorders is characterised by 
transmission from females, but males and females are 
generally affected equally. Unlike the other inheritance 
patterns mentioned above, mitochondrial inheritance 
has nothing to do with meiosis but reflects the fact that 
mitochondrial DNA is transmitted by oöcytes. Mito-
chondrial disorders tend to be very variable in pene-
trance and expressivity within families, and this is 
mostly accounted for by the fact that only a proportion 
of multiple mtDNA molecules within mitochondria 
contain the causal mutation (the degree of mtDNA 
heteroplasmy).
Epigenetic inheritance  
and imprinting
Several chromosomal regions (loci) have been identified 
where gene repression is inherited in a parent-of-origin-
specific manner; these are called imprinted loci. Within 
these loci the paternal alleles of a gene may be active 
while the maternal one may be silenced, or vice versa 
(see Fig. 3.8). Mutations within imprinted loci lead to a 
very unusual pattern of inheritance in which the pheno-
type is only manifest if inherited from the parent 
who contributes the transcriptionally active allele (see 
Fig. 3.8). Examples of these disorders are given in Box 3.3.
Classes of genetic variant
There are many different classes of variation in the 
human genome (Figs 3.9 and 3.10). Rare genetic varia-
tions that result in a disease are generally referred to as 
mutations, whereas common variations and those that 
do not cause disease are referred to as polymorphisms. 
These different types of variation are further categorised 
by the size of the DNA segment involved and/or by the 
mechanism giving rise to the variation.
Nucleotide substitutions
The substitution of one nucleotide for another is the 
most common type of variation in the human genome. 
Depending on their frequency and functional conse-
quences, these changes are known as a point mutation 
or a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). They occur 
by misincorporation of a nucleotide during DNA syn-
thesis or by the action of a chemical mutagen. When 
these substitutions occur within ORFs of a protein-
coding gene, they are further classified into:
•	 synonymous – resulting in a change in the codon 
but no change in the amino acid and thus no 
phenotype
•	 missense – altering a codon, resulting in an amino 
acid change in the protein
•	 nonsense – introducing a premature stop codon, 
resulting in truncation of the protein
•	 splicing – occurring at the junction of an intron and 
an exon, thereby adversely affecting splicing.
Examples of these types of variation are shown in 
Figures 3.9 and 3.10.
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
54
Normal
Silent polymorphism
(no amino acid change)
Missense mutation causing
Lys–Gln amino acid change
‘G’ insertion causing
frameshift mutation
Nonsense mutation causing
premature termination codon
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 3.9  Different types of mutation affecting coding exons. A Normal sequence.  B A synonymous nucleotide substitution changing the third 
base of a codon; the resulting amino acid sequence is unchanged.  C A missense mutation in which the nucleotide substitution results in a change in a 
single amino acid from the normal sequence (AAG) encoding lysine to glutamine (CAG).  D Insertion of a G residue (boxed) causes a frameshift mutation, 
completely altering the amino acid sequence downstream. This usually results in a loss-of-function mutation.  E A nonsense mutation resulting in a single 
nucleotide change from a lysine codon (AAG) to a premature stop codon (TAG). 
Disease
Locus
Genes
Notes
Imprinting disorders
Beckwith–Wiedemann 
syndrome
11p15
p57KIP2 HASH2, 
INS2, IGF2, H19
General ‘over-growth’, advanced bone age and increased 
childhood tumours. Some cases due to mutations in p57KIP2
Prader–Willi syndrome
15q11–q13
SNRPN, Necdin 
and others
Obesity, hypogonadism and learning disability. Lack of paternal 
contribution (due to deletion of paternal 15q11–q13, or inheritance 
of both chromosome 15q11–q13 regions from the mother)
Angelman’s syndrome (AS)
15q11–q13
UBE3A
Severe mental retardation, ataxia, epilepsy and inappropriate 
laughing bouts. Due to loss-of-function mutations in the maternal 
UBE3A gene. The neurological phenotype results because most 
tissues express both maternal and paternal alleles of UBE3A, 
whereas the brain expresses predominantly the maternal allele
Pseudohypoparathyroidism  
(p. 770)
20q13
GNAS1
Inheritance of the mutation from the mother results in 
hypocalcaemia, hyperphosphataemia, raised parathyroid hormone 
(PTH) levels, ectopic calcification, obesity, delayed puberty, 
shortened 4th and 5th metacarpals and ectopic calcification. When 
the mutation is inherited from the father, PTH, calcium and 
phosphate levels are normal but the other features are present. 
These differences are due to the fact that, in the kidney (the main 
target organ through which PTH regulates serum calcium and 
phosphate), the paternal allele is silenced and the maternal allele 
is expressed, whereas both alleles are expressed in other tissues
X-inactivation disorders
Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
(DMD) in females
Xp22
DMD
If, by chance, a sufficient number of the X chromosomes 
containing the normal dystrophin gene are inactivated in muscle, 
heterozygous females may rarely develop full-blown DMD. 
Conversely, if a higher proportion of the disease gene-carrying 
chromosome is inactivated, a carrier female may test negative on 
biochemical screening for elevated creatine kinase levels
Epigenetic silencing (oncogenesis)
Colon cancer
3p21
MLH1
Hypermethylation of the promoter results in silencing of MLH1, 
which encodes a DNA repair gene
3.3  Epigenetic disease
Genetic disease and inheritance
3
55
Insertions and deletions
One or more nucleotides may be inserted or lost in a 
DNA sequence, resulting in an insertion/deletion (indel) 
polymorphism or mutation (see Fig. 3.9). If an indel 
change affects one or two nucleotides within the 
ORF of a protein-coding gene, this can have serious con-
sequences because the triple nucleotide sequence of the 
codons is disrupted, resulting in a frameshift mutation. 
The effect upon the gene is typically severe because the 
amino acid sequence is totally disrupted.
Simple tandem repeat mutation
Variations in the length of simple tandem repeats of 
DNA are thought to arise as the result of slippage of 
DNA during meiosis and are termed microsatellite 
(small) or minisatellite (larger) repeats. These repeats 
are unstable and can expand or contract in different 
generations. This instability is proportional to the size 
of the original repeat, in that longer repeats tend to be 
more unstable. Many microsatellites and minisatellites 
occur in introns or in chromosomal regions between 
genes and have no obvious adverse effects. However, 
some genetic diseases, including Huntington’s disease 
and myotonic dystrophy, are caused by microsatellite 
repeats, which result in duplication of amino acids 
within the affected gene product or affect gene expres-
sion (Box 3.4).
Copy number variations
Variation in the number of copies of an individual 
segment of the genome from the usual diploid (two 
copies) content can be categorised by the size of the 
Fig. 3.10  Splice site mutations. A  The normal sequence is shown, illustrating two exons, and intervening intron (blue) with splice donor (AG) and 
splice acceptor sites (GT) underlined. Normally, the intron is removed by splicing to give the mature mRNA that encodes the protein. B  In a splice site 
mutation the donor site is mutated. As a result, splicing no longer occurs, leading to read-through of the mRNA into the intron, which contains a premature 
termination codon downstream of the mutation. 
Normal
Splice site mutation
Splice donor site
Exon
Exon
Intron
Exon
Exon
Intron
Intron removed by
splicing
Splice acceptor site
mRNA ‘reads through’ intron
Abnormal protein with
premature stop codon
A
B
segment involved. Rarely, individuals may gain or lose 
a whole chromosome. Such numerical chromosome 
anomalies most commonly occur by a process known as 
meiotic non-dysjunction (Box 3.5). This is the most 
common cause of Down’s syndrome, which results from 
trisomy (three copies) of chromosome 21.
Large insertions or deletions of chromosomal DNA 
also occur and are usually associated with learning 
disability and/or malformations. Such structural chro-
mosomal anomalies arise as the result of two different 
processes:
•	 non-homologous end-joining
•	 non-allelic homologous recombination.
Random double-stranded breaks in DNA are a neces-
sary process in meiotic recombination and also occur 
during mitosis at a predictable rate. The rate of these 
breaks is dramatically increased by exposure to ionising 
radiation. When such breaks occur, they are usually 
repaired accurately by DNA repair mechanisms within 
the cell. However, a proportion of breaks undergoes 
non-homologous end-joining, which results in the 
joining of two segments of DNA that are not normally 
contiguous. If the joined fragments are from different 
chromosomes, this results in a translocation. If they are 
from the same chromosome, this will result in inversion, 
duplication or deletion of a chromosomal fragment 
(Fig. 3.11). Large insertions and deletions may be cyto­
genetically visible as chromosomal deletions or duplica-
tions. If the anomalies are too small to be detected by 
microscopy, they are termed microdeletions and micro-
duplications. Many microdeletion syndromes have been 
described and most stem from non-allelic homologous 
recombination between repeats of highly similar DNA 
sequences, which results in identical chromosome 
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
56
No. of repeats
Repeat
Normal
Mutant
Gene
Gene location
Inheritance
Coding repeat expansion
Huntington’s disease
[CAG]
6–34
> 35
Huntingtin
4p16
AD
Spinocerebellar ataxia (type 1)
[CAG]
6–39
> 40
Ataxin
6p22–23
AD
Spinocerebellar ataxia (types 
2, 3, 6, 7)
[CAG]
Various
Various
Various
Various
AD
Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian 
atrophy
[CAG]
7–25
> 49
Atrophin
12p12–13
AD
Machado–Joseph disease
[CAG]
12–40
> 67
MJD
14q32
AD
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy
[CAG]
11–34
> 40
Androgen receptor
Xq11–12
XL recessive
Non-coding repeat expansion
Myotonic dystrophy
[CTG]
5–37
> 50
DMPK-3′UTR
19q13
AD
Friedreich’s ataxia
[GAA]
7–22
> 200
Frataxin-intronic
9q13
AR
Progressive myoclonic 
epilepsy
[CCCCGCCCCGCG]4–8
2–3
> 25
Cystatin B-5′UTR
21q
AR
Fragile X mental retardation
[CGG]
5–52
> 200
FMR1–5′UTR
Xq27
XL dominant
Fragile site mental retardation 
2 (FRAXE)
[GCC]
6–35
> 200
FMR2
Xq28
XL, probably 
recessive
Note The triplet repeat diseases fall into two major groups: those with disease resulting from expansion of [CAG]n repeats in coding DNA, resulting in multiple 
adjacent glutamine residues (polyglutamine tracts), and those with non-coding repeats. The latter tend to be longer. Unaffected parents usually display 
‘pre-mutation’ allele lengths that are just above the normal range. (AD/AR = autosomal dominant/recessive; UTR = untranslated region; XL = X-linked)
3.4  Diseases associated with triplet and other repeat sequences
Disease
Locus
Incidence
Clinical features
Numerical chromosomal abnormalities
Down’s syndrome 
(trisomy 21)
47,XY,+21 or 47,XX+21
1 : 800
Characteristic facies, IQ usually < 50, congenital heart disease, 
reduced life expectancy
Edwards’ syndrome 
(trisomy 18)
47,XY,+18 or 47,XX,+18
1 : 6000
Early lethality, characteristic skull and facies, frequent 
malformations of heart, kidney and other organs
Patau’s syndrome 
(trisomy 13)
47,XY,+13 or 47, XX,+13
1 : 15 000
Early lethality, cleft lip and palate, polydactyly, small head, 
frequent congenital heart disease
Klinefelter’s syndrome
47,XXY
1 : 1000
Phenotypic male, infertility, gynaecomastia, small testes (p. 766)
XYY
47,XYY
1 : 1000
Usually asymptomatic, some impulse control problems
Triple X syndrome
47,XXX
1 : 1000
Usually asymptomatic, may have reduced IQ
Turner’s syndrome
45,X
1 : 5000
Phenotypic female, short stature, webbed neck, coarctation of 
the aorta, primary amenorrhoea (p. 765)
Recurrent deletions, microdeletions and contiguous gene defects
Di George/
velocardiofacial 
syndrome
22q11.2
1 in 4000
Cardiac outflow tract defects, distinctive facial appearance, 
thymic hypoplasia, cleft palate and hypocalcaemia. Major gene 
seems to be TBX1 (cardiac defects and cleft palate)
Prader–Willi syndrome
15q11–q13
1 : 15 000
Distinctive facial appearance, hyperphagia, small hands and feet, 
distinct behavioural phenotype. Imprinted region, deletions on 
paternal allele in 70% of cases
Angelman’s syndrome
15q11–q13
1 : 15 000
Distinctive facial appearance, absent speech, EEG abnormality, 
characteristic gait. Imprinted region, deletions on maternal allele 
in UBE3A
Williams’ syndrome
7q11.23
1 : 10 000
Distinctive facial appearance, supravalvular aortic stenosis, 
learning disability and infantile hypercalcaemia. Major gene for 
supravalvular aortic stenosis is elastin
Smith–Magenis 
syndrome
17p11.2
1 in 25 000
Distinctive facial appearance and behavioural phenotype, 
self-injury and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep abnormalities. 
Major gene seems to be RAH
3.5  Chromosome and contiguous gene disorders
anomalies – and clinical syndromes – occurring in unre-
lated individuals (see Fig. 3.11 and Box 3.5).
Polymorphic copy number variants
In addition to the disease-causing structural chromo-
somal anomalies mentioned above, there are also a 
considerable number of polymorphic CNVs that exist as 
common genetic polymorphisms in humans. These 
involve duplication of large segments of the genome, 
often containing multiple genes and regulatory ele-
ments. These duplications usually result from non-allelic 
homologous recombination via misalignment of tandem 
Genetic disease and inheritance
3
57
Fig. 3.11  Chromosomal analysis and structural chromosomal disorders. A How chromosome analysis is carried out. Starting with a blood 
sample, the white cells are stimulated to divide by adding the mitogen phytohaemagglutinin (PHA), and colchicine is used to trap the cells in metaphase, 
which allows the chromosomes to be seen using light microscopy following staining with Giemsa, resulting in a banding pattern. B How structural 
chromosomal anomalies are described. Human chromosomes can be classed as metacentric if the centromere is near the middle, or acrocentric if the 
centromere is at the end. The bands of each chromosome are given a number, starting at the centromere and working out along the short (p) arm and 
long (q) arm. Translocations and inversions are balanced structural chromosome anomalies where no genetic material is missing but it is in the wrong 
order. Translocations can be divided into reciprocal (direct swap of chromosomal material between non-homologous chromosomes) and Robertsonian 
(fusion of acrocentric chromosomes). Deletions and duplications can also occur due to non-allelic homologous recombination (illustrated in panel C). 
Deletions are classified as interstitial if they lie within a chromosome, and terminal if the terminal region of the chromosome is affected. Duplications can 
either be in tandem (where the duplicated fragment is orientated in the correct direction) or inverted (where the duplicated fragment is in the wrong 
direction). (N = normal; A = abnormal) C A common error of meiotic recombination, known as non-allelic homologous recombination, can occur (right 
panel), resulting in a deletion on one chromosome and a duplication in the homologous chromosome. The error is induced by tandem repeats in the DNA 
sequences (green), which can misalign and bind to each other, thereby ‘fooling’ the DNA into thinking the pairing prior to recombination is correct. 
A
Blood
sample
Chromosome
9
Cen
p
23
21
12
12
21.1
21.3
21.2
31
33
34.2
q
Cen
p
N
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
A
13 (sa)
(st)
11.2
12
21
23
24.2
31
32.2
q
Metacentric
Acrocentric
Chromosome
14
Reciprocal
translocation
Robertsonian
translocation
Inversions
Interstitial
Terminal
Tandem
Inverted
Mechanism underlying recurrent deletions and duplication: non-allelic homologous recombination
Deletions
Duplications
Mitogen
stimulation
using PHA
Giemsa stain
‘G banding’
Conventional
(light microscopy)
Normal male
metaphase spread
Normal male
karyotype
Colchicine trap
G0
M
G2
G1
C
B
Recombination
Normal pairing
Abnormal pairing between DNA repeats
Deletion
Duplication
 
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
DNA repeat
Maternal chromosome
Paternal chromosome
1
1
2
1
2
repeated DNA elements in the chromosome during 
recombination (see Fig. 3.11). The consequences of CNV 
for genetic disease have not been fully explored, although 
recent studies have shown a strong association between 
an increased copy number of the gene FCGR3B and the 
risk of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Consequences of genetic variation
Genetic variants can generally be classed into three 
groups:
•	 those associated with no detectable change in gene 
function (neutral variants)
•	 those which cause a loss of function of the gene 
product
•	 those which cause a gain of function of the gene 
product.
The consequence of an individual mutation depends 
on many factors, including the mutation type, the nature 
of the gene product and the position of the variant in the 
protein. Mutations can have profound effects or subtle 
effects on gene and cell function (Box 3.6). Variations 
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
58
gene expression or in protein structure and function (see 
Box 3.15, p. 69). It is thought that these polymorphisms 
lead to variations in phenotype within the general popu-
lation, including variations in susceptibility to common 
diseases. An example is polymorphism in the gene 
SLC2A9 that not only explains a significant proportion 
of the normal population variation in serum urate con-
centration but also predisposes ‘high-risk’ allele carriers 
to the development of gout. Other examples are listed 
in Box 3.6.
Neutral variants
The vast majority of variations within the human 
genome have no discernible effect on the cell or organ-
ism. This may be because the variation is non-coding, 
occurring outside the gene but within an intron, or is 
within the coding regions of a gene but does not change 
the amino acid because of a synonymous substitution at 
the third base of a codon (see Fig. 3.9). Some variations 
that do change the amino acid may be completely toler-
ated with regard to protein function.
Evolutionary selection
Genetic variants play an important role in evolutionary 
selection; some are advantageous to an organism, result-
ing in positive selection through evolution via improved 
reproductive fitness. However, variations that decrease 
reproductive fitness become less common and are 
excluded through evolution. Given this simple para-
digm, it would be tempting to assume that common 
mutations are all advantageous and all rare mutations 
are pathogenic. Unfortunately, it is often difficult to clas-
sify any common mutation as either advantageous or 
deleterious – or, indeed, neutral. Mutations that are 
advantageous in early life and thus enhance reproduc-
tive fitness may be deleterious in later life. There may 
be mutations that are advantageous for survival in par-
ticular conditions (for example, famine or pandemic), 
which may be disadvantageous in more benign circum-
stances by resulting in a predisposition to obesity or 
autoimmune disorders. This complexity of balancing 
selection through evolution is likely to be an important 
feature of the genetics of common disease.
Constitutional genetic disease
All familial genetic disease is caused by constitutional 
mutations, which are inherited through the germ line. 
that have profound effects are responsible for ‘classical’ 
genetic diseases, whereas those with subtle effects may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of complex diseases with 
a genetic component.
Loss-of-function mutations
These mutations cause the normal function of a protein 
to be reduced or lost. Deletion of the whole gene is the 
most extreme example but the same phenotype can be 
seen with a nonsense or frameshift mutation early in the 
ORF. Missense mutations that alter a critical domain 
within the protein can also result in loss of function. 
In autosomal recessive diseases, mutations that result 
in no protein function whatsoever are known as null 
mutations. If loss-of-function mutations result in an 
autosomal dominant disease, the genetic mechanism is 
known as haploinsufficiency and indicates that both 
functional copies of the gene are required for normal 
cellular function. Mutations in PKD1 or PKD2 that cause 
autosomal dominant adult polycystic kidney disease are 
mostly loss of function.
Gain-of-function and dominant 
negative mutations
Gain-of-function and dominant-negative effect muta-
tions are most commonly the result of missense muta-
tion or in-frame deletions but may also be caused by 
triplet repeat expansion mutations. Gain of function 
results where a mutation alters the protein structure, 
causing activation of its normal function, causing it to 
interact with a novel substrate or causing it to change its 
normal function. Constitutive activation of fibroblast 
growth factor receptors by missense mutation, which 
leads to many disorders such as achondroplasia, is an 
example of a gain-of-function mutation. Dominant-
negative mutations are heterozygous changes that have 
a more deleterious effect on the protein function than a 
heterozygous ‘null’ mutation. For example, hetero-
zygous mutations in FBN1 cause Marfan’s syndrome by 
the production of a protein with an abnormal amino acid 
sequence that disrupts the normal assembly of micro­
fibrils. In comparison, complete loss of function of one 
allele of FBN1 is usually completely benign.
Polymorphisms
A polymorphism is defined as a change in the nucleotide 
sequence that exists with a population frequency of 
more than 1%. Most common polymorphisms are 
neutral (see below), but some cause subtle changes in 
*The genetic variants shown are common in the general population but heterozygotes do not exhibit any evidence of disease. In the homozygous form, however, 
these variants cause recessive disease due to loss of function of the affected gene.
Disease
Inheritance
Gene
Genetic variant
Population frequency
Haemochromatosis
AR
HFE
p.Cys282Tyr (p.C282Y; nucleotide c.845G>A)
3%
p.His63Asp (p.H63D; nucleotide c.187C>G)
5%
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
AR
SERPINA1
p.Glu342Lys (p.E342K, c.1197G>A)
3%
Spinal muscular atrophy
AR
SMN1
Gene deletion by non-allelic homologous 
recombination
2–3%
Cystic fibrosis
AR
CFTR
p.Phe508del (p.F508del aka δF508, 
c.1521_1523delCTT)
4%
3.6  Examples of recessive diseases caused by common genetic variants*
Genetic disease and inheritance
3
59
However, different mutations in the same gene can have 
different consequences, depending on the genetic mech-
anism underlying that disease. About 1% of the popula-
tion carries constitutional mutations that cause disease.
Allelic heterogeneity
Allelic heterogeneity is where several different muta-
tions cause the same phenotype. This is seen in almost 
all genetic disease. In familial adenomatous poly­
posis coli, whole-gene deletions, nonsense mutations, 
frameshift mutations and some missense mutations 
result in exactly the same phenotype because they all 
cause loss of function in the FAP gene on chromosome 
5q. Many other Mendelian disorders show this phenom-
enon with loss-of-function mutations, including adult 
polycystic kidney disease (PKD1, 16p13; PKD2, 4q21). 
Allelic heterogeneity can also be seen in gain-of-function 
and dominant-negative mutations. In connective tissue 
disorders, dominant-negative mutations are almost 
always missense mutations or in-frame deletions or 
insertions, since the aberrant protein has to be made for 
the disease to manifest. In most diseases caused by gain-
of-function mutations, allelic heterogeneity is severely 
restricted. A good example of this is achondroplasia, in 
which the mutations in FGFR3 are restricted to a few 
specific codons that cause constitutive activation of the 
receptor that is required to cause the disease.
Locus heterogeneity
Locus heterogeneity is where a similar phenotype results 
from mutations in several different genes. One of the 
best examples is retinitis pigmentosa, which can occur 
as the result of mutations in more than 75 genes, each of 
which has a different chromosomal location.
De novo mutations
Although the vast majority of constitutional mutations 
are inherited, each gamete will contain mutations that 
have occurred as a result of meiosis; these are called de 
novo mutations. Each individual has approximately 70 
de novo mutations scattered throughout their genome. 
This occurs in each generation and is presumably 
required for evolution to occur. Most are neutral but 
such mutations may also cause human disease. De novo 
mutations cause severe congenital disorders such as 
thanatophoric dysplasia (FGFR3 gain-of-function muta-
tion), bilateral anophthalmia (SOX2 haploinsufficiency), 
campomelic dysplasia (SOX9 loss of function) (Fig. 3.2) 
and the severe form of osteogenesis imperfecta 
(dominant-negative mutations in COL1A1 or COL1A2).
Somatic genetic disease
Somatic mutations are not inherited but instead occur 
during post-zygotic mitotic cell divisions at any point 
from embryonic development to late adult life. An 
example of this phenomenon is polyostotic fibrous dys-
plasia (McCune–Albright syndrome), in which a somatic 
mutation in the GS alpha gene causes constitutive activa-
tion of receptor signalling downstream of many G 
protein-coupled receptors, resulting in focal lesions in 
the skeleton and endocrine dysfunction (p. 770).
The most important example of human disease 
caused by somatic mutations is cancer. Here, ‘driver’ 
mutations occur within genes that are involved in regu-
lating cell division or apoptosis, resulting in abnormal 
cell growth and tumour formation. The two general cat-
egories of cancer-causing mutation are gain-of-function 
mutations in growth-promoting genes (oncogenes) and 
loss-of-function mutations in growth-suppressing genes 
(tumour suppressor genes). Whichever mechanism is 
acting, most tumours require an initiating mutation in a 
single cell that can then escape from normal growth 
controls. This cell replicates more frequently or fails to 
undergo programmed death, resulting in clonal expan-
sion. As the size of the clone increases, one or more cells 
may acquire additional mutations that confer further 
growth advantage, leading to proliferation of these 
subclones, which may ultimately lead to aggressive 
metastatic cancer. The cell’s complex self-regulating 
machinery means that more than one mutation is usually 
required to produce a malignant tumour (see Fig. 11.3, 
p. 264). For example, if a mutation results in activation 
of a growth factor gene or receptor, then that cell will 
replicate more frequently as a result of autocrine stimu-
lation. However, this mutant cell will still be subject to 
normal cell cycle checkpoints to promote DNA integrity 
in its progeny. But if additional mutations in the same 
cell result in defective cell cycle checkpoints, it will 
rapidly accumulate further mutations, which may allow 
completely unregulated growth and/or separation from 
its matrix and cellular attachments and/or resistance 
to apoptosis. As cell growth becomes increasingly dys-
regulated, cells de-differentiate, lose their response to 
normal tissue environment and cease to ensure appro-
priate mitotic chromosomal segregation. These pro-
cesses combine to generate the classical malignant 
characteristics of disorganised growth, variable levels of 
differentiation, and numerical and structural chromo-
some abnormalities. An increase in somatic mutation 
rate can occur on exposure to external mutagens, such 
as ultraviolet light or cigarette smoke, or if the cell 
has defects in DNA repair systems. Cancer therefore 
affects the fundamental processes of molecular and 
cell biology.
In many familial cancer syndromes, somatic muta-
tions act together with an inherited mutation to cause 
cancer. Familial cancer syndromes may be due to loss-
of-function mutations in tumour suppressor genes or 
genes encoding DNA repair enzymes. In DNA repair 
diseases, the inherited mutations increase the somatic 
mutation rate. Autosomal dominant mutations in genes 
encoding components of specific DNA repair systems 
are relatively common causes of familial colon cancer 
and breast cancer (e.g. BRCA1). Autosomal recessive 
DNA repair disorders are rare and are associated with 
almost complete loss of DNA repair enzymes. This is 
usually associated with a severe multifaceted degenera-
tive disorder with cancer susceptibility as a significant 
component (e.g. xeroderma pigmentosum, p. 267).
Cancer syndromes are also caused by loss-of-function 
mutations in tumour suppressor genes. At the cellular 
level, loss of one functional copy of a tumour suppressor 
gene does not have any functional consequences, as the 
cell is protected by the remaining normal copy. However, 
a somatic mutation affecting the normal allele is likely 
to occur in one cell at some point during life, resulting 
in complete loss of tumour suppressor activity and a 
tumour developing by clonal expansion of that cell. This 
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
60
Cool ~60°C
DNA
sample
DNA strands
separate
Primers
bind to
DNA
DNA
replicated
Heat 95°C
Heat 95°C
Cool ~60°C
Repeat cycles
20–30 times
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
10
0
5
10
15
PCR cycles
Exponential amplification
of DNA between primer sites
DNA molecules
20
25
30
DNA strands
separate
Primers bind
to DNA
Cycle
no. 1
DNA
replicated
Heat ~72°C
Heat ~72°C
Polymerase
+ dNTPs
Primers
Cycle
no. 2
two-hit mechanism (one inherited, one somatic) for 
cancer development is known as the Knudsen hypoth-
esis. It explains why tumours may not develop for many 
years (or ever) in some members of these cancer-prone 
families. Yet another group of cancer syndromes are the 
result of gain-of-function mutations in tumour promoter 
genes (proto-oncogenes).
INVESTIGATION OF GENETIC DISEASE
General principles of diagnosis
Many genetic diseases can be diagnosed by a careful 
clinical history and examination together with an 
awareness and knowledge of rare diseases. Although 
DNA-based diagnostic tools are now widely used, not 
all diagnostic genetic tests involve analysis of DNA. For 
example, an electrocardiogram (ECG) can establish the 
diagnosis in long QT syndrome or a renal ultrasound 
can detect adult polycystic kidney disease. By definition, 
all genetic testing (whether DNA-based or not) has 
implications for both the patient and other members of 
the family. These issues should be considered before 
genetic testing is undertaken and a plan should be in 
place to deliver medical information and support to 
family members and to organise any relevant down-
stream investigations.
Constructing a family tree
The family tree – or pedigree – is fundamental to the 
diagnosis of genetic diseases. The basic symbols and 
nomenclature used in drawing a pedigree are shown in 
Figure 3.7 (p. 51). A three-generation family history 
taken in a routine medical clerking may reveal impor-
tant genetic information of relevance to the presenting 
complaint, particularly relating to cancer.
A pedigree should include details from both sides 
of the family, any history of pregnancy loss or infant 
death, consanguinity, and details of all medical condi-
tions in family members, including dates of birth and 
age at death.
It is important to be aware that a diagnosis given by 
a family member, or even obtained from a death certifi-
cate, may be wrong. This is often true in cases of cancer, 
where ‘stomach’ may mean any part of the bowel, and 
‘brain’ may refer to secondary deposits or be used where 
the primary site has not been identified.
Polymerase chain reaction and 
DNA sequencing
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a fundamental 
laboratory technique that amplifies targeted sections 
of the human genome for DNA diagnostic analysis. 
Almost any tissue can be used to extract DNA for 
PCR analysis, but most commonly, a sample of periph-
eral blood is used. PCR is very often used in associa-
tion with DNA sequencing to determine the exact 
nucleotide sequence of a specific region of a gene 
or chromosome. The principles of PCR are shown in 
Figure 3.12. The technique of DNA sequencing is used 
for DNA diagnostic analysis in clinical practice. Until 
recently, most diagnostic DNA laboratories used 
Sanger sequencing for diagnosis (Fig. 3.13A), but 
Investigation of genetic disease
3
61
Fig. 3.12 (see opposite)  The polymerase chain reaction. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) involves adding a tiny amount of the patient’s DNA 
to a reaction containing primers (short oligonucleotides 18–21 bp in length, which bind to the DNA flanking the region of interest) and deoxynucleotide 
phosphates (dATP, dCTP, dGTP, dTTP), which are used to synthesise new DNA and a heat-stable polymerase. The reaction mix is first heated to 95°C, 
which causes the double-stranded DNA molecules to separate. The reaction is then cooled to 50–60°C, which allows the primers to bind to the target 
DNA. The reaction is then heated to 72°C, at which point the polymerase starts making new DNA strands. These cycles are repeated 20–30 times, 
resulting in exponential amplification of the DNA fragment between the primer sites. The resulting PCR products can then be used for further analysis 
– most commonly DNA sequencing (see Fig. 3.13). 
Fig. 3.13  DNA sequencing. A Sanger sequencing of DNA, which is very widely used in DNA diagnostics. This is performed using PCR-amplified 
fragments of DNA corresponding to the gene of interest. The sequencing reaction is performed using a combination dNTP and fluorescently labelled 
di-deoxy dNTP (ddATP, ddTTP, ddCTP and ddGTP), which become incorporated into the newly synthesised DNA, causing termination of the chain at that 
point. The reaction products are then subject to capillary electrophoresis and the different-sized fragments are detected by a laser, producing a sequence 
chromatogram that corresponds to the target DNA sequence. B Next-generation sequencing. Samples of patient DNA are fragmented and adapters 
ligated to each end of the fragment. The sequencing reaction is then performed with primers specific for the adaptors, much as described for Sanger 
sequencing. In next-generation sequencing, however, the reaction products are detected without the need for electrophoresis, and assembled by computer 
to produce the final sequence read. The absence of electrophoresis allows next-generation sequencing to generate data 100–1000 times faster than 
Sanger sequencing. 
A
B
Capillary
electrophoresis
Largest fragments
migrate slowest
Smallest fastest
Laser
fluorescence
detector
ddTTP
ddCTP
ddATP
ddGTP
DNA
sample
PCR
DNA sequence chromatogram
Key
Fragments detected by laser fluorescence
New DNA molecules terminated by
incorporation of ddNTP
Polymerase
+ ddNTPs
Primers
DNA
sample
Automated computer-based
assembly of reads
Final sequence
Fragment DNA
Ligate adaptors
PCR with adaptor-
specific primers
Next-generation
sequencer
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
62
Fig. 3.14  Detection of chromosomal abnormalities by fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) and comparative genomic hybridisation 
(CGH). A An example of FISH analysis showing a pair of homologous metaphase chromosome 22 stained with a blue fluorescent dye. The green spots 
represent a telomeric probe that has hybridised to both sister chromatids (there are two spots on the right-hand chromosome, whereas on the left the two 
spots are overlapping). The pink spot shows hybridisation of a probe mapping to band 22q11.2. The left chromosome has a normal signal that is absent 
on the right. This represents the microdeletion associated with velocardiofacial syndrome on the chromosome on the right. B Overview of comparative 
genomic hybridisation (CGH). Deletions and duplications are detected by looking for deviation from the 1 : 1 ratio of patient and control DNA in a microarray. 
Ratios in excess of 1 indicate duplications, whereas ratios below 1 indicate deletions. 
FISH
CGH
Patient
DNA
Label DNA
with different
fluorescent
dyes
Mix equimolar
amounts of
labelled DNA
Apply DNA mix to
glass slide with
high-density array
of different DNA
probes with known
location in the
human genome
Patient/control
ratio = 0.5:1
→ deletion of
patient DNA
Patient/control
ratio = 1.5:1
→ duplication
of patient DNA
Patient/control
ratio = 1:1
→ normal
Normal control
DNA
A
B
metaphase chromosomes as a follow-up to microarray 
analysis.
Non-DNA-based methods  
of assessment
Although DNA-based diagnostic tools are used in the 
majority of patients with suspected genetic disease, 
direct analysis of protein function, such as measurement 
of specific enzyme activity, can also be used to diagnose 
single-gene disorders. An example of this is the investi-
gation of myopathy thought to be due to defects in mito-
chondrial complex 1 proteins (Box 3.7). Complex 1 is 
made up of at least 36 nuclear-encoded and 7 mitochon-
drial DNA-encoded subunits, and mutations in any of 
these subunits can cause the disorder, which makes 
sequence analysis impractical as a first-line clinical test. 
Conversely, the biochemical measurement of respira-
tory chain complex I proteins can easily be analysed 
in muscle biopsies, and this can be diagnostic of a 
specific mitochondrial cytopathy (see Fig. 3.3, p. 45, and 
Box 3.1, p. 46).
Genetic testing in pregnancy and  
pre-implantation genetic testing
Genetic testing may be performed during pregnancy. 
Invasive tests, such as amniocentesis and chorionic 
increasingly this is being replaced by next-generation 
sequencing, which has higher throughput (Fig. 3.13B).
Assessing DNA copy number
For decades, metaphase chromosome analysis by light 
microscopy has been the mainstay of clinical cytogenetic 
analysis to detect gain or loss of whole chromosomes or 
large chromosomal segments (> 4 million bp); such 
anomalies are collectively known as aneuploidy. More 
recently, whole-genome microarrays have replaced 
chromosome analysis, allowing rapid and precise detec-
tion of segmental gain or loss of DNA throughout the 
genome (see Box 3.5, p. 56). Microarrays consist of dense 
grids of short sequences of DNA (probes) that are 
complementary to known sequences in the genome 
(Fig. 3.14B). Each probe is fixed at a known position on 
the array (often printed on to a specially coated glass 
slide). The patient’s fluorescently labelled DNA sample 
is hybridised to the array, and results for each probe are 
read by a laser scanner. This allows a copy number map 
of the patient’s DNA to be constructed and abnormali-
ties to be identified. Many clinically recognisable syn-
dromes are the result of aneuploidy. The specific 
phenotype associated with individual deletion syn-
dromes is the result of loss of one copy of several adja-
cent genes – a contiguous gene syndrome (see Box 3.5). 
Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH, Fig. 3.14A) can 
be used to confirm specific deletions or duplications on 
Disease
Investigation
Page reference
Sickle-cell disease
Haemoglobin electrophoresis
1032
Haemophilia
Clotting factor levels
1051
Hypogammaglobulinaemia
Immunoglobulin levels, complement levels
81
Phenylketonuria
Enzyme assays, amino acid levels
449
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Hormone levels, enzyme assays
782
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Radiology, renal biopsy
505
Mitochondrial myopathy
Muscle biopsy, enzyme assay
1229
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Radiology and calcium biochemistry
770
3.7  Examples of non-DNA-based investigations for common genetic diseases
Investigation of genetic disease
3
63
and for which useful medical interventions are avail­
able, it is clearly important to test a child. An example 
of this is neonatal testing for cystic fibrosis, when early 
therapy reduces disease progression (p. 680), or in mul-
tiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN 2B), when early 
thyroidectomy prevents medullary thyroid carcinoma 
(p. 755). However, testing a healthy child for an adult-
onset disorder where no benefit from early intervention 
exists should be avoided. Instead, the child should be 
left to make his or her own informed decision as an 
adult.
Identifying a disease gene in families
In families with a genetic disease for which the causa-
tive gene is unknown, single nucleotide polymor-
phisms (SNPs) can be used to track or ‘map’ disease 
genes using a technique called genome-wide linkage 
analysis. Microarray-based techniques allow more than 
500 000 SNPs to be typed in a single experiment, and 
by comparison of the segregation of patterns of contig-
uous SNPs (called haplotypes) in affected and unaf-
fected individuals, the ‘locus’ of DNA where the 
responsible gene resides can be identified. The confi-
dence of association (‘linkage’) with the disease in 
question is influenced by the number of subjects 
studied, the strength of the effect of the gene on the 
disease, and the closeness of the SNP to the gene in 
question. The confidence can be expressed as a LoD 
(logarithm of the odds) score, which is −log10 of the 
probability (p value) of linkage; by convention, a LoD 
score of more than 3 (p < 0.001) is taken to be statisti-
cally significant. Once a locus has been identified, more 
detailed mapping within the locus can be undertaken 
and the relevant mutation confirmed by sequencing the 
relevant gene. Over recent years, next-generation 
sequencing of every exon in the genome (exome 
sequencing) has been used as an alternative to linkage 
analysis in identifying disease-causing mutations in 
families. Typically affected individuals within the 
family are sequenced and the results compared with 
unaffected family members and controls from the 
general population. For a fully penetrant disorder, the 
disease-causing mutation will be present in affected 
individuals and not present in unaffected family 
members or unrelated controls.
•	 Advanced maternal age and a high-risk serum screening 
result
•	 A previous child with a detectable chromosome abnormality 
or a parent with a chromosome abnormality such as a 
balanced translocation
•	 A parent or child with a genetic disease for which testing is 
available
•	 Abnormal antenatal scan
3.8  Some indications for prenatal testing
‘Antenatal screening in the first and second trimesters identifies 
fetuses at risk of Down’s syndrome. Tests which currently have 
sensitivity > 60% and specificity > 95% include:
•	 First trimester (11–14 weeks): nuchal translucency; or 
nuchal translucency, human chorionic gonadotrophin  
(hCG) and pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A  
(PAPP-A)
•	 Second trimester (3–20 weeks): triple test (hCG, 
α-fetoprotein, unconjugated oestriol, uE3)
•	 Other combinations are available for use from 11 to  
20 weeks.’
For further information: 
 http://publications.nice.org/antenatal-care-cg62
3.10  Screening for Down’s syndrome
Test
Gestation
Comments
Ultrasound
1st trimester 
onwards
Increased nuchal 
translucency (an oedematous 
flap of skin at the base of 
the neck) for trisomies and 
Turner’s; all major 
abnormalities such as NTDs, 
congenital heart disease
Chorionic 
villus biopsy
From  
11 weeks
2% risk of miscarriage; used 
for early chromosomal, DNA 
and biochemical analysis; a 
specialised test
Amniocentesis
From  
14 weeks
< 1 % risk of miscarriage; 
used for chromosomal and 
some biochemical analysis, 
e.g. α-fetoprotein for NTD
Cordocentesis
From  
19 weeks
2–3% risk of miscarriage; a 
highly specialised test; used 
for chromosomal and DNA 
analysis
(NTD = neural tube defect)
3.9  Methods used in prenatal testing
villus sampling, are most often carried out to diagnose 
conditions that result in early infant death or severe dis-
ability. Such tests are only offered after careful explana-
tion of the risks involved. Many couples will use the 
result of such tests to decide about termination of preg-
nancy. Some indications for testing are listed in Box 3.8; 
the methods used are summarised in Boxes 3.9 and 3.10. 
Non-invasive ultrasound scanning is offered to all preg-
nant couples and is particularly important if there is a 
previous history of serious develop­mental abnormali-
ties. It is now possible to test single cells from a develop-
ing human embryo for the presence of deleterious 
mutations to select unaffected embryos as part of in vitro 
fertilisation procedures. As the range of tests for genetic 
diseases increases, demand for prenatal testing and pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis is likely to rise. There is 
considerable ethical debate about the types of disease for 
which such procedures are appropriate.
Genetic testing in children
Ethical issues often arise with regard to genetic testing 
of children. For conditions with onset during childhood 
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
64
Genetic investigation in populations
Genetic screening may be applied to whole populations. 
The criteria for the use of population screening are well 
established; they depend on the incidence of specific 
conditions in individual populations and on whether 
an intervention is available to ameliorate the effects of 
the disease. In the UK, examples include screening for 
phenylketonuria and cystic fibrosis in the newborn, and 
prenatal screening for neural tube defects and Down’s 
syndrome in pregnant women (see Box 3.10). Screening 
for carriers of haemoglobinopathies and Tay–Sachs 
disease is also carried out in some countries where the 
incidence of these conditions may be high enough to 
merit screening the entire population (p. 1031).
Predictive genetic testing
In the absence of symptoms or signs of disease in an 
individual at risk, a genetic test can be used to determine 
whether that individual carries the disease-causing 
mutation. This is known as pre-symptomatic or predic-
tive genetic testing. Predictive tests are usually carried 
out for adult-onset disorders such as familial cancer syn-
dromes and neurodegenerative disorders such as Hunt-
ington’s disease (Box 3.11), or when a positive result in 
children will affect screening and management, such as 
in familial polyposis coli (p. 911). However, many com-
plicated ethical issues arise with testing of children and 
such tests should only be carried out by clinicians expe-
rienced in their use.
Whilst a negative predictive test is clearly a favour-
able outcome for the individual concerned, a positive 
test may have significant negative consequences. These 
should have been explained fully in the counselling 
process (see below), and include employment discrimi-
nation and psychological effects. Providing this is done, 
current evidence suggests that serious psychological 
sequelae are uncommon.
genetics a fascinating clinical specialty but it does mean 
that it is difficult, if not impossible, for any individual 
clinician to memorise the features associated with all 
these disorders. It is therefore important to have an 
awareness of the existence of genetic diseases and some 
general rules or ‘triggers’ in mind. Although single-gene 
disorders can present at any age (Box 3.12) and affect 
any tissue or organ system, they share some general 
characteristics:
•	 positive family history
•	 early age of onset
•	 multisystem involvement
•	 no obvious non-genetic explanation.
It is important to recognise any unusual clinical pres-
entation and to consider genetic disease in the context 
of the clinical findings and the family history. Publicly 
accessible online catalogues of Mendelian diseases can 
be useful sources of potential diagnoses.
MAJOR CATEGORIES OF  
GENETIC DISEASE
It is clearly impossible to discuss all Mendelian disease 
in this chapter, as there are many thousands of single-
gene disorders. However, the major categories of genetic 
disease that are commonly encountered by clinical 
geneticists in adult practice are discussed below.
Inborn errors of metabolism
Inborn errors of metabolism (IEM) are caused by muta-
tions that disrupt the normal function of a biochemical 
pathway. A good example is the glycogen storage 
diseases (see Box 16.23, p. 450), which are caused by 
mutations in various genes involved in regulating 
glucose metabolism. Most IEM are due to autosomal or 
X-linked recessive loss-of-function mutations in genes 
encoding specific enzymes or enzymatic co-factors. 
Knowledge of the biochemical pathway involved means 
that specific blocks have predictable consequences, 
including deficiency of the end product and build-up of 
intermediary compounds. Many hundreds of different 
IEM have been identified and these disorders have con-
tributed a great deal to our understanding of human 
biochemistry. Most IEM are very rare and some are 
restricted to paediatric practice; however, a growing 
number may now present during adult life and some of 
these are discussed below.
Intoxicating IEM
A subgroup of IEM, termed ‘intoxicating IEM’, can 
present as a sudden deterioration in a previously well 
individual. Such deteriorations are usually precipitated 
•	 Currently, no medical benefit can be derived from knowing 
pre-symptomatic genetic status. In this situation, predictive 
testing is not offered to children but is available to capable 
adults
•	 Individuals have several reasonably spaced appointments 
with a genetic counsellor (or medical geneticist or specialist 
psychiatrist) prior to testing to ensure that the implications of 
testing are fully understood
•	 Fully informed patient consent is required prior to testing and 
individuals must be free to withdraw from testing at any time
•	 Follow-up support must be available and the result must not 
be disclosed to any other person without written consent of 
the tested individual
3.11  Predictive testing for Huntington’s disease
•	 Genetic disease: may present for the first time in elderly 
patients, e.g. Huntington’s disease.
•	 Family investigation: remains essential in the management 
of genetic disease presenting in old age and referral to 
clinical genetics services should be considered.
3.12  Genetic disease and counselling in old age
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN  
GENETIC DISEASE
There are many thousands of known single-gene dis-
eases. Individually these are rare, but collectively they 
are relatively common. This diversity makes clinical 
Major categories of genetic disease 
3
65
disorders cause an interesting group of syndromes and 
have specific features that are dealt with below.
Huntington’s disease
Huntington’s disease (HD) is the paradigm of triplet 
repeat disorders. This condition can present with a 
movement disorder, weight loss or psychiatric symp-
toms (depression, addiction, psychosis, dementia), or 
with a combination of all three. The disease is the result 
of a [CAG]n triplet repeat expansion mutation in the HD 
gene on chromosome 4. Since CAG is a codon for 
glutamine and this mutation is positioned in the ORF, 
this results in an expansion of a polyglutamine tract in 
the protein. The mutation probably leads to gain of func-
tion, as deletions of the gene do not cause HD. The 
function of the protein encoded by the HD gene is not 
fully understood, but expansion of the repeat to above 
the normal range of 3–35 results in neurological disease. 
In general, the severity of disease and age at onset are 
related to the repeat length. In HD, atrophy of the 
caudate nuclei and the putamen is obvious on magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, and in later stages 
cerebral atrophy is also apparent. There is currently no 
therapy that will alter the progression of the disease, 
which will often be the cause of the patient’s death. 
Within families there is a tendency for disease severity 
to increase and age at onset to fall due to further expan-
sion of the repeat, a phenomenon known as anticipation. 
The mutation is more likely to expand through the male 
germ line than through female meiosis.
Other triplet repeat disorders
Other progressive neurological disorders caused by 
triplet repeat expansion mutations in different genes 
include several forms of autosomal dominant spino­
cerebellar ataxias, dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atro­
phy (DRPLA), Machado–Joseph disease and Kennedy 
disease. These polyglutamine disorders all show intra­
cellular inclusions in affected cells. It is thought that this 
accumulation may, in itself, be deleterious and is the 
result of defective protein degradation. Myotonic dys-
trophy and Friedreich’s ataxia are also triplet repeat 
expansion disorders but the pathogenetic mechanism 
associated with these diseases is different, as these 
repeats do not lie within the coding regions of the 
affected genes.
Connective tissue disorders
Mutations in different types of collagen, fibrillin and 
elastin make up the majority of connective tissue disor-
ders. The clinical features of these disorders vary, 
depending on the structural function and tissue distri-
bution of the protein that is mutated. For example, auto-
somal dominant loss-of-function mutations in the gene 
encoding elastin cause either supravalvular aortic steno-
sis, cutis laxa or a combination of both conditions. The 
most commonly involved systems are:
•	 skin (increased or decreased elasticity, poor wound 
healing)
•	 eyes (myopia, lens dislocation)
•	 blood vessels (vascular fragility)
•	 bones (osteoporosis, skeletal dysplasia)
•	 joints (hypermobility, dislocation, arthropathy).
by physiological stress, such as infection, pregnancy, 
exercise or changes in diet. The intoxication is due to the 
build-up of intermediary, water-soluble compounds, 
which will vary according to the pathway involved. For 
example, in urea cycle disorders ammonia is the toxic 
substance, whereas in maple syrup urine disease it is 
branched-chain amino acids. The intoxication is often 
associated with derangement of the acid–base balance 
and, if not recognised and treated, will often proceed to 
multi-organ failure, coma and death. In the porphyrias 
(Box 16.32, p. 460), the intoxication is caused by a 
build-up in the metabolites involved in haem synthesis. 
The diagnosis of these disorders requires specialist bio-
chemical analysis of blood and/or urine. In some disor-
ders, treatment relies on removal of the toxic substance 
using haemodialysis or chemical conjugation, or preven-
tion of further accumulation by restricting intake of the 
precursors, such as total protein restriction in urea cycle 
disorders and avoidance of branched-chain amino-acid 
intake in maple syrup urine disease. In other disorders, 
such as the porphyrias, treatment is based on avoiding 
precipitating factors and supportive care (p. 460).
Mitochondrial disorders
Disorders of energy production are the most common 
type of IEM presenting in adult life, and some of these 
disorders have been mentioned in the section on mito-
chondrial function (see Fig. 3.3, p. 45, and Box 3.1, 
p. 46). The tissues that are most commonly affected in 
this group of disorders are those with the highest meta-
bolic energy requirements, such as muscle, heart, retina 
and brain. Therapy in this group of disorders is based 
on giving antioxidants and co-factors, such as vitamin C 
and ubiquinone, that can improve the function of the 
respiratory chain.
Storage disorders
Storage disorders involve enzyme deficiency in lyso-
somal degradation pathways. The clinical consequences 
depend on the specific enzyme involved. For example, 
Fabry disease, an X-linked recessive deficiency of 
α-galactosidase A, results in abdominal pain, episodic 
diarrhoea, renal failure and angiokeratoma. Niemann–
Pick disease type C is caused by autosomal recessive 
loss-of-function mutations in either the NPC1 or NPC2 
gene. These result in lysosomal cholesterol accumula-
tion, causing hepatosplenomegaly, dysphagia, loss of 
speech, very early dementia, spasticity and dystonia. An 
increasing number of storage disorders are treatable 
with enzyme replacement or substrate depletion thera-
pies, making awareness and diagnosis more important. 
More details of specific disorders are provided in 
Chapter 16 (Box 16.24, p. 451).
Neurological disorders
Progressive neurological deterioration is one of the most 
common presentations of adult genetic disease. These 
diseases are mostly autosomal dominant and can be 
grouped into specific neurological syndromes and early-
onset forms of well-known, non-Mendelian clinical 
entities. In the latter group, the best examples would 
be early-onset familial forms of dementia, Parkinson’s 
disease and motor neuron disease. The triplet repeat 
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
66
Learning disability, dysmorphism  
and malformations
Congenital global cognitive impairment (also called 
mental handicap or learning disability) affects about 3% 
of the population. It is commonly divided into broad 
categories of mild to moderate (IQ 50–70), moderate to 
severe (IQ 20–50), and severe to profound (IQ < 20). 
There are important ‘environmental’ causes of global 
cognitive impairment, including:
•	 teratogen exposure during pregnancy (alcohol, 
anticonvulsants)
•	 congenital infections (cytomegalovirus, rubella, 
toxoplasmosis, syphilis)
•	 the sequelae of prematurity (intraventricular 
haemorrhage)
•	 birth injury (hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy).
Genetic disorders contribute very significantly to the 
aetiology of global cognitive impairment. Given the 
complexity of brain development, it is not surprising 
that global cognitive impairment shows extreme locus 
heterogeneity. The three most important groups of dis-
order are reviewed below.
Chromosome disorders
Any significant gain or loss of autosomal chromosomal 
material (known as aneuploidy) usually results in learn-
ing disability and other phenotypic abnormalities (see 
Fig. 3.11, p. 57). Down’s syndrome is the most frequently 
found and best known of these disorders, and is caused 
by an increased dosage of genes on chromosome 21. 
Most cases of Down’s syndrome are due to a numerical 
chromosome abnormality with trisomy of chromosome 
21, e.g. 47,XX,+21 or 47,XY,+21. The clinical features are:
•	 globally delayed development
•	 characteristic facial appearance
•	 a significant risk of specific malformations 
(atrioventricular septal defect, duodenal atresia)
•	 a predisposition to several late-onset disorders, 
including hypothyroidism, acute leukaemias and 
Alzheimer’s disease.
Recent surveys have shown that DNA microarray 
analysis can identify causative structural chromosome 
abnormalities in 10–25% of cases of significant learning 
disability. These deletions and duplications are mostly 
de novo and unique. An interest group of recurrent dele-
tions and duplication caused by non-allelic homologous 
recombination events has been mentioned above. These 
result in specific microdeletion or microduplication syn-
dromes, such as:
•	 velocardiofacial syndrome due to deletion of 22q11.2 
(learning disability, malformations of the cardiac 
outflow tract, cleft palate, distinctive facial 
appearance and immune disorders)
•	 Williams’ syndrome due to deletion of 7q11.23 
(learning disability, supravalvular aortic stenosis 
and mild cutis laxa as a result of deletion of the 
elastin gene, distinctive facial appearance and 
over-friendly, chatty personality).
Dysmorphic syndromes
There are several thousand different dysmorphic syn-
dromes; all are rare but they are characterised by the 
occurrence of cognitive impairment, malformations and 
a distinctive facial appearance – or ‘gestalt’ – associated 
with various other clinical features. Making the correct 
diagnosis is important, as it has profound implications 
on immediate patient management, detection of future 
complications and assessment of recurrence risks in the 
family. Clinical examination remains the mainstay of 
diagnosis and the patient often needs to be evaluated by 
a clinician who specialises in the diagnosis of these syn-
dromes. The differential diagnosis in dysmorphic syn-
dromes is often very wide and this has resulted in 
computer-aided diagnosis becoming an established clin-
ical tool. Dysmorphology databases such as POSSUM 
and LMD have been established that are curated cata-
logues of the many thousands of known syndrome enti-
ties; they can be searched to identify possible explanations 
of unusual combinations of clinical features. The clinical 
diagnosis may then be confirmed by specific genetic 
investigations, as the genetic basis of a wide range of 
dysmorphic syndromes has been identified.
X-linked mental handicap
X-linked mental handicap (XLMH) accounts for approx-
imately 10% of cases of moderate to severe learning dis-
ability. There are over 100 genes on the X chromosome 
that can cause learning disability but the most common 
disorder is fragile X syndrome, characterised by a dis-
tinctive facial appearance, attention deficit, joint hyper-
mobility, macro-orchism (increased testicular size) and 
a non-staining gap on the X chromosome on chromo-
some analysis. Fragile X is caused by a triplet repeat 
expansion mutation but of a different type from the 
polyglutamine repeat disorders mentioned above. The 
repeat in fragile X syndrome is not in the coding region 
and is a [CGG]n expansion (see Box 3.4, p. 56). Methyla-
tion of the expanded repeat results in silencing of a 
specific gene called FMR1, which encodes an RNA-
binding protein.
De novo mutations
Next-generation sequencing technology has made pos-
sible trio-based, whole-exome sequencing, in which the 
affected individual and both of their parents are ana-
lysed. It has recently become clear that de novo muta-
tions in the coding regions of one of the many genes that 
are involved in normal brain development are collec-
tively responsible for severe intellectual disability in at 
least 25% of affected patients. Trio-exome sequencing is 
thus likely to become a first-line diagnostic test for such 
cases in the near future.
Familial cancer syndromes
Most cancers are not inherited but occur as the result of 
an accumulation of somatic mutations, as discussed pre-
viously in this chapter. However, it has been recognised 
for many decades that some families are prone to one or 
more specific types of cancer. Affected individuals tend 
to present with tumours at an early age and are more 
likely to have multiple primary foci of carcinogenesis.
Retinoblastoma
Patients with autosomal dominant familial retinoblast-
oma have an inherited mutation in one copy of the RB 
Genetic counselling
3
67
primarily with the effects of non-ionising radiation. The 
skin is particularly involved, and affected patients 
develop skin cancers with increased frequency.
GENETIC COUNSELLING
Genetic counselling provides information about the 
medical and family implications of a specific disease in 
a clear and non-directive manner. Such counselling aims 
to help individuals make informed decisions about plan-
ning a family, taking part in screening programmes and 
accepting prophylactic therapies. Genetic counselling 
may be provided by a medical geneticist, a specialist 
nurse, or a clinician with particular skills in this area, 
such as an obstetrician or paediatrician (Box 3.13). Per-
ception of genetic risks clearly depends on perceived 
hazard. For example, a 5% (or 1 : 20) risk of genetic 
disease may be perceived as low if the disease is treat-
able, but unacceptably high if not.
Specific problems encountered in genetic counselling 
include:
•	 accurate assessment of genetic risk
•	 identification of children at risk of genetic disorders
•	 the increase in genetic risks associated with 
consanguinity
•	 non-paternity as an incidental finding in DNA.
gene, which is a tumour suppressor. This strongly pre-
disposes individuals to the formation of retinoblastoma 
in one or both eyes. It is possible for more than one 
primary tumour to form in the same eye and for retino-
blastoma to occur in the pineal gland. From a clinical 
perspective, it is important to screen the eyes and pineal 
gland of such individuals regularly so that tumours can 
be treated early and sight preserved. This gene is widely 
expressed and it is not clear why the retina is the main 
site of oncogenesis in this syndrome. An increased inci-
dence of osteogenic sarcoma is also seen in affected 
individuals.
Familial adenomatous  
polyposis coli
Familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP) is an auto-
somal dominant condition due to inactivation mutations 
in the FAP tumour suppressor gene on 5q. The gene 
product is thought to modulate a specific signalling 
cascade (Wnt signalling) that regulates cell proliferation. 
Mutation carriers usually develop many thousands of 
intestinal polyps in their second and third decades and 
have a very high risk of malignant change in the colon. 
Prophylactic colectomy in the third decade is necessary 
in most cases. Regular screening for polyps in the upper 
gastrointestinal tract is also recommended.
Li–Fraumeni syndrome
Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the gene 
encoding p53 cause Li–Fraumeni syndrome. Families 
with this condition have a very significant increased 
predisposition to early-onset leukaemias, sarcomas, 
and breast and brain malignancies. Screening for pre-
symptomatic tumours in this condition is very difficult 
and of unproven benefit, as almost any tissue can be 
affected.
Hereditary non-polyposis 
colorectal cancer
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is 
an autosomal dominant disorder that presents with 
early-onset familial colon cancer, particularly affecting 
the proximal colon. Other cancers, such as endometrial 
cancer, are often observed in affected families. This dis-
order shows marked locus heterogeneity, as mutations 
can occur in several different genes encoding proteins 
involved in DNA mismatch repair.
Familial breast cancer
Familial breast cancer is an autosomal dominant disor-
der that is most often due to mutations in genes encod-
ing either BRCA1 or BRCA2. Both of these proteins are 
involved in DNA repair. Individuals who carry a BRCA1 
or BRCA2 mutation are at high risk of early-onset breast 
and ovarian tumours, and require regular screening for 
both of these conditions. Because of the very high risk 
of cancer, many women who carry these mutations elect 
to have prophylactic bilateral mastectomy and oophorec-
tomy in the absence of a detectable tumour.
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is the name given to a 
group of rare disorders in which there are autosomal 
recessive defects in DNA repair genes that deal 
Component
Role
Medical geneticist
Diagnosis and management of genetic 
disease, assessment of genetic risk, 
managing screening programmes, 
interpretation of genetic test results. 
Subspecialties include prenatal genetics, 
dysmorphology (syndrome identification), 
cancer genetics
Genetic counsellor
Assessing genetic risk, provision of 
genetic counselling (providing accurate 
risk information in a comprehensible 
format), predictive testing for genetic 
disease and provision of information and 
support
DNA diagnostic 
laboratory
Identifying and reporting disease-causing 
mutations in validated disease genes. 
Some laboratories also provide linkage 
analysis to track diseases in families. 
Laboratories often work in a consortium, 
as so many different disease genes have 
now been identified
Cytogenetics 
laboratory
Identifying pathogenic numerical and 
structural chromosome anomalies in 
prenatal, postnatal and oncology 
samples
Biochemical 
genetics 
laboratory
Metabolite and enzymatic-based 
diagnosis of IEM. Metabolite-based 
monitoring of treatment of IEM
Newborn 
screening 
laboratory
Provision of population-based newborn 
screening, e.g. PKU, cystic fibrosis, etc.
(IEM = inborn errors of metabolism; PKU = phenylketonuria)
3.13  Clinical genetics services
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
68
of the genetic aspects of common disorders are outlined 
below.
Measuring the genetic contribution to 
complex disease
Genetic contributions to complex disease can be detected 
and quantified by twin studies and/or by analysing 
familial clustering. Twin studies use the difference in 
disease concordance between monozygotic (MZ) and 
dizygotic (DZ) twins to calculate genetic contribution. 
MZ twins are genetically identical, whereas DZ twins, 
like all siblings, are identical for only about 50% of their 
genetic variation. However, both MZ and DZ twins 
share an almost identical intrauterine environment and 
similar postnatal environment. Thus, any evidence of 
a higher concordance of the disease in MZ compared 
to DZ twins is assumed to be evidence of genetic contri-
bution. Many common diseases and quantitative traits, 
such as height, weight, blood pressure and bone mineral 
density, show higher concordance rates in MZ twins 
compared to DZ twins. Genetic contributions to common 
diseases can also be assessed by studying the incidence 
of the disease in first-degree relatives of affected indi-
viduals, as compared with the general population 
(Fig. 3.15). The difference in incidence is used to calcu-
late a disease risk, which is measured by the λs value 
(Box 3.14).
Genetic tests are increasingly used for the diagnosis 
and prediction of Mendelian disease in a medical 
context, and such skills will become increasingly impor-
tant for many clinicians.
Genetic risk is often calculated using Bayes’ theorem 
(Box 1.6, p. 6), which takes prior risk into account to 
calculate future risk. A simple Bayesian calculation is 
illustrated here. Consider a woman who is at risk of 
being a carrier of an X-linked recessive disease. Her 
grandfather and brother are affected, which makes her 
mother an obligate gene carrier. Her risk of being a 
carrier is therefore 50%. However, she has two unaf-
fected sons. This information can be used to modify her 
risk. The prior probability that she is a carrier is 1 : 2 and 
that she is not a carrier also 1 : 2. The conditional prob-
ability that she would have two normal sons if she were 
a carrier is 1/2 × 1/2, i.e. 1/4. If she were not a carrier, 
the probability of having normal sons is 1. From this, the 
joint probability for each outcome can be calculated (the 
prior risk × the conditional risk): 1/2 × 1/4 (1/8) for 
being a carrier and 1/2 × 1 (1/2) for not being a carrier. 
The final risk, or relative probability, for each outcome 
can then be obtained by dividing the joint probability for 
that outcome by the sum of the joint probabilities. The 
probability that she is a carrier is therefore 1/8(1/8 + 
1/2) = 1/5 (20%).
GENETICS OF COMMON DISEASES
Many common disorders, such as diabetes, athero­
sclerosis, hypertension, cancer, osteoarthritis, inflamma-
tory bowel disease and osteoporosis, have an important 
genetic component but are not caused by a single muta-
tion. Techniques are now available both to measure the 
contribution and to identify genes with significant 
effects. This means that the result of genetic testing is 
beginning to have an impact on diagnosis, prognosis 
and therapy for common diseases, and this trend is 
likely to expand significantly in the years to come. Some 
of the most useful approaches to clinical interpretation 
Fig. 3.15  The spectrum of genetic disease: how the genotype influences the phenotype. A particular characteristic or disease in an individual 
may be due to a specific genetic abnormality (monogenic disease) or may reflect several predisposing genes (polygenic disease). In each case, 
environmental factors may further influence the phenotype; in their absence, genetic factors alone may be insufficient to allow the disease to develop, 
resulting in non-penetrance or reduced penetrance (see text). 
100%
Contribution
to phenotype
Environment
Other genes
Sporadic
0%
Genetic-
multifactorial
Specific gene
Genetic-
polygenic
Genetic-
monogenic
Types of disease
Penetrance
threshold
(disease
manifests)
Disease
λs
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
15
Systemic lupus erythematosus
10–20
Multiple sclerosis
20–40
Schizophrenia
10
Ischaemic heart disease
4–12
3.14  Risk to siblings of affected patients for 
common polygenic diseases
Research frontiers in molecular medicine 
3
69
patients who have increased sensitivity to the effects of 
azathioprine and who can be treated with lower doses 
than normal.
RESEARCH FRONTIERS IN  
MOLECULAR MEDICINE
Gene therapy
Replacing or repairing mutated genes (gene therapy) is 
very difficult in humans. Retroviral-mediated ex vivo 
replacement of the defective gene in bone marrow cells 
for the treatment of severe combined immune deficiency 
syndrome (p. 80) has been partially successful. There 
have been two major problems with the clinical trials of 
virally delivered gene therapy conducted to date:
•	 The random integration of the retroviral DNA 
(which contains the replacement gene) into the 
genome has caused leukaemia in some treated 
children via activation of proto-oncogenes.
•	 A severe immune response to the viral vector may 
be induced. It has not yet been possible to use 
non-viral means to introduce sufficient numbers of 
copies of replacement genes to produce significant 
biological effects.
Other therapies for genetic disease include PTC124, 
a compound that can ‘force’ cells to read through a 
mutation that results in a premature termination codon 
in an ORF with the aim of producing a near-normal 
protein product. This therapeutic approach could be 
applied to any genetic disease caused by nonsense 
mutations.
Induced pluripotent stem cells and 
regenerative medicine
Adult stem cell therapy has been in wide use for decades 
in the form of haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
The identification of adult stem cells for other tissues, 
coupled with the ability to purify and maintain such 
cells in vitro, now offers exciting therapeutic potential 
for other diseases. Many different adult cell types can be 
transdifferentiated to form cells termed induced pluri­
potent stem cells (iPS cells) with almost all the charac-
teristics of embryonic stem cells. In mammals, iPS cells 
can be used to regenerate various tissues such as the 
Genetic testing in complex disease
Most common diseases are determined by interactions 
between a number of genes and the environment. In this 
situation, the genetic contribution to disease is termed 
polygenic. Until recently, very little progress had been 
made in identifying the genetic variants that predispose 
to common diseases, but this has been changed by the 
advent of genome-wide association studies (GWAS). A 
GWAS typically involves genotyping many (> 500 000) 
genetic markers spread across the genome in a large 
group of individuals with the disease and controls. By 
comparing the genotypes in cases and controls, it is pos-
sible to identify regions of the genome and candidate 
genes that contribute to the disease under study. Some 
of the candidate genes for common diseases identified 
by this approach are listed in Box 3.15.
Pharmacogenomics
Pharmacogenomics is the science of dissecting the 
genetic determinants of drug kinetics and effects using 
information from the human genome. For more than 
50 years, it has been appreciated that polymorphic 
mutations within genes can affect individual responses 
to some drugs, such as loss-of-function mutations in 
CYP2D6 causing hypersensitivity to debrisoquine, an 
adrenergic-blocking medication formerly used for the 
treatment of hypertension, in 3% of the population. 
This gene is part of a large family of highly polymorphic 
genes encoding cytochrome P450 proteins, mostly 
expressed in the liver, which determine the metabolism 
of a host of specific drugs. Polymorphisms in the 
CYP2D6 gene also determine codeine activation, while 
those in the CYP2C9 gene affect warfarin inactivation. 
Polymorphisms in these and other drug metabolic 
genes determine the persistence of drugs and, therefore, 
should provide information about dosages and toxicity. 
At the present time, genetic testing for assessment 
of drug response is seldom used routinely, but in the 
future it may be possible to predict the best specific 
drugs and dosages for individual patients based on 
genetic profiling: so-called ‘personalised medicine’. An 
example is the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase 
(TPMT), which catabolises azathioprine, a drug that is 
used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases and in 
cancer chemotherapy. Genetic screening for polymor-
phic variants of TPMT can be useful in identifying 
Disease
Inheritance
No. of loci
Pathways
Colorectal cancer
Polygenic
20
DNA repair enzymes, growth factor signalling pathways, Wnt signalling
Osteoporosis
Polygenic
56
Cytokines, receptors and intracellular signalling molecules in RANK and Wnt 
pathways. Regulators of stem cell differentiation and bone mineralisation
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Polygenic
60
Cytokines, receptors and intracellular signalling pathways that regulate immune 
function; complement, intracellular nucleases
Gout
Polygenic
9
Renal solute transporters; regulators of glucose and insulin metabolism
(RANK = receptor activator of nuclear factor κ B)
3.15  Polymorphisms that predispose to common diseases
Molecular and genetic factors in disease
3
70
model of Marfan’s syndrome, showing promising effects 
in early human clinical trials.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Alberts B, Bray D, Hopkin K, et al. Essential cell biology. 
New York: Garland Science. 3rd edn; 2009.
Read A, Donnai D. New clinical genetics. 2nd edn. Banbury: 
Scion; 2010.
Strachan T, Read A. Human molecular genetics. 3rd edn. 
Wilmington: Wiley–Liss; 2003.
Websites
www.bshg.org.uk British Society for Human Genetics; has 
report on genetic testing of children.
www.ensembl.org Annotated genome databases from multiple 
organisms.
www.genome.ucsc.edu Excellent source of genomic information.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
(OMIM).
heart and brain. They have great potential both to 
develop tissue models of human disease and for regen-
erative medicine. In mammalian model species, such 
cells can be taken and used to regenerate differentiated 
tissue cells, such as in heart and brain.
Pathway medicine
The ability to manipulate pathways that have been 
altered in genetic disease has tremendous therapeutic 
potential for Mendelian disease, but a firm understand-
ing of both disease pathogenesis and drug action at a 
biochemical level is required. An exciting example of 
this has been the discovery that the vascular pathology 
associated with Marfan’s syndrome is due to the defec-
tive fibrillin molecules causing up-regulation of trans-
forming growth factor (TGF)-β signalling in the vessel 
wall. Losartan is an antihypertensive drug that is mar-
keted as an angiotensin II receptor antagonist. However, 
it also acts as a partial antagonist of TGF-β signalling 
and is effective in preventing aortic dilatation in a mouse 
71
4 
Functional anatomy and physiology of  
the immune system 72
The innate immune system 72
The adaptive immune system 76
Immune deficiency 78
Presenting problems in immune  
deficiency 79
Recurrent infections 79
Primary phagocyte deficiencies 79
Complement pathway deficiencies 79
Primary deficiencies of the adaptive immune 
system 80
Secondary immune deficiencies 82
Immunological factors 
in disease
Allergy 89
Pathology of allergy 89
Presenting problems in allergy 90
A general approach to the allergic patient 90
Anaphylaxis 91
Angioedema 93
Specific allergies 94
C1 inhibitor deficiency 94
Transplantation immunology 94
Transplant rejection 94
Complications of transplant 
immunosuppression 95
Organ donation 96
S.E. Marshall
The inflammatory response 82
Physiology and pathology of  
inflammation 82
Investigations in inflammation 83
Presenting problems in  
inflammation 85
Unexplained raised ESR 85
Periodic fever syndromes 85
Amyloidosis 86
Autoimmune disease 86
Pathophysiology of  
autoimmunity 86
Investigations in autoimmunity 88
Immunological factors in disease
4
72
immunoglobulin A (IgA) prevents bacteria and viruses 
attaching to and penetrating epithelial cells. As in the 
skin, lysozyme and antimicrobial peptides within 
mucosal membranes can directly kill invading patho­
gens, and additionally lactoferrin acts to starve invading 
bacteria of iron. Within the respiratory tract, cilia directly 
trap pathogens and contribute to removal of mucus, 
assisted by physical manœuvres, such as sneezing and 
coughing. In the gastrointestinal tract, hydrochloric acid 
and salivary amylase chemically destroy bacteria, while 
normal peristalsis and induced vomiting or diarrhoea 
assist clearance of invading organisms.
Endogenous commensal bacteria provide an addi­
tional constitutive defence against infection (p. 136). 
They compete with pathogenic microorganisms for 
space and nutrients, and produce fatty acids and bac­
tericidins that inhibit the growth of many pathogens. In 
addition, commensal bacteria help to shape the immune 
response by inducing specific regulatory T cells within 
the intestine (p. 78).
These constitutive barriers are highly effective, but if 
external defences are breached by a wound or patho­
genic organism, the specific soluble proteins and cells of 
the innate immune system are activated.
Phagocytes
Phagocytes (‘eating cells’) are specialised cells which 
ingest and kill microorganisms, scavenge cellular and 
infectious debris, and produce inflammatory molecules 
which regulate other components of the immune system. 
They include neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages, 
and are particularly important for defence against bacte­
rial and fungal infections.
Phagocytes express a wide range of surface receptors 
that allow them to identify microorganisms. These 
pattern recognition receptors include the Toll-like 
receptors, NOD (nucleotide-oligomerisation domain 
protein)-like receptors and mannose receptors. They rec­
ognise generic molecular motifs not present on mam­
malian cells, including bacterial cell wall components, 
bacterial DNA and viral double-stranded RNA. While 
phagocytes can recognise microorganisms through 
pattern recognition receptors alone, engulfment of 
microorganisms is greatly enhanced by opsonisation. 
Opsonins include acute phase proteins such as 
C-reactive protein (CRP), antibodies and complement. 
They bind both to the pathogen and to phagocyte recep­
tors, acting as a bridge between the two to facilitate 
phagocytosis (Fig. 4.1).
Neutrophils
Neutrophils, also known as polymorphonuclear leuco­
cytes, are derived from the bone marrow (Fig. 4.2). They 
are short-lived cells with a half-life of 6 hours in the 
blood stream, and are produced at the rate of approxi­
mately 1011 cells daily. Their functions are to kill micro­
organisms directly, facilitate the rapid transit of cells 
through tissues, and non-specifically amplify the immune 
response. This is mediated by enzymes contained in 
granules which also provide an intracellular milieu for 
the killing and degradation of microorganisms.
The two main types of granule are primary 
or azurophil granules, and the more numerous second­
ary or specific granules. Primary granules contain 
myeloperoxidase and other enzymes important for 
The immune system has evolved to protect the host from 
pathogens while minimising damage to self tissue. 
Despite the ancient observation that recovery from 
some diseases results in protection against that condi­
tion, the existence of the immune system as a functional 
entity was not recognised until the end of the 19th 
century. More recently, it has become clear that the 
immune system not only protects against infection, but 
also influences healing and governs the responses that 
can lead to autoimmune diseases. Dysfunction or defi­
ciency of the immune response leads to a wide variety 
of diseases, involving every organ system in the body.
The aim of this chapter is to provide a general under­
standing of immunology and how it contributes to 
human disease. A review of the key components of the 
immune response is followed by five sections that illus­
trate the clinical presentation of the most common forms 
of immune dysfunction. Clinical immunologists are 
usually involved in managing patients with allergy and 
immune deficiency. More detailed discussion of indi­
vidual conditions can be found in the relevant organ-
specific chapters of this book.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The immune system consists of an intricately linked 
network of cells, proteins and lymphoid organs that are 
strategically placed to ensure maximal protection against 
infection. Immune defences are normally categorised 
into the innate immune response, which provides imme­
diate protection against an invading pathogen, and the 
adaptive or acquired immune response, which takes 
more time to develop but confers exquisite specificity 
and long-lasting protection.
The innate immune system
Innate defences against infection include anatomical 
barriers, phagocytic cells, soluble molecules, such as 
complement and acute phase proteins, and natural killer 
cells. The innate immune system recognises generic 
microbial structures present on non-mammalian tissue 
and can be mobilised within minutes. A specific stimu­
lus will elicit essentially identical responses in different 
individuals (in contrast with antibody and T-cell 
responses, which vary greatly between individuals).
Constitutive barriers to infection
The tightly packed, highly keratinised cells of the skin 
constantly undergo renewal and replacement, which 
physically limits colonisation by microorganisms. 
Microbial growth is inhibited by physiological factors, 
such as low pH and low oxygen tension, and sebaceous 
glands secrete hydrophobic oils that further repel water 
and microorganisms. Sweat also contains lysozyme, an 
enzyme that destroys the structural integrity of bacterial 
cell walls; ammonia, which has antibacterial properties; 
and several antimicrobial peptides such as defensins. 
Similarly, the mucous membranes of the respiratory, 
gastrointestinal and genitourinary tract provide a con­
stitutive barrier to infection. Secreted mucus acts as 
a physical barrier to trap invading pathogens, and 
Functional anatomy and physiology of the immune system
4
73
protected compartment, killing of the organism occurs 
through a combination of oxidative and non-oxidative 
killing. Oxidative killing, also known as the respiratory 
burst, is mediated by the NADPH (nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate) oxidase enzyme com­
plex. This converts oxygen into reactive oxygen species 
such as hydrogen peroxide and superoxide that are 
lethal to microorganisms. When combined with myelo­
peroxidase, hypochlorous ions (HOCl−, analogous to 
bleach) are produced, which are highly effective oxi­
dants and antimicrobial agents. Non-oxidative (oxygen-
independent) killing occurs through the release of 
bactericidal enzymes into the phagolysosome. Each 
enzyme has a distinct antimicrobial spectrum, providing 
broad coverage against bacteria and fungi.
The process of phagocytosis depletes neutrophil gly­
cogen reserves and is followed by neutrophil cell death. 
As the cells die, their contents are released and lyso­
somal enzymes degrade collagen and other components 
intracellular killing and digestion of ingested microbes. 
Secondary granules are smaller and contain lysozyme, 
collagenase and lactoferrin, which can be released into 
the extracellular space. Granule staining becomes more 
intense in response to infection (‘toxic granulation’), 
reflecting increased enzyme production.
When tissues are changed or damaged, they trigger 
the local production of inflammatory molecules and 
cytokines. These stimulate the production and matura­
tion of neutrophils in the bone marrow, and their release 
into the circulation. The neutrophils are recruited to the 
inflamed site by chemotactic agents and by activation of 
local endothelium. Transit of neutrophils through the 
blood stream is responsible for the rise in leucocyte 
count that occurs in early infection. Once within infected 
tissue, activated neutrophils seek out and engulf invad­
ing microorganisms. These are initially enclosed within 
membrane-bound vesicles which fuse with cytoplasmic 
granules to form the phagolysosome. Within this 
Fig. 4.1  Opsonisation. Phagocytosis of microbial products may be augmented by several opsonins.  A C-reactive protein.  B Antibody.
 C Complement fragments. 
Bacteria
C-reactive
protein
Macrophage
Fc receptor
Macrophage
Bacteria
Macrophage
C3b
C3b
receptor
Antibody
A
B
C
Fig. 4.2  Neutrophil function and dysfunction (green boxes). 
Neutrophils mobilised from
bone marrow in response
to inflammation
Endothelial activation markers 
increased in response to 
inflammation. Neutrophils
adhere to blood vessels and
migrate into tissues
Engulfment of microorganisms followed
by oxidative and non-oxidative killing
Failure to express leucocyte 
adhesion markers gives rise to 
leucocyte adhesion deficiencies
Neutrophil
precursors
Stem
cells
Bone
marrow
Failure of oxidative killing causes chronic
granulomatous disease. Specific cytokine
and cytokine receptor deficiencies result in
susceptibility to mycobacterial infection
Exhausted neutrophils die at the site of
infection, with formation of pus
Immunological factors in disease
4
74
of the interstitium, causing liquefaction of closely adja­
cent tissue. The accumulation of dead and dying neu­
trophils results in the formation of pus, which, if 
extensive, may result in abscess formation.
Monocytes and macrophages
Monocytes are the precursors of tissue macrophages. 
They are produced in the bone marrow and constitute 
about 5% of leucocytes in the circulation. From the 
blood stream, they migrate to peripheral tissues, where 
they differentiate into tissue macrophages and reside for 
long periods. Specialised populations of tissue macro­
phages include Kupffer cells in the liver, alveolar 
macrophages in the lung, mesangial cells in the kidney, 
and microglial cells in the brain. Macrophages, like neu­
trophils, are capable of phagocytosis and killing of 
microorganisms but also play an important role in 
the amplification and regulation of the inflammatory 
response (Box 4.1). They are particularly important in 
tissue surveillance, monitoring their immediate sur­
roundings for signs of tissue damage or invading 
organisms.
Dendritic cells
Dendritic cells are specialised antigen-presenting cells 
which are prevalent in tissues in contact with the exter­
nal environment, such as the skin and mucosa. They can 
also be found in an immature state in the blood. They 
sample the environment for foreign particles, and once 
activated, carry microbial antigens to regional lymph 
nodes, where they interact with T cells and B cells to 
initiate and shape the adaptive immune response.
Cytokines
Cytokines are small soluble proteins that act as multi­
purpose chemical messengers. Examples are listed in 
Box 4.2. They are produced by cells involved in immune 
responses and by stromal tissue. More than 100 cytokines 
have been described, with overlapping, complex roles in 
intercellular communication. Their clinical importance 
is demonstrated by the efficacy of ‘biological’ therapies 
(often abbreviated to ‘biologics’) that target specific 
cytokines (pp. 1102 and 18).
Complement
The complement system is a group of more than 20 
tightly regulated, functionally linked proteins that act to 
promote inflammation and eliminate invading patho­
gens. Complement proteins are produced in the liver 
and are present in the circulation as inactive molecules. 
When triggered, they enzymatically activate other pro­
teins in a rapidly amplified biological cascade analogous 
to the coagulation cascade (p. 995).
There are three mechanisms by which the comple­
ment cascade may be triggered (Fig. 4.3):
Initiation and amplification of the inflammatory response
• Stimulation of the acute phase response
• Activation of vascular endothelium
• Stimulation of neutrophil maturation and chemotaxis
• Stimulation of monocyte chemotaxis
Killing of microorganisms
• Phagocytosis
• Microbial killing through oxidative and non-oxidative 
mechanisms
Clearance, resolution and repair
• Scavenging of necrotic and apoptotic cells
• Clearance of toxins and other inorganic debris
• Tissue remodelling (elastase, collagenase, matrix proteins)
• Down-regulation of inflammatory cytokines
• Wound healing and scar formation (interleukin (IL)-1, 
platelet-derived growth factor, fibroblast growth factor)
Link between innate and adaptive immune system
• Activation of T cells by presenting antigen in a recognisable 
form
• T cell-derived cytokines increase phagocytosis and 
microbicidal activity of macrophages
4.1  Functions of macrophages
Cytokine
Source
Actions
Interferon-alpha 
(IFN-α)
T cells and 
macrophages
Antiviral activity
Activates NK cells, 
CD8+ T cells and 
macrophages
Interferon-
gamma (IFN-γ)
T cells and NK 
cells
Increases antimicrobial 
and antitumour activity 
of macrophages
Regulates cytokine 
production by T cells 
and macrophages
Tumour necrosis 
factor alpha 
(TNF-α)
Macrophages 
and NK cells
Pro-inflammatory
Increases apoptosis 
and expression of 
cytokines and adhesion 
molecules
Directly cytotoxic
Interleukin-1 
(IL-1)
Macrophages 
and neutrophils
Acute phase reactant
Stimulates neutrophil 
recruitment, fever, 
T-cell and macrophage 
activation, and 
immunoglobulin 
production
Interleukin-2 
(IL-2)
T cells
Stimulates proliferation 
and differentiation of 
antigen-specific T 
lymphocytes
Interleukin-4 
(IL-4)
CD4+ T cells 
and mast cells
Stimulates maturation 
of B and T cells, and 
production of IgE 
antibody
Interleukin-6 
(IL-6)
Monocytes and 
macrophages
Acute phase reactant
Stimulates maturation 
of B cells into plasma 
cells
Interleukin-12 
(IL-12)
Monocytes and 
macrophages
Stimulates IFN-γ and 
TNF-α release by T 
cells, activates NK 
cells
(NK = natural killer)
4.2  Some roles for cytokines in regulating 
the immune response
Functional anatomy and physiology of the immune system
4
75
Mast cells and basophils
Mast cells and basophils are bone marrow-derived cells 
which play a central role in allergic disorders. Mast cells 
reside predominantly in tissues exposed to the external 
environment, such as the skin and gut, while basophils 
are located in the circulation and are recruited into 
tissues in response to inflammation. Both contain large 
cytoplasmic granules which contain preformed vaso­
active substances such as histamine (see Fig. 4.9, p. 89). 
Mast cells and basophils express IgE receptors on 
their cell surface (see Fig. 4.5). On encounter with spe­
cific antigen, the cell is triggered to release preformed 
mediators and synthesise additional mediators, includ­
ing leukotrienes, prostaglandins and cytokines. These 
trigger an inflammatory cascade which increases local 
blood flow and vascular permeability, stimulates smooth 
muscle contraction, and increases secretion at mucosal 
surfaces.
Natural killer cells
Natural killer (NK) cells are large granular lymphocytes 
which play a major role in defence against tumours 
and viruses. They exhibit features of both the adaptive 
and innate immune systems: they are morphologically 
similar to lymphocytes and recognise similar ligands, 
but they are not antigen-specific and cannot generate 
immunological memory.
NK cells express a variety of cell surface receptors. 
Some recognise stress signals, while others recognise the 
absence of human leucocyte antigen (HLA) molecules 
on cell surfaces (down-regulation of HLA molecules by 
viruses and tumour cells is an important mechanism 
by which they evade T lymphocytes). NK cells can also 
be activated by binding of antigen–antibody complexes 
to surface receptors. This physically links the NK cell 
to its target in a manner analogous to opsonisation, and 
is known as antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity 
(ADCC).
Activated NK cells can kill their targets in various 
ways. Pore-forming proteins, such as perforin, induce 
•	 The alternative pathway is triggered directly by 
binding of C3 to bacterial cell wall components, 
such as lipopolysaccharide of Gram-negative 
bacteria and teichoic acid of Gram-positive bacteria.
•	 The classical pathway is initiated when two or more 
IgM or IgG antibody molecules bind to antigen, 
forming immune complexes. The associated 
conformational change exposes binding sites on the 
antibodies for C1. C1 is a multiheaded molecule 
which can bind up to six antibody molecules. Once 
two or more ‘heads’ of a C1 molecule are bound to 
antibody, the classical cascade is triggered.
•	 The lectin pathway is activated by the direct binding 
of mannose-binding lectin to microbial cell surface 
carbohydrates. This mimics the binding of C1 to 
immune complexes and directly stimulates the 
classical pathway.
Activation of complement by any of these pathways 
results in activation of C3. This, in turn, activates the 
final common pathway, in which the complement pro­
teins C5–C9 assemble to form the membrane attack 
complex. This can puncture target cell walls, leading to 
osmotic cell lysis. This step is particularly important 
in the defence against encapsulated bacteria, such as 
Neisseria spp. and Haemophilus influenzae. Complement 
fragments generated by activation of the cascade can 
also act as opsonins, rendering microorganisms more 
susceptible to phagocytosis by macrophages and neu­
trophils (see Fig. 4.1). In addition, they are chemotactic 
agents, promoting leucocyte trafficking to sites of inflam­
mation. Some fragments act as anaphylotoxins, binding 
to complement receptors on mast cells and triggering 
release of histamine, which increases vascular permea­
bility. The products of complement activation also help 
to target immune complexes to antigen-presenting cells, 
providing a link between the innate and the acquired 
immune systems. Finally, activated complement prod­
ucts dissolve the immune complexes that triggered the 
cascade, minimising bystander damage to surrounding 
tissues.
Fig. 4.3  The complement pathway. The activation of C3 is central to complement activation. 
Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) pathway
Classical pathway
Alternative pathway
Direct cell lysis
Membrane attack
complex
C3
Final common pathway
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
Opsonisation
of pathogens
Solubilisation of
immune complexes
Activated complement fragments
act as pro-inflammatory mediators:
– increase in vascular permeability
– smooth muscle contraction
– chemotaxis
C4
C2
C1
Direct activation by
bacterial cell surface 
Antigen–antibody
immune complexes
Mannose-binding lectin binds
mannose on pathogen
surface
Immunological factors in disease
4
76
Streptococcus pneumoniae and H. influenzae infection (see 
Box 24.40, p. 1028).
Lymph nodes and mucosa-associated  
lymphoid tissue
Lymph nodes are positioned to maximise exposure to 
lymph draining from sites of external contact. Their 
structure is highly organised, as shown in Figure 4.4B.
More diffuse unencapsulated lymphoid cells and fol­
licles are also present on mucosal surfaces: for example, 
in Peyer’s patches in the small intestine.
direct cell lysis, while granzymes are proteolytic enzymes 
which stimulate apoptosis. In addition, NK cells produce 
a variety of cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α and interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which have direct anti­
viral and antitumour effects.
The adaptive immune system
If the innate immune system fails to provide effective 
protection against an invading pathogen, the adaptive 
immune system (Fig. 4.4) is mobilised. This has three 
key characteristics:
•	 It has exquisite specificity and is able to 
discriminate between very small differences in 
molecular structure.
•	 It is highly adaptive and can respond to an 
unlimited number of molecules.
•	 It possesses immunological memory, such that 
subsequent encounters with a particular antigen 
produce a more effective immune response than the 
first encounter.
There are two major arms of the adaptive immune 
response: humoral immunity involves antibodies pro­
duced by B lymphocytes; cellular immunity is mediated 
by T lymphocytes, which release cytokines and kill 
immune targets. These interact closely with each other 
and with the innate immune system, to maximise the 
effectiveness of the response.
Lymphoid organs
•	 Primary lymphoid organs. The primary lymphoid 
organs are involved in lymphocyte development. 
They include the bone marrow, where both T and B 
lymphocytes are derived from haematopoietic stem 
cells (p. 993) and where B lymphocytes also mature, 
and the thymus, where T lymphocytes mature.
•	 Secondary lymphoid organs. After maturation, 
lymphocytes migrate to the secondary lymphoid 
organs. These include the spleen, lymph nodes and 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. These organs 
trap and concentrate foreign substances, and are  
the major sites of interaction between naïve 
lymphocytes and microorganisms.
The thymus
The thymus is a bilobed structure organised into cortical 
and medullary areas. The cortex is densely populated 
with immature T cells, which migrate to the medulla to 
undergo selection and maturation. The thymus is most 
active in the fetal and neonatal period, and involutes 
after puberty. Failure of thymic development is associ­
ated with profound T-cell immune deficiency (p. 80), but 
surgical removal of the thymus in childhood (usually in 
the context of major cardiac surgery) is not associated 
with significant immune dysfunction.
The spleen
The spleen is the largest of the secondary lymphoid 
organs. It is highly effective at filtering blood and is an 
important site of phagocytosis of senescent erythrocytes, 
bacteria, immune complexes and other debris. It is also 
a major site of antibody synthesis. It is particularly 
important for defence against encapsulated bacteria, 
and asplenic individuals are at risk of overwhelming 
Fig. 4.4  Anatomy of the adaptive immune system.
 A Macroanatomy  B Anatomy of a lymph node. 
B
A
Adenoids
Lymph
nodes
Tonsils
Thymus
Thoracic
duct
Spleen
Peyer’s
patches
Bone marrow
Liver
Appendix
Germinal centre
Proliferating B cells after
antigen exposure
Afferent lymph
Paracortex
T cells
Dendritic cells
Cortex
B cells in primary
lymphoid follicles
Efferent lymph
Medulla
Plasma cells
Sinuses with
macrophages
Blood vessels
Capsule
Lymph node section
Lymphatics
Functional anatomy and physiology of the immune system
4
77
regions (Fab) of both heavy and light chains, while the 
consequences of antibody-binding are determined by 
the constant region of the heavy chain (Fc) (Box 4.3).
Antibodies can initiate a number of different actions. 
They facilitate phagocytosis by acting as opsonins (see 
Fig. 4.1), and can also facilitate cell killing by cytotoxic 
cells (ADCC, p. 75). Binding of antibodies to antigen can 
trigger activation of the classical complement pathway 
(see Fig. 4.3). In addition, antibodies may act directly to 
neutralise the biological activity of toxins. This is a par­
ticularly important feature of IgA antibodies, which act 
predominantly at mucosal surfaces.
The humoral immune response is characterised by 
immunological memory: that is, the antibody response 
to successive exposures to antigen is qualitatively and 
quantitatively different from that on first exposure. 
When a previously unstimulated (naïve) B lymphocyte 
is activated by antigen, the first antibody to be produced 
is IgM, which appears in the serum after 5–10 days. 
Depending on additional stimuli provided by T lym­
phocytes, other antibody classes (IgG, IgA and IgE) are 
produced 1–2 weeks later. If, some time later, a memory 
B cell is re-exposed to antigen, the lag time between 
antigen exposure and the production of antibody is 
decreased (to 2–3 days), the amount of antibody pro­
duced is increased, and the response is dominated by 
IgG antibodies of high affinity. Furthermore, in contrast 
Lymphatics
Lymphoid tissues are physically connected by a network 
of lymphatics, which has three major functions: it pro­
vides access to lymph nodes, returns interstitial fluid to 
the venous system, and transports fat from the small 
intestine to the blood stream (see Fig. 16.14, p. 452). The 
lymphatics begin as blind-ending capillaries, which 
come together to form lymphatic ducts. These enter and 
then leave regional lymph nodes as afferent and efferent 
ducts respectively. They eventually coalesce and drain 
into the thoracic duct and thence into the left subclavian 
vein. Lymphatics may be either deep or superficial, and, 
in general, follow the distribution of major blood vessels.
Humoral immunity
B lymphocytes
These specialised cells arise in the bone marrow. Mature 
B lymphocytes (also known as B cells) are found in bone 
marrow, lymphoid tissue, spleen and, to a lesser extent, 
the blood stream. They express a unique immunoglobu­
lin receptor on their cell surface (the B-cell receptor), 
which binds to soluble antigen. Encounters with antigen 
usually occur within lymph nodes, where, if provided 
with appropriate signals from nearby T lymphocytes, 
stimulated antigen-specific B cells respond by proliferat­
ing rapidly in a process known as clonal expansion. This 
is accompanied by a highly complex series of genetic re- 
arrangements, which generates B-cell populations that 
express receptors with greater affinity for antigen than 
the original. These cells differentiate into either long-
lived memory cells, which reside in the lymph nodes, or 
plasma cells, which produce antibody.
Immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulins (Ig) are soluble proteins made up of 
two heavy and two light chains (Fig. 4.5). The heavy 
chain determines the antibody class or isotype, i.e. IgG, 
IgA, IgM, IgE or IgD. Subclasses of IgG and IgA also 
occur. The antigen is recognised by the antigen-binding 
Fig. 4.5  The structure of an immunoglobulin (antibody) molecule. 
Variable
region (Fab)
Constant
region (Fc)
Light chain
Heavy chain
Antibody/properties
Concentration 
in adult serum
Complement 
activation*
Opsonisation
IgG
4 subclasses: IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4
Distributed equally between blood and extracellular fluid, and transported across 
placenta
IgG2 is the predominant antibody produced against polysaccharides
8.0–16.0 g/L
lgG1 +++
lgG2 +
lgG3 +++
IgG1 ++
IgG3 ++
IgA
2 subclasses: IgA1, IgA2
Highly effective at neutralising toxins
Particularly important at mucosal surfaces
1.5–4.0 g/L
−
−
IgM
Highly effective at agglutinating pathogens
0.5–2.0 g/L
++++
−
IgE
Mostly bound to mast cells, basophils and eosinophils
Important in allergic disease and defence against parasite infection
0.003–0.04 g/L
−
−
IgD
Function unknown
Not detected
−
−
*Refers to activation of the classical complement pathway, also called ‘complement fixation’.
4.3  Classes and properties of antibody
Immunological factors in disease
4
78
antigenic peptides in association with HLA class I mol­
ecules (HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C). They kill infected cells 
directly through the production of pore-forming mol­
ecules such as perforin, or by triggering apoptosis of the 
target cell, and are particularly important in defence 
against viral infection. CD4+ T cells recognise peptides 
presented on HLA class II molecules (HLA-DR, HLA-DP 
and HLA-DQ) and have mainly immunoregulatory 
functions. They produce cytokines and provide 
co-stimulatory signals that support the activation of 
CD8+ T lymphocytes and assist the production of mature 
antibody by B cells. In addition, their close interaction 
with phagocytes determines cytokine production by 
both cell types.
CD4+ lymphocytes can be further subdivided into 
subsets on the basis of the cytokines they produce:
•	 Typically, Th1 cells produce IL-2, IFN-γ and TNF-α, 
and support the development of delayed type 
hypersensitivity responses (p. 87).
•	 Th2 cells typically secrete IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10, and 
promote allergic responses (p. 89).
•	 A further subset of specialised CD4+ lymphocytes 
known as regulatory cells are important in immune 
regulation of other cells and the prevention of 
autoimmune disease.
IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
The consequences of deficiencies of the immune system 
include recurrent infections, autoimmunity and suscep­
tibility to malignancy. Immune deficiency may arise 
through intrinsic defects in immune function, but is 
much more commonly due to secondary causes, includ­
ing infection, drug therapy, malignancy and ageing. 
This chapter gives an overview of the rare primary 
immune deficiencies. More than a hundred genetically 
determined deficiencies have been described, most of 
which present in childhood or adolescence. The clinical 
manifestations are dictated by the component of 
the immune system involved (Box 4.4), but there is 
considerable overlap and redundancy in the immune 
to the initial antibody response, secondary antibody 
responses do not require additional input from T lym­
phocytes. This allows the rapid generation of highly 
specific responses on pathogen re-exposure.
Cellular immunity
T lymphocytes (also known as T cells) mediate cellular 
immunity and are important for defence against viruses, 
fungi and intracellular bacteria. They also play an 
important immunoregulatory role, orchestrating and 
regulating the responses of other components of the 
immune system. T-lymphocyte precursors arise in bone 
marrow and are exported to the thymus while still 
immature (see Fig. 4.6 below). Within the thymus, each 
cell expresses a T-cell receptor with a unique specificity. 
These cells undergo a process of stringent selection to 
ensure that autoreactive T cells are deleted. Mature T 
lymphocytes leave the thymus and expand to populate 
other organs of the immune system. It has been esti­
mated that an individual possesses 107–109 T-cell clones, 
each with a unique T-cell receptor, ensuring at least 
partial coverage for any antigen encountered.
T cells respond to protein antigens, but they cannot 
recognise these in their native form. Instead, intact 
protein must be processed into component peptides 
which bind to a structural framework on the cell surface 
known as HLA (human leucocyte antigen). This process 
is known as antigen processing and presentation, and it 
is the peptide/HLA complex which is recognised by 
individual T cells. While all nucleated cells have the 
capacity to process and present antigens, specialised 
antigen-presenting cells include dendritic cells, macro­
phages and B lymphocytes. HLA molecules exhibit 
extreme polymorphism; as each HLA molecule has the 
capacity to present a subtly different peptide repertoire 
to T lymphocytes, this ensures enormous diversity in 
recognition of antigens within the population.
T lymphocytes can be segregated into two subgroups 
on the basis of function and recognition of HLA mol­
ecules. These are designated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, 
according to the ‘cluster of differentiation’ (CD) antigen 
expressed on their cell surface. CD8+ T cells recognise 
Phagocyte deficiency
Complement deficiency
T-lymphocyte deficiency
Antibody deficiency
Bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Serratia marcescens
Burkholderia cenocepacia
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Atypical mycobacteria
Neisseria meningitidis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Haemophilus influenzae
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Atypical mycobacteria
Haemophilus influenzae
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Fungi
Candida spp.
Aspergillus spp.
Candida spp.
Aspergillus spp.
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Viruses
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
Enteroviruses
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
Herpes zoster
Protozoa
Toxoplasma gondii
Cryptosporidia
Giardia lamblia
4.4  Immune deficiencies and common patterns of infection
Immune deficiency
4
79
leucocytes results in their inability to exit the blood 
stream. They are characterised by recurrent bacterial 
infections with high blood neutrophil counts but sites 
of infection lack pus or other evidence of neutrophil 
infiltration.
Chronic granulomatous disease
This is caused by mutations in the genes encoding 
the NADPH oxidase enzymes, which results in failure 
of oxidative killing. The defect leads to susceptibility 
to catalase-positive organisms, such as Staphylococcus 
aureus, Burkholderia cenocepacia and Aspergillus. Intracel­
lular killing of mycobacteria is also impaired. Infections 
most commonly involve the lungs, lymph nodes, soft 
tissues, bone, skin and urinary tract, and are character­
ised histologically by granuloma formation.
Defects in cytokines and  
cytokine receptors
Defects of cytokines such as IFN-γ, IL-12 or their 
receptors 
also 
result 
in 
failure 
of 
intracellular 
killing, with particular susceptibility to mycobacterial 
infections.
Complement pathway deficiencies
Genetic deficiencies of almost all the complement 
pathway proteins (see Fig. 4.3, p. 75) have been described. 
Many present with recurrent infection with encapsu­
lated bacteria, particularly Neisseria species, reflecting 
the importance of the membrane attack complex in 
defence against these bacteria. In addition, genetic defi­
ciencies of the classical complement pathway (C1, C2 
and C4) are associated with a high prevalence of auto­
immune disease, particularly systemic lupus erythema­
tosus (SLE, p. 1109).
In contrast to other complement deficiencies, 
mannose-binding lectin deficiency is very common 
(5% of the northern European population). Complete 
deficiency may predispose to bacterial infections in 
the presence of an additional cause of immune com­
promise, such as premature birth or chemotherapy, 
but is otherwise well tolerated. Deficiency of the 
complement regulatory protein Cl inhibitor is not asso­
ciated with recurrent infections but causes recurrent 
angioedema  (p. 93).
Investigations and management
Complement C3 and C4 are the only complement com­
ponents that are routinely measured. Screening for com­
plement deficiencies is performed using more specialised 
functional tests of complement-mediated haemolysis, 
known as CH50 and AP50 (classical haemolytic pathway 
50 and alternative pathway 50). If abnormal, these 
haemolytic tests should be followed by measurement of 
individual complement components.
There is no definitive treatment for complement defi­
ciencies. Patients should be vaccinated with meningo­
coccal, pneumococcal and H. influenzae B vaccines in 
order to boost their adaptive immune responses. Life-
long prophylactic penicillin to prevent meningococcal 
infection is recommended. At-risk family members 
should also be screened.
network so some diseases do not fall easily into this 
classification.
Presenting problems in  
immune deficiency
Recurrent infections
Most patients with an immune deficiency present with 
recurrent infections. While there is no accepted defini­
tion of ‘too many’ infections, features that may indicate 
immune deficiency are shown in Box 4.5. Frequent, 
severe infections or infections caused by unusual organ­
isms or at unusual sites are the most useful indicator.
Baseline investigations include full blood count with 
white cell differential, acute phase reactants (CRP, see 
below), renal and liver function tests, urine dipstick, 
serum immunoglobulins with protein electrophoresis, 
and total IgE level. Additional microbiological, virologi­
cal and radiological tests may be appropriate. At this 
stage, it may be clear which category of immune defi­
ciency should be considered, and specific investigation 
can be undertaken, as described below.
If an immune deficiency is suspected but has not yet 
been formally characterised, patients should not receive 
live vaccines because of the risk of vaccine-induced 
disease. Discussion with specialists will help determine 
whether additional preventative measures, such as pro­
phylactic antibiotics, are indicated.
Primary phagocyte deficiencies
Primary phagocyte deficiencies (see Fig. 4.2, p. 73) 
usually present with recurrent bacterial and fungal 
infections which may affect unusual sites. Aggressive 
management of existing infections, including intra­
venous antibiotics and surgical drainage of abscesses, 
and long-term prophylaxis with antibacterial and anti­
fungal agents, is required. Specific treatment depends 
upon the nature of the defect; haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation may be considered (p. 1017).
Leucocyte adhesion deficiencies
These are rare disorders of phagocyte migration, when 
failure to express adhesion molecules on the surface of 
*Developed by the Jeffrey Modell Foundation (www.info4pi.org/).
The presence of ≥ 2 warning signs may indicate an underlying 
primary immunodeficiency:
• ≥ 4 new ear infections within 1 yr
• ≥ 2 serious sinus infections within 1 yr
• ≥ 2 mths on antibiotics with little effect
• ≥ 2 pneumonias within 1 yr
• Failure of an infant to gain weight or grow normally
• Recurrent, deep skin or organ abscesses
• Persistent thrush in mouth or fungal infection on skin
• Need for intravenous antibiotics to clear infections
• ≥ 2 deep-seated infections, including septicaemia
• A family history of primary immune deficiency
4.5  Warning signs of primary 
immune deficiency*
Immunological factors in disease
4
80
Investigations and management
The principal tests for T-lymphocyte deficiencies are a 
total blood lymphocyte count and quantitation of lym­
phocyte subpopulations by flow cytometry. Serum 
immunoglobulins should also be measured. Second-
line, functional tests of T-cell activation and proliferation 
may be indicated. Patients in whom T-lymphocyte defi­
ciencies are suspected should be tested for human 
immunodeficiency (HIV) infection (p. 392).
Anti-Pneumocystis and antifungal prophylaxis, and 
aggressive management of infections, are required. 
Immunoglobulin replacement may be indicated if anti­
body production is impaired. Haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT, p. 1017) may be appropriate.
Combined B- and T-lymphocyte 
immune deficiencies
Severe combined immune deficiency (SCID) is caused 
by defects in lymphoid precursors and results in com­
bined failure of B- and T-cell maturation. The absence of 
an effective adaptive immune response causes recurrent 
bacterial, fungal and viral infections soon after birth. 
HSCT (p. 1017) is the only current treatment, although 
gene therapy is under investigation.
Primary antibody deficiencies
Primary antibody deficiencies (Fig. 4.7) are characterised 
by recurrent bacterial infections, particularly of the res­
piratory and gastrointestinal tract. The most common 
causative organisms are encapsulated bacteria, such as 
Strep. pneumoniae and H. influenzae. These disorders may 
present in infancy, when the protective benefit of trans­
ferred maternal immunoglobulin has waned. However, 
three forms of primary antibody deficiency can also 
present in adulthood:
Primary deficiencies of the  
adaptive immune system
Primary T-lymphocyte deficiencies
These are characterised by recurrent viral, protozoal and 
fungal infections (see Box 4.4). In addition, many T-cell 
deficiencies are associated with defective antibody 
production because of the importance of T cells in 
regulating B cells. These disorders generally present 
in childhood and are illustrated in Figure 4.6.
DiGeorge syndrome
This results from failure of development of the 3rd/4th 
pharyngeal pouch, usually caused by a deletion of 
22q11. It is associated with multiple abnormalities, 
including congenital heart disease, hypocalcaemia, 
tracheo-oesophageal fistulae, cleft lip and palate, and 
absent thymic development. The immune deficiency is 
characterised by very low numbers of circulating T cells, 
despite normal development in the bone marrow.
Bare lymphocyte syndromes
These are caused by absent expression of HLA mol­
ecules within the thymus. If HLA class I molecules are 
affected, CD8+ lymphocytes fail to develop, while absent 
expression of HLA class II molecules affects CD4+ lym­
phocyte maturation. In addition to recurrent infections, 
failure to express HLA class I is associated with systemic 
vasculitis caused by uncontrolled activation of NK cells.
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
This is caused by failure of normal lymphocyte apopto­
sis (p. 50), leading to non-malignant accumulation of 
autoreactive cells. This results in lymphadenopathy, 
splenomegaly and a variety of autoimmune diseases.
Fig. 4.6  T-lymphocyte function and dysfunction (green boxes). 
Failure of lymphocyte
precursors:
Severe combined
immune deficiency
Stem
cells
Lymphoid progenitors
Bone
marrow
Failure of expression
of HLA molecules:
Bare lymphocyte
syndromes
Failure of thymic
development:
DiGeorge syndrome
Proliferation and
maturation of thymocytes
Export of mature
T lymphocytes
to periphery
T-lymphocyte activation
and effector function
Apoptotic cell death
Failure of apoptosis:
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndromes
Thymus
Failure of cytokine production:
Cytokine deficiencies
Immune deficiency
4
81
There is overlap between specific antibody deficiency, 
IgA deficiency and CVID, and some patients may 
progress to a more global antibody deficiency over time.
Investigations
Investigations include serum immunoglobulins (Box 
4.6), with protein and urine electrophoresis to exclude 
secondary causes of hypogammaglobulinaemia, and B 
and T lymphocyte counts in blood by flow cytometry. 
Specific antibody responses to known pathogens can be 
assessed by measuring IgG antibodies against tetanus, 
H. influenzae and Strep. pneumoniae (most patients will 
have been exposed to these antigens through infection 
or immunisation). If specific antibody levels are low, 
immunisation with the appropriate killed vaccine 
should be followed by repeat antibody measurement 
6–8 weeks later; failure to mount a response indicates a 
defect in antibody production. These functional tests 
have superseded IgG subclass quantitation.
Management
With the exception of individuals with selective IgA 
deficiency, patients with antibody deficiencies require 
aggressive treatment of infections, and prophylactic 
antibiotics may be indicated. The mainstay of treatment 
is life-long immunoglobulin replacement therapy. This 
•	 Selective IgA deficiency is the most common primary 
immune deficiency, affecting 1 : 600 northern 
Europeans. In most patients, low (< 0.05 g/L) or 
undetectable IgA is an incidental finding with no 
clinical sequelae. However, 30% of individuals 
experience recurrent mild respiratory and 
gastrointestinal infections. In some patients, there is 
a compensatory increase in serum IgG levels. 
Specific treatment is generally not required.
•	 Common variable immune deficiency (CVID) is a 
heterogeneous primary immune deficiency of 
unknown cause. It is characterised by low serum 
IgG levels and failure to make antibody responses 
to exogenous pathogens. Paradoxically, antibody-
mediated autoimmune diseases, such as 
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, are common. 
CVID is also associated with an increased risk of 
malignancy, particularly lymphoproliferative 
disease.
•	 Specific antibody deficiency or functional IgG antibody 
deficiency is a poorly characterised condition 
which causes defective antibody responses to 
polysaccharide antigens. Some patients are deficient 
in antibody subclasses IgG2 and IgG4, and this 
condition was previously called IgG subclass 
deficiency.
Fig. 4.7  B lymphocytes and primary antibody deficiencies (green boxes). 
Failure of lymphocyte precursors:
Severe combined immune deficiency
Stem cells
Lymphoid
progenitors
Bone marrow
Failure of production of IgG antibodies:
Common variable immune deficiency
Specific antibody deficiency
IgM-producing
B cells
Failure of B-cell maturation:
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia
Immature
B cells
IgG
IgE
IgA
Plasma cells
Failure of IgA production:
Selective IgA deficiency
Failure of T-cell
co-stimulation:
Hyper-IgM syndrome
Serum immunoglobulin concentrations
Blood cell count
IgM
IgG
IgA
IgE
B cells
T cells
Test 
immunisation
Selective IgA 
deficiency
Normal
Often 
elevated
Absent
Normal
Normal
Normal
Common variable 
immune deficiency
Normal or 
low
Low
Low or 
absent
Low or 
absent
Variable
Variable
No antibody 
response
Specific antibody 
deficiency
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
No antibody 
response to 
polysaccharide 
antigens
4.6  Investigation of primary antibody deficiencies
Immunological factors in disease
4
82
is derived from pooled plasma (p. 1011) and contains 
IgG antibodies to a wide variety of common organisms. 
Immunoglobulin replacement may be administered 
either intravenously or subcutaneously, often by the 
patient, with the aim of maintaining trough IgG levels 
within the normal range. Immunisation is generally 
not effective because of the defect in IgG antibody pro­
duction. As with all primary immune deficiencies, live 
vaccines should be avoided (p. 148).
Secondary immune deficiencies
Secondary immune deficiencies are much more common 
than primary immune deficiencies (Box 4.7). Common 
causes include infections, such as HIV and measles, and 
cytotoxic and immunosuppressive drugs, particularly 
those used in the management of transplantation, 
autoimmunity and cancer. Physiological immune defi­
ciency occurs at the extremes of life; the decline of the 
immune response in the elderly is known as immune 
senescence (Box 4.8). Management of secondary immune 
deficiency is described in the relevant chapters on infec­
tious diseases (Ch. 13), HIV (Ch. 14), oncology (Ch. 11) 
and haematological disorders (Ch. 24).
THE INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE
Inflammation is the response of tissues to injury or infec­
tion, and is necessary for normal repair and healing. This 
section focuses on the generic inflammatory response 
and its multisystem manifestations. The role of inflam­
mation in specific diseases is illustrated in many other 
chapters of this book.
Physiology and pathology  
of inflammation
Acute inflammation
Acute inflammation is the result of rapid and complex 
interplay between the cells and soluble molecules of the 
innate immune system. The classical external signs 
include heat, redness, pain and swelling (calor, rubor, 
dolor and oedema, Fig. 4.8).
The inflammatory process is initiated by local tissue 
injury or infection. Damaged epithelial cells produce 
cytokines and antimicrobial peptides, causing early infil­
tration of phagocytic cells. As a result, there is produc­
tion of leukotrienes, prostaglandins, histamine, kinins, 
anaphylotoxins and inducible nitric oxide synthase 
within inflamed tissue. The effect is vasodilatation and 
increased local vascular permeability, which increases 
trafficking of fluid and cells to the affected tissue. In 
addition, pro-inflammatory cytokines produced at the 
site of injury have profound systemic effects. IL-1, 
TNF-α and IL-6 act on the hypothalamus to raise the 
temperature set-point, causing fever, and also stimulate 
the production of acute phase proteins.
Acute phase proteins
Acute phase proteins are produced by the liver in 
response to inflammatory stimuli and have a wide range 
of activities. CRP and serum amyloid A may be increased 
1000-fold, contributing to host defence and stimulating 
repair and regeneration. Fibrinogen plays an essential 
role in wound healing, and α1-antitrypsin and α1-
antichymotrypsin control the pro-inflammatory cascade 
by neutralising the enzymes produced by activated neu­
trophils, preventing widespread tissue destruction. In 
addition, antioxidants, such as haptoglobin and manga­
nese superoxide dismutase, scavenge for oxygen free 
radicals, while increased levels of iron-binding proteins, 
such as ferritin and lactoferrin, decrease the iron avail­
able for uptake by bacteria (p. 1023). Immunoglobulins 
are not acute phase proteins but are often increased in 
chronic inflammation.
Resolution of inflammation
Resolution of an inflammatory response is crucial for 
normal healing. This involves active down-modulation 
Physiological
• Ageing
• Prematurity
• Pregnancy
Infection
• HIV
• Measles
• Mycobacterial infection
Iatrogenic
• Immunosuppressive 
therapy
• Antineoplastic agents
• Corticosteroids
• Stem cell transplantation
• Radiation injury
• Some anti-epileptic agents
Malignancy
• B-cell malignancies 
including leukaemia, 
lymphoma and myeloma
• Solid tumours
• Thymoma
Biochemical and nutritional disorders
• Malnutrition
• Renal insufficiency/dialysis
• Diabetes mellitus
• Specific mineral 
deficiencies, e.g. iron, zinc
Other conditions
• Burns
• Asplenia/hyposplenism
4.7  Causes of secondary immune deficiency
• T-cell responses: decline, with reduced delayed type 
hypersensitivity responses.
• Antibody production: decreased for many exogenous 
antigens. Although autoantibodies are frequently detected, 
autoimmune disease is less common.
• Response to vaccination: reduced, e.g. 30% of healthy 
older people may not develop protective immunity after 
influenza vaccination.
• Allergic disorders and transplant rejection: less common.
• Susceptibility to infection: increased, e.g. community-
acquired pneumonia by threefold and urinary tract infection 
by 20-fold. Latent infections, including tuberculosis and 
herpes zoster, may be reactivated.
• Manifestations of inflammation: may be absent, e.g. lack 
of pyrexia or leucocytosis.
4.8  Ageing and immune senescence
The inflammatory response
4
83
Fig. 4.8  Clinical features of acute inflammation. In this example, the response is to a penetrating injury and infection of the foot. 
Flushing
Hypothalamus:
Change in temperature set point
Fever
Sweating
Neuro-endocrine and autonomic stress responses
Headache
Confusion
Anorexia
↑ Respiratory rate
↑ Heart rate, flow murmur
Low blood pressure
Adrenal release of glucocorticoids
and catecholamines
Release of insulin
from pancreas
Bone marrow:
↑ Production and mobilisation
 of neutrophils
Liver:
 ↑ Synthesis of acute
phase proteins
Enlarged draining
lymph nodes
Ascending
lymphangitis
Local cellulitis
Pain
Redness
Swelling
Nail
Skin rupture
Bacteria
Tissue damage
Inflammatory mediators
and cytokines
Phagocytosis
Cytokine production
Vasodilatation
↑ Local vascular
 permeability
↑ Leucocyte influx
Neutrophils
Macrophages
Vasodilatation
↑ Local vascular
permeability
Local infection
+
of inflammatory stimuli and repair of bystander damage 
to local tissues. Extravasated neutrophils undergo apop­
tosis and are phagocytosed by macrophages, along 
with the remains of microorganisms. Macrophages also 
synthesise collagenase and elastase, which break down 
local connective tissue and remove debris. Macrophage-
derived cytokines, including transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-β and platelet-derived growth factor, attract 
fibroblasts and promote synthesis of new collagen, while 
angiogenic factors stimulate new vessel formation.
Sepsis and septic shock
Septic shock is the clinical manifestation of overwhelm­
ing inflammation (p. 190). Failure of normal inhibitory 
mechanisms results in excessive production of pro-
inflammatory cytokines by macrophages, causing hypo­
tension, hypovolaemia, decreased perfusion and tissue 
oedema. In addition, uncontrolled neutrophil activation 
causes release of proteases and oxygen free radicals 
within blood vessels, damaging the vascular endothe­
lium and further increasing capillary permeability. 
Direct activation of the coagulation pathway combines 
with endothelial cell disruption to form clots within 
the damaged vessels. The clinical consequences include 
cardiovascular collapse, acute respiratory distress syn­
drome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, multi-
organ failure and often death. Septic shock most 
frequently results from infection with Gram-negative 
bacteria, because lipopolysaccharide is particularly 
effective at activating the inflammatory cascade.
Chronic inflammation
In most instances, the development of an active immune 
response results in either clearance or control of the 
inflammatory stimulus with minimal local damage. 
Failure of elimination may result in chronic inflamma­
tion. Persisting microorganisms stimulate the ongoing 
accumulation of neutrophils, macrophages and acti­
vated T lymphocytes. If this is associated with local 
deposition of fibrous connective tissue, a granuloma 
may form. Granulomas are characteristic of infections 
such as tuberculosis and leprosy, in which the micro­
organism is protected by a robust cell wall which shields 
it from killing, despite phagocytosis.
Too vigorous or prolonged immune responses may 
cause bystander tissue damage, known as hypersensitiv­
ity responses. The Gell and Coombs classification of 
hypersensitivity disorders is discussed on page 87.
Investigations in inflammation
Changes associated with inflammation are reflected in 
many laboratory investigations. Leucocytosis is common, 
Immunological factors in disease
4
84
circulating erythrocytes. These factors govern the pro­
pensity of red cells to aggregate, which is the major 
determinant of the ESR. Erythrocytes are inherently 
negatively charged, and this prevents them clumping 
together in the blood stream. Plasma proteins are 
positively charged and an increase in plasma proteins 
neutralises the surface charge of erythrocytes, overcom­
ing their inherent repulsive forces and causing them 
to aggregate, or stack like tyres, forming rouleaux. 
Rouleaux have a higher mass/surface area ratio than 
single red cells, and therefore sediment faster.
The most common cause of an increased ESR is an 
acute phase response, which leads to an increase in the 
concentration of acute phase reactants, including CRP. 
However, other conditions that do not affect acute 
phase proteins may alter the composition and concentra­
tion of other plasma proteins (see Box 4.9). For example, 
immunoglobulins comprise a significant proportion of 
plasma proteins, but do not participate in the acute 
phase response. Thus, any condition that causes a mono­
clonal or polyclonal increase in serum immunoglobulins 
will increase the ESR without a corresponding rise in 
CRP. In addition, changes in erythrocyte surface area 
and density influence sedimentation, and abnormal red 
cell morphology can make rouleaux formation impos­
sible. For these reasons, an inappropriately low ESR 
occurs in spherocytosis and sickle cell anaemia.
As CRP is a simple and sensitive early indicator of 
the acute phase response, it is increasingly used in pref­
erence to the ESR. If both ESR and CRP are used, any 
discrepancy should be resolved by assessing the indi­
vidual determinants of the ESR, i.e. full blood count and 
blood film, serum immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA and IgM) 
and protein electrophoresis. The IgE concentration in 
and reflects the transit of activated neutrophils and 
monocytes to the site of infection. The platelet count may 
also be increased. The most widely used laboratory 
measure of acute inflammation is the C-reactive protein 
(see below). Plasma levels of many other acute phase 
reactants, including fibrinogen, ferritin and complement 
components, are increased in response to acute inflam­
mation, while albumin levels are reduced. Chronic 
inflammation is frequently associated with a normocytic 
normochromic anaemia of chronic disease (p. 1023).
C-reactive protein
C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute phase reactant syn­
thesised by the liver, which opsonises invading patho­
gens. Levels of CRP increase within 6 hours of an 
inflammatory stimulus and may rise up to 1000-fold. 
Measurement of CRP provides a direct index of acute 
inflammation and, because the plasma half-life of CRP 
is 19 hours, levels fall promptly once the stimulus is 
removed. Sequential measurement is useful in monitor­
ing disease (Box 4.9). For reasons that remain unclear, 
some diseases are associated with only minor elevations 
of CRP, despite unequivocal evidence of active inflam­
mation. These include SLE, systemic sclerosis, ulcerative 
colitis and leukaemia. However, intercurrent infection 
does provoke a significant CRP response in these 
conditions.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
In contrast to the CRP, the erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR) is an indirect measure of inflammation. It 
measures how fast erythrocytes fall through anticoagu­
lated blood, and is determined by a combination of the 
composition of plasma proteins and the morphology of 
Condition
Consequence
Effect on CRP1
Effect on ESR2
Acute bacterial, fungal or 
viral infection
Acute phase response
Increased (range 50–150 mg/L;  
in severe infections may be  
> 300 mg/L)
Increased
Necrotising bacterial 
infection
Profound acute inflammatory 
response
Increased +++ (may be > 300 mg/L)
Increased
Acute inflammatory diseases, 
e.g. Crohn’s disease, 
polymyalgia rheumatica
Acute phase response
Increased (range 50–150 mg/L)
Increased
Chronic bacterial or fungal 
infection, e.g. localised 
abscess, bacterial endocarditis 
or tuberculosis
Acute and chronic inflammatory 
response: increased acute phase 
proteins with polyclonal increase 
in immunoglobulins
Increased (range 50–150 mg/L)
Increase disproportionate 
to CRP
SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome
Chronic inflammatory response 
with polyclonal increase in 
immunoglobulins
Normal (paradoxically)
Increased
Multiple myeloma
Monoclonal increase in 
immunoglobulin without acute 
inflammation
Normal
Increased
Pregnancy, old age, 
end-stage renal disease
Normal immunoglobulins but 
increased fibrinogen
Normal
Moderately increased
1Reference range < 10 mg/L.
2Reference range: adult males < 10 mm/hr, adult females < 20 mm/hr.
4.9  Conditions commonly associated with abnormal CRP and/or ESR
The inflammatory response
4
85
soft tissue or bone/joint infections. Echocardiography is 
used to look for vegetations and assess valve function in 
suspected bacterial endocarditis. White cell scans are 
rarely indicated but may be useful in identifying the site 
of pyogenic infection. An isotope bone scan may provide 
evidence of malignancy or focal bone infection.
Periodic fever syndromes
These rare disorders are characterised by recurrent epi­
sodes of fever and systemic inflammation, associated 
with an elevated acute phase response.
Familial Mediterranean fever
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common 
of the familial periodic fevers, predominantly affect­
ing Mediterranean people, including Arabs, Turks, 
Sephardic Jews and Armenians. It results from muta­
tions of the MEFV gene, which encodes a protein called 
pyrin. Pyrin regulates neutrophil-mediated inflamma­
tion by indirectly suppressing the production of IL-1. 
FMF is characterised by recurrent painful attacks of 
fever associated with peritonitis, pleuritis and arthritis, 
which last for a few hours to 4 days and which are asso­
ciated with markedly increased CRP levels. Symptoms 
resolve completely between episodes. The majority of 
individuals have their first attack before the age of 
20 years. The major complication of FMF is AA amy­
loidosis (see below). Colchicine significantly reduces the 
number of febrile episodes in 90% of patients but is inef­
fective during acute attacks.
Mevalonate kinase deficiency
Mevalonate kinase deficiency (previously known as 
hyper-IgD syndrome, or HIDS) is an autosomal reces­
sive disorder that causes recurrent attacks of fever, 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, lymphadenopathy, arthral­
gia, skin lesions and aphthous ulceration. Most patients 
are from Western Europe, particularly the Netherlands 
and northern France. Mevalonate kinase is involved in 
the metabolism of cholesterol, but why mutations in its 
gene cause an inflammatory periodic fever remains 
unknown. Serum IgD and IgA levels are persistently 
elevated, and CRP levels are increased during acute 
attacks. Standard anti-inflammatory drugs (including 
colchicine and steroids) are ineffective.
TNF receptor-associated  
periodic syndrome
TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS), 
also known as Hibernian fever, is an autosomal domi­
nant syndrome, causing recurrent periodic fever, arthral­
gia, myalgia, serositis and rashes, which has been 
reported in many ethnic groups. Attacks may be pro­
longed (lasting over 1 week). During a typical attack, 
there is neutrophilia, increased CRP and elevated IgA 
levels. The diagnosis can be confirmed by low serum 
levels of the soluble type 1 TNF receptor and by analysis 
of the TNFRSF1A gene. As in FMF, the major com­
plication is amyloidosis, and regular screening for 
proteinuria is advised. TRAPS responds to systemic 
corticosteroids and to biological therapies, including 
soluble TNF receptor therapy and IL-l receptor antago­
nists (p. 1102).
plasma is very low and does not contribute significantly 
to the ESR.
Plasma viscosity
Plasma viscosity is another surrogate measure of plasma 
protein concentration. Like the ESR, it is affected by 
the concentration of large plasma proteins, including 
fibrinogen and immunoglobulins. However, it is not 
affected by properties of erythrocytes and is generally 
considered to be more reliable than the ESR.
Presenting problems in inflammation
In most patients presenting with the manifestations of 
acute inflammation shown in Figure 4.8, it is possible 
to identify the source of the problem quickly and to 
assess the consequences, as discussed in other chapters. 
Systemic manifestations of inflammation include fever 
(p. 296), leucocytosis (p. 1005) and shock (p. 190).
Unexplained raised ESR
The ESR should not be used to screen asymptomatic 
patients for the presence of disease. However, in the era 
of frequent routine laboratory testing, an unexplained 
raised ESR is a common problem.
Clinical assessment
A comprehensive history and examination are crucial. 
Extreme elevations in the ESR (> 100 mm/hr) rarely 
occur in the absence of significant disease (see Box 4.9).
Investigations
Assessing the CRP, serum immunoglobulins and elec­
trophoresis, and urine electrophoresis will help deter­
mine whether the elevation in ESR is due to an 
inflammatory process (see Box 4.9).
A full blood count and film may show a normocytic, 
normochromic anaemia, which occurs in many chronic 
diseases. Leucocytosis may reflect infection, inflamma­
tory disease or tissue necrosis. Neutrophilia suggests 
infection or acute inflammation. Atypical lymphocytes 
may occur in some chronic infections, such as cytomega­
lovirus (CMV) and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV).
Abnormalities in liver function suggest either a local 
infective process (hepatitis, hepatic abscess or biliary 
sepsis) or systemic disease, including malignancy.
Blood and urine cultures should be performed. It 
may be relevant to measure antinuclear and antineu­
trophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and to exclude chronic 
infections, including HIV and syphilis.
In the unusual circumstances when ESR is elevated 
but both CRP and immunoglobulins are normal, fibrino­
gen should be measured. Elevated fibrinogen causes a 
higher ESR in older people, women, and patients with 
renal or heart failure, obesity and diabetes mellitus.
Imaging
If indicated by the clinical and laboratory features, a 
chest X-ray and abdominal computed tomography (CT) 
scan may identify a source of unknown infection or 
malignancy. An abdominal and pelvic ultrasound may 
identify hepatic lesions, abdominal nodes and local 
intra-abdominal or pelvic abscesses. Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) is more appropriate for the diagnosis of 
Immunological factors in disease
4
86
primary cause. When the latter is possible, regression of 
existing amyloid deposits may occur. Liver transplanta­
tion may provide definitive treatment in selected patients 
with hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
Autoimmunity can be defined as the presence of immune 
responses against self tissue. This may be a harmless 
phenomenon, identified only by the presence of low titre 
autoantibodies or autoreactive T cells. However, if these 
responses cause significant organ damage, this results in 
autoimmune diseases, which are a major cause of chronic 
morbidity and disability, affecting up to 1 in 30 adults 
at some time (Box 4.11).
Pathophysiology of autoimmunity
Immunological tolerance
Autoimmunity results from the failure of immunologi­
cal tolerance, the process by which the immune system 
recognises and accepts self tissue. There are a number of 
mechanisms of immune tolerance. Central tolerance 
occurs during lymphocyte development, when T and B 
lymphocytes that recognise self antigens are eliminated 
before they differentiate into fully immunocompetent 
cells. This process is most active in fetal life, but 
Amyloidosis
The amyloidoses are a group of acquired and hereditary 
disorders characterised by extracellular deposition of 
insoluble proteins (Box 4.10). These complex deposits 
consist of fibrils of the specific protein involved, linked 
to glycosaminoglycans, proteoglycans and serum 
amyloid P (SAP). Protein accumulation may be localised 
or systemic, and the clinical manifestations depend 
upon the organ(s) affected. The diagnosis of amyloidosis 
should be considered in all cases of unexplained neph­
rotic syndrome (p. 476), cardiomyopathy (p. 636) and 
peripheral neuropathy (p. 1223).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is established by biopsy, which may 
be of an affected organ, rectum or subcutaneous fat. 
The pathognomonic histological feature is apple-green 
birefringence of amyloid deposits when stained with 
Congo red dye and viewed under polarised light. 
Immunohistochemical staining can identify the type of 
amyloid fibril present. Quantitative scintigraphy with 
radio-labelled SAP is a valuable tool in determining the 
overall load and distribution of amyloid deposits.
Management
The aims of treatment are to support the function of 
affected organs and, in acquired amyloidosis, to prevent 
further amyloid deposition through treatment of the 
Disorder
Pathological basis
Predisposing conditions
Other features
Acquired systemic amyloidosis
Reactive (AA) 
amyloidosis
Increased production of 
serum amyloid A as part of 
prolonged or recurrent acute 
inflammatory response
Chronic infection (TB, bronchiectasis, 
chronic abscess, osteomyelitis)
Chronic inflammatory diseases 
(untreated rheumatoid arthritis, FMF)
90% of patients present with non-
selective proteinuria or nephrotic 
syndrome
Light chain 
amyloidosis (AL)
Increased production of 
monoclonal light chain
Monoclonal gammopathies, including 
myeloma, benign gammopathies and 
plasmacytoma
Restrictive cardiomyopathy, peripheral 
and autonomic neuropathy, carpal tunnel 
syndrome, proteinuria, spontaneous 
purpura, amyloid nodules and plaques. 
Macroglossia occurs rarely but is 
pathognomonic. Prognosis is poor
Dialysis-associated 
(Aβ2M) amyloidosis
Accumulation of circulating 
β2-microglobulin due to 
failure of renal catabolism in 
kidney failure
Renal dialysis
Carpal tunnel syndrome, chronic 
arthropathy and pathological fractures 
secondary to amyloid bone cyst 
formation. Manifestations occur 5–10 yrs 
after the start of dialysis
Senile systemic 
amyloidosis
Normal transthyretin protein 
deposited in tissues
Age > 70 yrs
Feature of normal ageing (affects  
> 90% of 90-year-olds). Usually 
asymptomatic
Hereditary systemic amyloidosis
> 20 forms of 
hereditary systemic 
amyloidosis
Production of protein with an 
abnormal structure that 
predisposes to amyloid fibril 
formation. Most commonly 
due to mutations in 
transthyretin gene
Autosomal dominant inheritance
Peripheral and autonomic neuropathy, 
cardiomyopathy
Renal involvement unusual
10% of gene carriers are asymptomatic 
throughout life
(FMF = familial Mediterranean fever)
4.10  Amyloid disorders
Autoimmune disease
4
87
following bacterial infection. A number of mechanisms 
have been postulated, such as cross-reactivity between 
the infectious pathogen and self antigens (molecular 
mimicry), and release of sequestered antigens, which are 
not usually visible to the immune system, from damaged 
tissue. Alternatively, infection may result in the produc­
tion of inflammatory cytokines, which overwhelm the 
normal control mechanisms that prevent bystander 
damage. Occasionally, the development of autoimmune 
disease is a side-effect of drug treatment. For example, 
the metabolic products of the anaesthetic agent halo­
thane bind to liver enzymes, resulting in a structurally 
novel protein. This is recognised as a new (foreign) 
antigen by the immune system, and the autoantibodies 
and activated T cells directed against it may cause 
hepatic necrosis.
Classification of autoimmune diseases
The spectrum of autoimmune diseases is broad. They 
can be classified by organ involvement (see Box 4.11) or 
by the predominant mechanism responsible for tissue 
damage. The Gell and Coombs classification of hyper­
sensitivity is the most widely used, and distinguishes 
four types of immune response which result in bystander 
tissue damage (Box 4.13).
•	 Type I hypersensitivity is relevant in allergy but is not 
associated with autoimmune disease.
•	 In type II hypersensitivity, injury is localised to a 
single tissue or organ and is mediated by specific 
autoantibodies.
•	 Type III hypersensitivity is a generalised reaction 
resulting from immune complex deposition which 
initiates activation of the classical complement 
cascade, as well as recruitment and activation of 
phagocytes and CD4+ lymphocytes. The site of 
immune complex deposition is determined by the 
relative amount of antibody, size of the immune 
complexes, nature of the antigen and local 
haemodynamics. Generalised deposition of  
immune complexes gives rise to systemic diseases 
such as SLE.
•	 In type IV hypersensitivity, activated T cells and 
macrophages mediate phagocytosis and tissue 
damage.
continues throughout life as immature lymphocytes are 
generated. Inevitably some autoreactive cells evade 
deletion and reach the peripheral tissues, where they are 
controlled by peripheral tolerance mechanisms. These 
include suppression of autoreactive cells by regulatory 
T cells, generation of functional hyporesponsiveness 
(‘anergy’) in lymphocytes which encounter antigen in 
the absence of the co-stimulatory signals that accom­
pany inflammation, and T cell death by apoptosis.
Autoimmune diseases develop when self-reactive 
lymphocytes escape from these tolerance mechanisms 
and become activated.
Factors predisposing to autoimmune disease
Autoimmune diseases are much more common in 
women than in men, for reasons which remain unclear. 
Most autoimmune diseases have multiple genetic deter­
minants (Box 4.12). Many are associated with variation 
at specific HLA loci, reflecting the importance of HLA 
genes in shaping lymphocyte responses. Other impor­
tant susceptibility genes include those determining 
cytokine activity, co-stimulation and cell death. Even 
though some of these associations are the strongest that 
have been identified in polygenic diseases (p. 68), they 
have limited predictive value, and are not useful in 
determining disease risk for individual patients. Several 
acquired factors can trigger autoimmunity in genetically 
predisposed individuals, including infection, cigarette 
smoking and hormone levels. The most widely studied 
of these is infection, as occurs in acute rheumatic fever 
following streptococcal infection or reactive arthritis 
Type
Disease
Page no.
Organ-specific
Immune response 
directed against 
localised antigens
Graves’ disease
747
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
751
Addison’s disease
777
Pernicious anaemia
1025
Type 1 diabetes
803
Sympathetic ophthalmoplegia
1169
Multiple sclerosis
1188
Goodpasture’s syndrome
500
Pemphigus vulgaris
1294
Bullous pemphigoid
1292
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
1050
Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia
1029
Myasthenia gravis
1226
Primary antiphospholipid 
syndrome
1055
Rheumatoid arthritis
1096
Dermatomyositis
1114
Primary biliary cirrhosis
963
Autoimmune hepatitis
962
Sjögren’s syndrome
1114
Multisystem
Immune response 
directed to 
widespread target 
antigens
Systemic sclerosis
1112
Mixed connective tissue 
disease
1113
SLE
1109
4.11  The spectrum of autoimmune disease
Gene
Function
Diseases
HLA 
complex
Key determinants of 
antigen presentation to 
T cells
Most autoimmune 
diseases
PTPN22
Regulates T- and 
B-cell receptor 
signalling
Rheumatoid arthritis, 
type 1 diabetes, SLE
CTLA4
Important 
co-stimulatory 
molecule which 
transmits inhibitory 
signals to T cells
Rheumatoid arthritis, 
type 1 diabetes
TNFRSF1A
Control of TNF network
Multiple sclerosis
ATG5
Autophagy
SLE
4.12  Some genetic variations predisposing to 
autoimmune diseases
Immunological factors in disease
4
88
Type
Mechanism
Example of disease in 
response to exogenous agent
Example of autoimmune disease
Type I
Immediate hypersensitivity
IgE-mediated mast cell 
degranulation
Allergic disease
None described
Type II
Antibody-mediated
Binding of cytotoxic IgG or IgM 
antibodies to antigens on cell 
surface causes cell killing
ABO blood transfusion reaction
Hyperacute transplant rejection
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia 
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura 
Goodpasture’s disease
Type III
Immune complex-mediated
IgG or IgM antibodies bind 
soluble antigen to form immune 
complexes which trigger classical 
complement pathway activation
Serum sickness
Farmer’s lung
SLE
Type IV
Delayed type
Activation of T cells and 
phagocytes
Acute cellular transplant 
rejection
Nickel hypersensitivity
Type 1 diabetes
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
4.13  Gell and Coombs classification of hypersensitivity diseases
Type I
Type II
Type III
Immunoglobulin 
isotype and specificity
Isolated monoclonal IgM 
paraprotein with no particular 
specificity
Immune complexes formed by 
monoclonal IgM paraprotein 
directed towards constant region 
of IgG
Immune complexes formed by 
polyclonal IgM or IgG directed 
towards constant region of IgG
Prevalence
25%
25%
50%
Disease association
Lymphoproliferative disease, 
especially Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia (p. 1045)
Infection, particularly hepatitis B 
and hepatitis C; 
lymphoproliferative disease
Infection, particularly hepatitis B 
and C; autoimmune disease, 
including rheumatoid arthritis  
and SLE
Symptoms
Hyperviscosity:
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Acrocyanosis
Retinal vessel occlusion
Arterial and venous thrombosis
Small-vessel vasculitis:
Purpuric rash
Arthralgia
Cutaneous ulceration
Hepatosplenomegaly
Glomerulonephritis
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Small-vessel vasculitis:
Purpuric rash
Arthralgia
Cutaneous ulceration
Hepatosplenomegaly
Glomerulonephritis
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Protein 
electrophoresis
Monoclonal IgM paraprotein
Monoclonal IgM paraprotein
No monoclonal paraprotein
Rheumatoid factor
Negative
Strongly positive
Strongly positive
Complement
Normal
Decreased C4
Decreased C4
4.14  Classification of cryoglobulins
Investigations in autoimmunity
Autoantibodies
A number of autoantibodies can be identified in the 
laboratory and are used in disease diagnosis and moni­
toring, as discussed elsewhere in this book (e.g. p. 1067). 
Antibodies are quantified either by titre (the minimal 
dilution at which the antibody can be detected) or by 
concentration (in standardised units).
Measures of complement activation
Quantitation of complement components may be useful 
in the evaluation of immune complex-mediated dis­
eases. Classical complement pathway activation leads to 
a decrease in circulating (unactivated) C4, and is often 
also associated with decreased C3 levels. Serial measure­
ment of C3 and C4 is a useful surrogate measure of 
immune complex formation.
Cryoglobulins
Cryoglobulins are antibodies directed against other 
immunoglobulins, and which form immune complexes 
that precipitate in the cold. They are classified into 
three types on the basis of the properties of the immuno­
globulin involved (Box 4.14). Testing for cryoglobulins 
requires the transport of a serum specimen to the labora­
tory at 37°C. Cryoglobulins should not be confused with 
cold agglutinins; the latter are autoantibodies specifi­
cally directed against the I/i antigen on the surface of 
red cells, which can cause intravascular haemolysis in 
the cold (p. 1030).
Allergy
4
89
Fig. 4.9  Type I (immediate) hypersensitivity response. A After an encounter with allergen, B cells produce IgE antibody against the allergen.
 B Specific IgE antibodies bind to circulating mast cells via high-affinity IgE cell surface receptors.  C On re-encounter with allergen, the allergen binds to 
the IgE antibody-coated mast cells. This triggers mast cell activation with release of vasoactive mediators (see Box 4.15). 
B
B
B
T
T
B
B
B
B
Allergen
T and B cells
IgE antibody
IgE receptor
Mast cell
Histamine, tryptase and
vasoactive peptides
A
B
C
Susceptibility to allergic diseases
The incidence of allergic diseases is increasing. This 
trend is largely unexplained but one widely held theory 
is the ‘hygiene hypothesis’. This proposes that infections 
in early life are critically important in maturation of the 
immune response and bias the immune system against 
the development of allergies. It is suggested that the 
high prevalence of allergic disease is the penalty for the 
decreased exposure to infection that has resulted from 
improvements in sanitation and health care.
A number of factors predispose to allergic diseases, 
the strongest of which is a family history. A wide array 
of genetic determinants of disease susceptibility have 
been identified, including genes controlling innate 
immune responses, cytokine production, IgE levels and 
the ability of the epithelial barrier to protect against 
environmental agents. Contributory environmental 
factors include bacterial and viral infection, pollutants 
and cigarette smoke.
ALLERGY
Allergic diseases are a common and increasing cause of 
illness, affecting between 15% and 20% of the population 
at some time. They comprise a range of disorders from 
mild to life-threatening, and affect many organs. Atopy 
is the tendency to produce an exaggerated IgE immune 
response to otherwise harmless environmental sub­
stances, while an allergic disease can be defined as the 
clinical manifestation of this inappropriate IgE immune 
response.
Pathology of allergy
Normally, the immune system does not make detectable 
responses to the many environmental substances to 
which it is exposed daily. However, in an allergic reac­
tion, initial exposure to an otherwise harmless exog­
enous substance (known as an allergen) triggers the 
production of specific IgE antibodies by activated B 
cells (Fig. 4.9). These IgE antibodies bind to the surface 
of mast cells via high-affinity IgE receptors, a step 
that is not itself associated with clinical sequelae. 
However, upon re-exposure, the allergen binds to 
membrane-bound IgE which activates the mast cells, 
releasing a variety of mediators (the early phase 
response, Box 4.15). This type I hypersensitivity reaction 
is the basis of the symptoms of allergic reactions, which 
range from sneezing and rhinorrhoea to anaphylaxis 
(Box 4.16).
In some patients, the early phase response is followed 
by persistent activation of mast cells, manifest by 
ongoing swelling and local inflammation. This is known 
as the late phase reaction and is mediated by basophils, 
eosinophils and macrophages. Long-standing or recur­
rent allergic inflammation may give rise to a chronic 
inflammatory response characterised by a complex infil­
trate of macrophages, eosinophils and T lymphocytes, in 
addition to mast cells and basophils. Once this has been 
established, inhibition of mast cell mediators with anti­
histamines is clinically ineffective.
Occasionally, mast cell activation may be non-
specifically triggered through other signals, such as 
neuropeptides, anaphylotoxins and bacterial peptides.
Mediator
Biological effects
Preformed and stored within granules
Histamine
Vasodilatation, chemotaxis, 
bronchoconstriction, increased 
capillary permeability, 
increased mucus secretion
Tryptase
Bronchoconstriction, activates 
complement C3
Eosinophil chemotactic factor
Eosinophil chemotaxis
Neutrophil chemotactic factor
Neutrophil chemotaxis
Synthesised on activation of mast cells
Leukotrienes
Increase vascular permeability, 
chemotaxis, mucus secretion, 
smooth muscle contraction
Prostaglandins
Bronchoconstriction, platelet 
aggregation, vasodilatation
Thromboxanes
Bronchoconstriction
Platelet-activating factor
Bronchoconstriction, 
chemotaxis of eosinophils and 
neutrophils
4.15  Products of mast cell degranulation
Immunological factors in disease
4
90
sensitivity and specificity of specific IgE tests (previ­
ously known as radioallergosorbent tests, RAST) are 
lower than skin prick tests. However, IgE tests may be 
very useful if skin testing is inappropriate: for example, 
in patients taking antihistamines or those who have 
severe skin disease or dermatographism. They can also 
be used to test for cross-reactivity between insect 
venoms, and post mortem to identify allergens respon­
sible for lethal anaphylaxis.
There is no indication for testing of specific IgG anti­
bodies to allergens in the investigation of allergic 
diseases.
Supervised exposure to allergen (challenge test)
Allergen challenges are usually performed in specialist 
centres, and include bronchial provocation testing, nasal 
challenge and food challenge. These may be particularly 
useful in the investigation of occupational asthma or 
food allergy.
Mast cell tryptase
After a systemic allergic reaction, the circulating level 
of mast cell mediators increases dramatically. Tryptase 
is the most stable of these and serum levels peak at 
1–2 hours. Measurement of serum mast cell tryptase is 
extremely useful in investigating a possible anaphylactic 
event. Ideally, measurements should be made at the 
time of the reaction, and 3 hours and 24 hours later.
Non-specific markers of atopic disease: total serum 
IgE and eosinophilia
Peripheral blood eosinophilia is common in atopic indi­
viduals. However, eosinophilia of more than 20% or an 
absolute eosinophil count over 1.5 × 109/L should initi­
ate a search for a non-atopic cause (p. 311).
Atopy is the most common cause of elevated total 
IgE in developed countries. However, there are many 
other causes, including parasite and helminth infections 
(pp. 369 and 381), lymphoma (p. 1041), drug reactions 
and Churg–Strauss vasculitis (p. 1118). Moreover, sig­
nificant allergic disease can occur despite a normal total 
IgE level. Thus total IgE quantitation is not indicated in 
the routine investigation of allergic disease.
Management
•	 Avoidance of the allergen should be rigorously 
attempted, and the advice of specialist dietitians 
and occupational physicians may be required.
•	 Antihistamines block histamine H1 receptors, thereby 
inhibiting the effects of histamine release. Long-
acting, non-sedating preparations are particularly 
useful for prophylaxis against frequent attacks.
•	 Corticosteroids down-regulate pro-inflammatory 
cytokine production. They are highly effective in 
allergic disease and, if used topically, their adverse 
effects may be minimised.
•	 Sodium cromoglicate stabilises the mast cell 
membrane, inhibiting release of vasoactive 
mediators. It is effective as a prophylactic agent in 
asthma and allergic rhinitis, but has no role in acute 
attacks. It is poorly absorbed and therefore 
ineffective in the management of food allergies.
•	 Antigen-specific immunotherapy involves the 
sequential administration of escalating amounts of 
dilute allergen over a prolonged period of time. Its 
mechanism of action is unknown, but it is highly 
Presenting problems in allergy
A general approach to  
the allergic patient
Common presentations of allergic disease are shown in 
Box 4.16. This chapter describes the general principles of 
the approach to the allergic patient and some of the more 
severe manifestations of allergy.
Clinical assessment
When assessing possible allergic disease, it is important 
to identify what the patient means by allergy, as up to 
20% of the UK population describe themselves as having 
a food allergy, although fewer than 1% have an IgE-
mediated hypersensitivity reaction confirmed on double 
blind challenge. The nature of symptoms should be 
established and specific triggers identified, along with 
the predictability of a reaction, and the time lag between 
exposure to a potential allergen and onset of symptoms. 
An allergic reaction usually occurs within minutes 
of exposure and provokes predictable symptoms 
(angioedema, urticaria, wheezing and so on). Specific 
enquiry should be made about other allergic symptoms, 
past and present, and about family history of allergic 
disease. Potential allergens in the home and workplace 
should be identified, and a detailed drug history should 
always be taken, including compliance, side-effects and 
the use of complementary therapies.
Investigations
Skin prick tests
These are the mainstay of allergy testing. A droplet of 
diluted standardised allergen solution is placed on the 
forearm and the skin is superficially punctured through 
the droplet with a sterile lancet. After 15 minutes, a posi­
tive response is indicated by a local weal and flare 
response at least 2 mm larger than the negative control. 
A major advantage of skin prick testing is that patients 
can clearly see the results, which may be useful in 
gaining compliance with avoidance measures. Disad­
vantages include the remote risk of a severe allergic 
reaction, so resuscitation facilities should be available. 
Results are unreliable in patients with extensive skin 
disease. Antihistamines inhibit the magnitude of the 
response and should be discontinued before testing; cor­
ticosteroids do not influence test results.
Specific IgE tests
An alternative to skin prick testing is the quantitation 
of IgE directed against the putative allergen. The 
•  Urticaria
p. 1290
•  Angioedema
p. 93
•  Atopic dermatitis
p. 1283
•  Allergic conjunctivitis
pp. 1105, 1107
•  Allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
p. 725
•  Allergic asthma
p. 666
•  Food allergy
p. 887
•  Drug allergy
p. 1303
•  Allergy to insect venom
p. 94
•  Anaphylaxis
p. 91
4.16  Common allergic diseases
Allergy
4
91
•	 Preloaded self-injectable adrenaline (epinephrine) may 
be life-saving in acute anaphylaxis.
Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is a potentially life-threatening, systemic 
allergic reaction caused by the release of histamine and 
other vasoactive mediators from mast cells. The risk of 
death is increased in patients with pre-existing asthma, 
particularly if this is poorly controlled, and when treat­
ment with adrenaline (epinephrine) is delayed.
Clinical assessment
The clinical features are shown in Figure 4.10. The sever­
ity of a reaction should be assessed; the time between 
allergen exposure and onset of symptoms provides a 
guide. Enquiry should be made about potential triggers; 
if these are not immediately obvious, a detailed history 
of the previous 24 hours may be helpful. The most 
common triggers are foods, latex, insect venom and 
drugs (Box 4.18). A history of previous allergic responses 
to the offending agent is common. The route of allergen 
exposure may influence the principal clinical features of 
a reaction; for example, if an allergen is inhaled, the 
major symptom is frequently wheezing. Features of ana­
phylaxis may overlap with the direct toxic effects of 
drugs and venoms (Ch. 9). Potentiating factors, such as 
effective in the prevention of insect venom 
anaphylaxis, and allergic rhinitis secondary to grass 
pollen (Box 4.17). The traditional route of 
administration is via subcutaneous injections, which 
carry a risk of anaphylaxis and should only be 
performed in specialised centres. More recently, 
sublingual immunotherapy has been shown to be 
effective in the management of moderate grass 
pollen allergy, and clinical trials of immunotherapy 
for food allergy are ongoing.
•	 Omalizumab, a monoclonal antibody against IgE, 
inhibits the binding of IgE to mast cells and 
basophils. It is effective in moderate and severe 
allergic asthma and rhinitis.
‘Immunotherapy is effective for treatment of allergic rhinitis, 
allergic asthma and stinging insect hypersensitivity. Clinical 
studies to date do not support the use of allergen 
immunotherapy for food hypersensitivity, chronic urticaria and/or 
angioedema.’
• Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2003; 
90:1–40.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
4.17  Immunotherapy for allergy
Fig. 4.10  Clinical manifestations of anaphylaxis. In this example, the response is to an insect sting containing venom to which the patient is 
allergic. 
Differential diagnosis (examples)
Causes of loss of consciousness
• Vasovagal syncope
• Cardiac arrhythmias
• Myocardial infarction
Causes of respiratory distress
• Status asthmaticus
Causes of laryngeal obstruction
• C1 inhibitor deficiency
• Idiopathic angioedema
Causes of generalised flushing
• Systemic mastocytosis
• Carcinoid syndrome
Other causes
• Phaeochromocytoma
Itching of palms, soles
of feet and genitalia
Feeling of impending doom,
loss of consciousness
Conjunctival
injection
Flushing
Sweating
Hypotension
Urticaria
Wheeze,
bronchoconstriction
Angioedema of lips
and mucous membrane
Diarrhoea
Abdominal pain
Cardiac arrhythmias
Laryngeal obstruction
Stridor
Wasp sting
Immunological factors in disease
4
92
exercise or alcohol, can lower the threshold for an ana­
phylactic event.
A number of conditions may mimic anaphylaxis (see 
Fig. 4.10). Anaphylactoid reactions result from the non-
specific degranulation of mast cells by drugs, chemicals 
or other triggers (see Box 4.18), and do not involve IgE 
antibodies. The clinical presentations are indistinguish­
able, and in the acute situation discriminating between 
them is unnecessary. However, this may be important 
in identifying precipitating factors and appropriate 
avoidance measures.
Investigations
Measurement of serum mast cell tryptase concentrations 
is useful to confirm the diagnosis. Specific IgE tests may 
be preferable to skin prick tests when investigating 
patients with a history of anaphylaxis.
Management
Anaphylaxis is an acute medical emergency (Box 4.19).
Individuals who have recovered from an anaphylac­
tic event should be referred for specialist assessment. 
The aim is to identify the trigger factor, to educate the 
patient regarding avoidance and management of subse­
quent episodes, and to identify whether specific treat­
ment, such as immunotherapy, is indicated. If the trigger 
factor cannot be identified or cannot be avoided, recur­
rence is common. Patients who have previously experi­
enced an anaphylactic event should be prescribed 
self-injectable adrenaline (epinephrine), and they and 
their families or carers should be instructed on its use 
(Box 4.20). The use of a MedicAlert (or similar) bracelet 
will increase the likelihood that adrenaline will be 
administered in an emergency. Issues most pertinent 
to serious allergy in adolescents are shown in Box 4.21.
Anaphylaxis: IgE-mediated mast cell degranulation
Foods
• Peanuts
• Tree nuts
• Fish and shellfish
• Milk
• Eggs
• Soy products
Insect stings
• Bee venom
• Wasp venom
Chemicals, drugs and other foreign proteins
• Intravenous anaesthetic 
agents, e.g. 
suxamethonium
• Penicillin and other 
antibiotics
• Latex
Anaphylactoid: non-IgE-mediated mast cell degranulation
Drugs
• Aspirin and non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)
• Opiates
• Radiocontrast media
Physical
• Exercise
• Cold
Idiopathic
• No cause is identified in 20% of patients with  
anaphylaxis
4.18  Common causes of systemic 
allergic reactions
Prevent further contact with allergen
• e.g. Removal of bee sting
Ensure airway patency
Administer intramuscular adrenaline (epinephrine) 
promptly
• Adult dose: 0.3–0.5 mL 1 : 1000 solution
• Acts within minutes
• Repeat at 5–10-min intervals if initial response is  
inadequate
Administer antihistamines
• e.g. Chlorphenamine 10 mg IM or slow IV injection
• Directly opposes effects of histamine released by activated 
mast cells
Administer corticosteroids
• e.g. Hydrocortisone 200 mg IV
• Prevents rebound symptoms in severely affected  
patients
Provide supportive treatments
• e.g. Nebulised β2-agonists to decrease bronchoconstriction
• Intravenous fluids to restore or maintain blood  
pressure
• Oxygen
4.19  Emergency management of anaphylaxis
Prescription of an adrenaline auto-injector is usually initiated by 
a specialist (e.g. immunologist or allergist)
Indications
• Anaphylaxis to allergens which are difficult to avoid, e.g. 
insect venom and foods
• Idiopathic anaphylactic reactions
• History of severe localised reactions with high risk of future 
anaphylaxis, e.g. reaction to trace allergen or likely repeated 
exposure to allergen
• History of severe localised reactions with high risk of adverse 
outcome, should anaphylaxis occur, e.g. poorly controlled 
asthma, lack of access to emergency care
Relative contraindications
Risk of arrhythmia or acute coronary syndrome
• Ischaemic heart disease, uncontrolled hypertension
• Tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 
cocaine use
Key practice points
Patient and family education
• Know when and how to use the device
• Carry the device at all times
• Seek medical assistance immediately after use
• Wear an alert bracelet or necklace
• Include the school in education for young patients
Prescriptions
• Specify the brand of auto-injector, as they have different 
triggering mechanisms
• Always prescribe two syringes
• Avoid β-blockers, as they may increase the severity of 
an anaphylactic reaction and reduce the response to 
adrenaline
4.20  How to prescribe self-injectable adrenaline 
(epinephrine)
Allergy
4
93
Angioedema
Angioedema is the episodic, localised, non-pitting swell­
ing of submucous or subcutaneous tissues. This most 
frequently affects the face (Fig. 4.11), extremities and 
genitalia. Involvement of the larynx or tongue may 
cause life-threatening respiratory tract obstruction, and 
Fig. 4.11  Angioedema. This young man has hereditary angioedema.
 A Normal appearance.  B During an acute attack. From Helbert 
2006 – see p. 96.
B
A
oedema of the intestinal mucosa may cause abdominal 
pain and distension.
In most cases, the underlying mechanism is degranu­
lation of mast cells. However, angioedema may occa­
sionally be mediated by increased local bradykinin 
concentration (Box 4.22). Differentiating the mechanism 
of angioedema is important in determining appropriate 
investigations and treatment.
• Resolution of childhood allergy: most children affected by 
allergy to milk, egg, soybean or wheat will grow out of their 
food allergies by adolescence. However, allergies to peanuts, 
tree nuts, fish and shellfish are frequently life-long.
• Risk-taking behaviour and fatal anaphylaxis: serious 
allergy is increasingly common in adolescents, and this is the 
highest-risk group for fatal, food-induced anaphylaxis. 
Food-allergic teenagers are more likely than adults to eat 
unsafe foods, deny reaction symptoms and delay emergency 
treatment.
• Emotional impact of food allergies: some adolescents 
neglect to carry a prescribed adrenaline (epinephrine) 
auto-injector because of the associated nuisance and/or 
stigma. Surveys of food-allergic teenagers reveal that many 
take risks because they feel socially isolated by their allergy.
4.21  Allergy in adolescence
Allergic reaction to 
specific trigger
Idiopathic angioedema
Hereditary angioedema
ACE-inhibitor associated 
angioedema
Pathogenesis
IgE-mediated 
degranulation of mast 
cells
Non-IgE-mediated 
degranulation of mast 
cells
C1 inhibitor deficiency, 
with resulting increased 
local bradykinin 
concentration
Inhibition of breakdown of 
bradykinin
Key mediator
Histamine
Histamine
Bradykinin
Bradykinin
Prevalence
Common
Common
Rare autosomal dominant 
disorder
0.1–0.2% of patients 
treated with ACE inhibitors
Clinical 
features
Usually associated with 
urticaria
History of other allergies 
common
Follows exposure to 
specific allergen, e.g. 
food, animal dander or 
insect venom
Usually associated with 
urticaria
May be triggered by 
physical stimuli, such as 
heat, pressure or exercise
Dermatographism 
common
Occasionally associated 
with infection or thyroid 
disease
Not associated with 
urticaria or other features 
of allergy
Does not cause 
anaphylaxis
May cause life-threatening 
respiratory tract obstruction
Can cause severe 
abdominal pain
Not associated with 
urticaria
Does not cause anaphylaxis
Usually affects the head 
and neck, and may cause 
life-threatening respiratory 
tract obstruction
Can occur years after the 
start of treatment
Investigations
Specific IgE tests or skin 
prick tests
Specific IgE tests and skin 
prick tests often negative
Exclude hypothyroidism
Complement C4 (invariably 
low in acute attacks)
C1 inhibitor levels
No specific investigations
Treatment
Allergen avoidance
Antihistamines
Antihistamines are 
mainstay of treatment and 
prophylaxis
Unresponsive to 
antihistamines
Attenuated androgens
C1 inhibitor concentrate or 
icatibant for acute attacks
Discontinue ACE inhibitor
Avoid angiotensin II 
receptor blockers
Possible drug 
causes
Specific drug allergies, 
e.g. penicillin
NSAIDs
Opioids
Radiocontrast media
ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor 
blockers
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
4.22  Types of angioedema
Immunological factors in disease
4
94
Acute episodes are always accompanied by low 
C4 levels and the diagnosis can be confirmed by C1 
inhibitor measurement. Prevention is with modified 
androgens (e.g. danazol), which increase endogenous 
production of complement proteins. Severe acute attacks 
should be treated with purified Cl inhibitor or a brady­
kinin receptor antagonist (icatibant).
Acquired C1 inhibitor deficiency
This rare disorder is clinically indistinguishable from 
HAE but presents in late adulthood. It is associated 
with autoimmune and lymphoproliferative diseases. 
Treatment of the underlying disorder may induce remis­
sion of angioedema.
TRANSPLANTATION IMMUNOLOGY
Transplantation provides the opportunity for definitive 
treatment of end-stage organ disease. The major compli­
cations are graft rejection, drug toxicity and infection 
consequent on immunosuppression. Transplant sur­
vival continues to improve, as a result of the intro­
duction of less toxic immunosuppressive agents and 
increased understanding of rejection mechanisms.
Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation and its 
complications are discussed on page 1017.
Transplant rejection
Solid organ transplantation inevitably stimulates an 
aggressive immune response by the recipient, unless the 
transplant is between monozygotic twins. The type and 
severity of the rejection response are determined by the 
genetic disparity between the donor and recipient, the 
immune status of the host and the nature of the tissue 
Allergic disease
• Maternal dietary restrictions during pregnancy or 
lactation: current evidence does not support these for 
prevention of allergic disease.
• Breastfeeding for at least 4 mths: prevents or delays the 
occurrence of atopic dermatitis, cow’s milk allergy and 
wheezing in early childhood, as compared with feeding 
formula milk containing intact cow’s milk protein.
Autoimmune disease
• Suppressed T cell-mediated immune responses in 
pregnancy: autoimmune diseases often improve during 
pregnancy but flare immediately after delivery. However, an 
exception is SLE, which is prone to exacerbation in 
pregnancy.
• Passive transfer of maternal antibodies: can mediate 
autoimmune disease in the fetus and newborn, including 
SLE, Graves’ disease and myasthenia gravis.
• Antiphospholipid syndrome (p. 1055): an important cause 
of fetal loss, intrauterine growth restriction and 
pre-eclampsia.
4.23  Immunological diseases in pregnancy
Specific allergies
Insect venom allergy
Local non-IgE-mediated reactions to insect stings are 
common and may cause extensive swelling around the 
site lasting as long as 7 days. These usually do not 
require specific treatment. Toxic reactions to venom 
after multiple (50–100) simultaneous stings may mimic 
anaphylaxis. In addition, exposure to large amounts of 
insect venom frequently stimulates the production of 
IgE antibodies, and thus may be followed by allergic 
reactions to single stings. Allergic IgE-mediated reac­
tions vary from mild to life-threatening. Antigen-specific 
immunotherapy with bee or wasp venom reduces the 
incidence of recurrent anaphylaxis from 50–60% to 10% 
but requires treatment for several years (see Box 4.17).
Peanut allergy
Peanut allergy is the most common food-related allergy. 
More than 50% of patients present before the age of 
3 years and some individuals react to their first known 
exposure to peanuts, possibly because of sensitisation by 
topical creams. Peanuts are ubiquitous in the Western 
diet, and every year up to 25% of peanut-allergic 
individuals will experience a reaction as a result of inad­
vertent exposure.
Birch oral allergy syndrome
This syndrome is characterised by a combination of 
birch pollen hay fever and local angioedema after contact 
with fresh fruit (especially apples), vegetables and nuts. 
Cooked fruits and vegetables are tolerated without dif­
ficulty. It is due to shared or cross-reactive allergens 
which are destroyed by cooking or digestion, and can be 
confirmed by skin prick testing using fresh fruit. Severe 
allergic reactions are unusual.
C1 inhibitor deficiency
Hereditary angioedema
Hereditary angioedema (HAE), also known as inherited 
C1 inhibitor deficiency, is an autosomal dominant disor­
der caused by decreased production or activity of C1 
inhibitor protein. This complement regulatory protein 
inhibits spontaneous activation of the classical comple­
ment pathway (see Fig. 4.3, p. 75). C1 inhibitor is also a 
regulatory protein for the kinin cascade, activation of 
which increases local bradykinin levels and gives rise to 
local pain and swelling.
In HAE, angioedema may be spontaneous or trig­
gered by local trauma or infection. Multiple parts of the 
body may be involved, especially the face, extremities, 
upper airway and gastrointestinal tract. Oedema of the 
intestinal wall causes severe abdominal pain. The most 
important complication is laryngeal obstruction, often 
associated with minor dental procedures, which can be 
fatal. Episodes of angioedema are self-limiting and 
usually resolve within 48 hours. Patients with HAE gen­
erally present in adolescence, but may go undiagnosed 
for many years. A family history can be identified in 80% 
of cases. HAE is not associated with allergic diseases and 
is specifically not associated with urticaria.
Transplantation Immunology
4
95
transplanted (Box 4.24). The most important genetic 
determinant is the difference between donor and recipi­
ent HLA proteins (p. 75). The extensive polymorphism 
of these proteins means that donor HLA antigens are 
almost invariably recognised as foreign by the recipient 
immune system, unless an active attempt has been made 
to minimise incompatibility.
•	 Acute cellular rejection is the most common form of 
graft rejection. It is mediated by activated T cells 
and results in deterioration in graft function. It may 
cause fever, pain and tenderness over the graft. It is 
usually amenable to increased immunosuppressive 
therapy.
•	 Hyperacute rejection results in rapid and irreversible 
destruction of the graft. It is mediated by pre-
existing recipient antibodies against donor HLA 
antigens, which arise as a result of previous 
exposure through transplantation, blood transfusion 
or pregnancy. It is rarely seen in practice, as the use 
of screening for anti-HLA antibodies and pre-
transplant cross-matching ensure prior identification 
of recipient–donor incompatibility.
•	 Acute vascular rejection is mediated by antibody 
formed de novo after transplantation. It is more 
curtailed than the hyperacute response because of 
the use of intercurrent immunosuppression, but it is 
also associated with reduced graft survival. 
Aggressive immunosuppressive therapy is 
indicated, and physical removal of antibody 
through plasmapheresis may be effective. Not all 
post-transplant anti-donor antibodies cause graft 
damage; their consequences are determined by 
specificity and ability to trigger other immune 
components, such as the complement cascade.
•	 Chronic allograft failure, also known as chronic 
rejection, is a major cause of graft loss. It is 
associated with proliferation of transplant vascular 
smooth muscle, interstitial fibrosis and scarring. The 
pathogenesis is poorly understood but contributing 
factors include immunological damage caused by 
subacute rejection, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia 
and chronic drug toxicity.
Investigations
Pre-transplantation testing
HLA typing determines an individual’s HLA polymor­
phisms and facilitates donor–recipient matching.
Potential transplant recipients are screened for the 
presence of anti-HLA antibodies using either recom­
binant HLA proteins or a pool of lymphocytes from 
individuals with broadly representative HLA types. If 
antibodies are detected, their specificity is further char­
acterised and the recipient is excluded from receiving a 
transplant which carries these alleles.
Donor–recipient cross-matching is a functional assay 
that directly tests whether serum from a recipient (which 
potentially contains anti-donor antibodies) is able to 
bind and/or kill donor lymphocytes. It is specific to a 
prospective donor–recipient pair and is done immedi­
ately prior to transplantation. A positive cross-match is 
a contraindication to transplantation because of the risk 
of hyperacute rejection.
C4d staining
C4d is a fragment of complement protein C4 (see Fig. 
4.3, p. 75). Deposition of C4d in graft capillaries indicates 
local activation of the classical complement pathway 
and provides evidence for antibody-mediated damage. 
This is useful in diagnosis of vascular rejection.
Complications of transplant 
immunosuppression
The prevention of transplant rejection requires indefinite 
treatment with immunosuppressive agents. In general, 
two or more immunosuppressive drugs are used in syn­
ergistic combinations in order to minimise drug side-
effects (Box 4.25). The major complications of long-term 
immunosuppression are infection and malignancy.
The risk of some opportunistic infections may be 
minimised through the use of prophylactic medication 
(e.g. ganciclovir for CMV prophylaxis and trimethoprim–
sulfamethoxazole for Pneumocystis prophylaxis). Immu­
nisation with killed vaccines is appropriate, although 
the immune response may be curtailed. Live vaccines 
should not be given.
The increased risk of malignancy arises because T-cell 
suppression results in failure to control viral infections. 
Virus-associated tumours include lymphoma (associ­
ated with EBV), Kaposi’s sarcoma (associated with 
human herpesvirus 8) and skin tumours (associated 
with human papillomavirus). Immunosuppression is 
also associated with a small increase in the incidence of 
common cancers not associated with viral infection 
Type
Time
Pathological findings
Mechanism
Treatment
Hyperacute rejection
Mins to hrs
Thrombosis, necrosis
Preformed antibody to donor 
antigens results in complement 
activation (type II hypersensitivity)
None – irreversible 
graft loss
Acute vascular rejection
5–30 days
Vasculitis
Antibody and complement 
activation
Increase 
immunosuppression
Acute cellular rejection
5–30 days
Cellular infiltration
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (type IV 
hypersensitivity)
Increase 
immunosuppression
Chronic allograft failure
> 30 days
Fibrosis, scarring
Immune and non-immune 
mechanisms
Minimise drug toxicity, 
control hypertension 
and hyperlipidaemia
4.24  Classification of transplant rejection
Immunological factors in disease
4
96
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.allergy.org.au An Australasian site providing information 
on allergy, asthma and immune diseases.
www.anaphylaxis.org.uk Provides information and support for 
patients with severe allergies.
www.immunopaedia.org A South African site designed for 
health-care providers requiring a general understanding of 
immunology, providing clinical case studies, articles, links and 
news, with a particular focus on HIV immunology.
www.info4pi.org A US site managed by the non-profit Jeffrey 
Modell Foundation, which provides extensive information 
about primary immunodeficiency diseases.
Figure acknowledgements
Fig. 4.11 Helbert M. Flesh and bones of immunology. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2006; copyright 
Elsevier.
(such as lung, breast and colon cancer), reflecting the 
importance of T cells in anti-cancer surveillance.
Organ donation
The major problem in transplantation is the shortage of 
organ donors. Cadaveric organ donors are usually pre­
viously healthy individuals who experience brainstem 
death (p. 1161), frequently as a result of road traffic 
accidents or cerebrovascular events. However, even if 
organs were obtained from all potential cadaveric 
donors, their numbers would be insufficient to meet 
current needs. An alternative is the use of living donors. 
Altruistic living donation, usually from close relatives, 
is widely used in renal transplantation. Living organ 
donation is inevitably associated with some risk to the 
donor, and the process is highly regulated to ensure 
appreciation of the dangers involved. Because of con­
cerns about coercion and exploitation, non-altruistic 
organ donation (the sale of organs) is illegal in most 
countries.
Drug
Mechanism of action
Major adverse effects
Anti-proliferative agents
e.g. azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil
Inhibit lymphocyte proliferation by blocking 
DNA synthesis
May be directly cytotoxic at high doses
Increased susceptibility to infection
Leucopenia
Hepatotoxicity
Calcineurin inhibitors
e.g. ciclosporin, tacrolimus
Inhibit T-cell signalling; prevent lymphocyte 
activation and block cytokine transcription
Increased susceptibility to infection
Hypertension
Nephrotoxicity
Diabetogenic (especially tacrolimus)
Gingival hypertrophy, hirsutism (ciclosporin)
Corticosteroids
Decrease phagocytosis and release of 
proteolytic enzymes; decrease lymphocyte 
activation and proliferation; decrease cytokine 
production; decrease antibody production
Increased susceptibility to infection
Multiple other complications (p. 776)
Anti-T-cell induction agents
e.g. anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG)
Antibodies to cell surface proteins deplete or 
inhibit T cells
Profound non-specific immunosuppression
Increased susceptibility to infection
4.25  Immunosuppressive drugs used in transplantation
97
5 
Principles and investigation of environmental 
factors in disease 98
Environmental effects on health 98
Investigations in environmental health 99
Preventive medicine 100
Environmental diseases 100
Alcohol 100
Smoking 100
Obesity 101
Poverty and affluence 101
Atmospheric pollution 102
Radiation exposure 102
Extremes of temperature 103
High altitude 106
Under water 108
Environmental and 
nutritional factors  
in disease
P. Hanlon
M. Byers
J.P.H. Wilding
H.M. Macdonald
Nutritional factors and disease 110
Physiology of nutrition 110
Clinical assessment and investigation of 
nutritional status 114
Disorders of altered energy balance 115
Obesity 115
Under-nutrition 120
Micronutrients, minerals and their  
diseases 124
Vitamins 124
Inorganic micronutrients 130
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
98
determinants of coronary heart disease operating at each 
level of a hierarchy.
Interactions between people and 
their environment
The hierarchy of systems demonstrates that the clinician 
should not focus too quickly on the disease process 
without considering the context. Health is an emergent 
quality of a complex interaction between many deter­
minants, including genetic inheritance, the physical 
circumstances in which people live (e.g. housing, air 
quality, working environment), the social environment 
(e.g. levels of friendship, support and trust), personal 
behaviour (smoking, diet, exercise), and access to money 
and the other resources that give people control over 
their lives. Health care is not the only determinant – and 
is usually not the major determinant – of health status 
in the population.
These systems do not operate in isolation in separate 
communities. When one group responds to ill health 
by manipulating its environment, the consequences may 
be global. For example, an Afghan farmer who starts 
growing opium for money in order to feed his children 
influences the environment of a teenager in Europe; in 
turn, drug misuse in Europe has fostered higher preva­
lence of blood-borne infectious diseases such as human 
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (HIV/AIDS); in turn, these have spilled out 
into sexually transmitted disease. This process contrib­
utes significantly to the tragedy of the epidemic of 
HIV/AIDS.
The life course
The determinants of health operate over the whole 
lifespan. Values and behaviours acquired during child­
hood and adolescence have a profound influence on 
PRINCIPLES AND INVESTIGATION OF 
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
Environmental effects on health
Health emerges from a highly complex interaction 
between factors intrinsic to the patient and his or her 
environment. Many factors within the environment 
influence health, including aspects of the physical 
environment, biological environment (bacteria, viruses), 
built environment and social environment, but these 
also encompass more distant influences such as the 
global ecosystem (Fig. 5.1). Environmental changes 
affect many physiological systems and do not respect 
boundaries between medical specialties. The specialty 
of ‘public health’ in the UK is concerned with the 
investigation and management of health in communi­
ties and populations, but the principles apply in all 
specialties.
Exposure to infectious agents is a major environmen­
tal determinant of health and is described in detail 
in Chapter 6. This chapter describes the approach to 
other common environmental factors that influence 
health.
The hierarchy of systems – from 
molecules to ecologies
When assessing a patient, a clinician subconsciously 
considers many levels at which problems may be occur­
ring, including molecular, cellular, tissue, organ and 
body systems. When the environment’s influence on 
health is being considered, this ‘hierarchy of systems’ 
extends beyond the individual to include the family, 
community, population and ecology. Box 5.1 shows an 
example of the utility of this concept in describing 
Fig. 5.1  Hierarchy of systems that influence population health. 
From Rao, et al. 2007 – see p. 132. 
Macro-economy,
politics, culture,
global forces
Other
neighbourhoods,
other regions
People
Age, sex and
hereditary
factors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L
i
f
e
s
t
y
l
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W
o
r
k
,
 
p
l
a
y
D
i
e
t
,
 
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
 
a
c
t
i
v
i
t
y
 
S
o
c
i
a
l 
c
a
p
it
a
l 
  
  
  
  
  
  
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
W
e
a
lt
h
 
c
r
e
a
ti
o
n
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
L
o
c
a
l 
e
c
o
n
o
m
y
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
M
a
r
k
e
t
s
B
ui
ld
in
g
s,
 
pl
a
c
e
s 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
E
n
vi
r
o
n
m
e
n
t 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
A
ir
, 
w
at
e
r,
 l
a
n
d
Cl
i
m
at
e 
c
h
a
n
g
e 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Gl
o
b
al
 e
c
o
s
y
st
e
m
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Bi
o
di
v
er
si
ty
Level in the hierarchy
Example of effect
Molecular
ApoB mutation causing 
hypercholesterolaemia
Cellular
Foam cells accumulate in vessel wall
Tissue
Atheroma and thrombosis of 
coronary artery
Organ
Ischaemia and infarction of 
myocardium
System
Cardiac failure
Person
Limited exercise capacity, impact on 
employment
Family
Passive smoking, diet
Community
Shops and leisure opportunities
Population
Prevalence of obesity
Society
Policies on smoking, screening for 
risk factors
Ecology
Agriculture influencing fat content  
in diet
5.1  ‘Hierarchy of systems’ applied to 
ischaemic heart disease
Principles and investigation of environmental factors in disease
5
99
with malaria parasites on a blood film) in the 
population at risk during a defined period of time.
Variability by time,  
person and place
The next task is to establish how the problem varies in 
terms of time, person and place. The incidence may fluc­
tuate throughout the year; for example, malaria occurs 
in the wet season but not the dry. Observation over 
longer periods establishes whether a problem is becom­
ing more or less common: malaria may re-emerge due 
to drug resistance. The next questions are, who are the 
victims? Are males or females more commonly affected? 
What is the age pattern? What are the occupations and 
social positions of those affected? In this example, symp­
tomatic malaria is more common in poorer, rural-
dwelling children. Finally, there is the question of 
variability by place: the prevalence of malaria is dictated 
by the distribution of Anopheles mosquitoes.
Measuring risk
Epidemiology is also concerned with the numerical 
estimation of risk. This is best illustrated by a simple 
example. In a rural African town with a population of 
5000, disease ‘d’ is under investigation. The majority of 
the cases of disease ‘d’ (300 out of 360) occurred among 
women and children who use the river, which recently 
had its flow of water reduced because of a new irrigation 
scheme. A formal experiment is established to measure 
risk. The 1000 women and children who use the river 
are followed up for 1 year and compared to a cohort 
with a similar age and sex distribution who use stand­
pipes as their source of water.
The incidence (new cases) of disease ‘d’ in the 1000 
exposed to risk ‘r’ (river water) was 300. The incidence 
(new cases) of disease ‘d’ in the 1000 not exposed to risk 
‘r’ was 60. The relative risk is the incidence in the 
exposed population (300 per 1000 per year) divided by 
the incidence in the non-exposed population (60 per 
1000 per year); 300/60 = 5, meaning that those exposed 
to the river water are 5 times more likely to contract the 
disease – their relative risk is 5. The attributable risk of 
exposure ‘r’ for disease ‘d’ is the incidence in the exposed 
population (300) minus the incidence in the non-exposed 
population (60), which is 240 per 1000 per year. The 
fraction, or proportion, of the disease in the exposed 
population which can be attributed to risk (r) is called 
the attributable fraction, in this case (300−60)/300 = 0.8. 
This means that 80% of the disease can be attributed to 
exposure to river water.
Establishing cause and effect
Associations between a risk factor and a disease do not 
prove that the risk factor causes the disease. In the 
northern hemisphere, both multiple sclerosis and blue 
eyes are more common but it is implausible that having 
blue eyes is the cause of multiple sclerosis. Cause and 
effect can only be proven by more detailed investigation. 
In the above example, further investigation of the river 
water will be needed, using the criteria for causation 
defined in Koch’s postulates (for infectious agents, 
p. 134) or the more generic Bradford Hill criteria.
educational outcomes, job prospects and risk of disease. 
Attributes such as the ability to form empathetic 
relationships or assess risk have a strong influence on 
whether a young person takes up damaging behaviour 
like smoking, risky sexual activity and drug misuse. 
Influences on health can even operate before birth.
Individuals with low birth weight have been shown 
to have a higher prevalence of conditions such as hyper­
tension and type 2 diabetes as young adults and of car­
diovascular disease in middle age. It has been suggested 
that under-nutrition during middle to late gestation per­
manently ‘programmes’ cardiovascular and metabolic 
responses.
This ‘life course’ perspective highlights the cumula­
tive effect on health of exposures to episodes of illness, 
adverse environmental conditions and behaviours that 
damage health. In this way, biological and social risk 
factors at each stage of life link to form pathways to 
disease and health.
Investigations in environmental health
Incidence and prevalence
The first task is to establish how common a problem is 
within the population. This is expressed in two ways 
(Box 5.2).
•	 If the problem is a continuing condition (e.g. 
enlarged spleen due to malaria), then prevalence is 
the appropriate measurement and is calculated by 
dividing the number of people with the condition at 
a specified time by the number of people in the 
population at risk at that time. Prevalence tends to 
be higher if the problem is common (many new 
cases) and/or if it is of longer duration.
•	 If the problem is an event that occurs at a clear 
point in time (e.g. fever due to malaria), then 
incidence is used. Incidence is a measure of the rate 
at which new cases occur (e.g. confirmed pyrexia 
Prevalence
•	 The ratio of the number of people with a longer-term disease 
or condition at a specified time, to the number of people in 
the population who are at risk
Incidence
•	 The number of events (new cases or episodes) occurring in 
the population at risk during a defined period of time
Attributable risk
•	 The difference between the risk (or incidence) of disease in 
exposed and non-exposed populations
Attributable fraction
•	 The ratio of the attributable risk to the incidence
Relative risk
•	 The ratio of the risk (or incidence) in the exposed  
population to the risk (or incidence) in the non-exposed 
population
5.2  Calculation of risk using 
descriptive epidemiology
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
100
alcohol deaths? The most likely explanation is that the 
environment changed. The price of alcohol fell in real 
terms and availability increased (more supermarkets 
sold alcohol and the opening times of public houses 
were extended). Also, the culture changed in a way that 
fostered higher levels of consumption and more binge 
drinking. These changes have caused a trebling of male 
and a doubling of female deaths due to alcohol. Public, 
professional and governmental concern has now led to 
a minimum price being charged for a unit of alcohol, 
tightening of licensing regulations and curtailment of 
some promotional activity (e.g. two-for-one offers in 
bars). Many experts judge that even more aggressive 
public health measures will be needed to reverse the 
levels of harm in the community. The approach for indi­
vidual patients suffering adverse effects of alcohol is 
described on pages 240 and 252.
Smoking
Smoking tobacco dramatically increases the risk of 
developing many diseases. It is responsible for a sub­
stantial majority of cases of lung cancer and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, and most smokers 
die either from these respiratory diseases or from ischae­
mic heart disease. Smoking also causes cancers of the 
upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, pancreas, 
bladder and kidney, and increases risks of peripheral 
vascular disease, stroke and peptic ulceration. Maternal 
smoking is an important cause of fetal growth retarda­
tion. Moreover, there is increasing evidence that passive 
(or ‘secondhand’) smoking has adverse effects on car­
diovascular and respiratory health.
When the ill-health effects of smoking were first dis­
covered, doctors imagined that warning people about 
the dangers of smoking would result in them giving up. 
However, it also took increased taxation of tobacco, 
banning of advertising and support for smoking cessa­
tion to maintain a decline in smoking rates. In several 
European countries (including the UK), this has culmi­
nated in a complete ban on smoking in all public places 
– legislation that only became possible as the public 
became convinced of the dangers of secondhand smoke. 
However, smoking rates remain high in many poorer 
areas and are increasing amongst young women. In 
many developing countries, tobacco companies have 
found new markets and rates are rising. Worldwide, 
there are approximately 1 billion smokers, and it is esti­
mated by WHO that 6 million die prematurely each year 
as a result of their habit.
In reality, there is a complex hierarchy of systems that 
interact to cause smokers to initiate and maintain their 
habit. At the molecular and cellular levels, nicotine acts 
on the nervous system to create dependence, so that 
smokers experience unpleasant effects when they 
attempt to quit. So, even if they know it is harmful, the 
role of addiction in maintaining the habit is important. 
Influences at the personal and social level are just as 
important. Many individuals bolster their denial of the 
harmful effects of smoking by focusing on someone they 
knew personally who smoked until he or she was very 
old and died peacefully in bed. Such strong counter-
examples help smokers to maintain internal beliefs that 
comfort them when presented with statistical evidence. 
Preventive medicine
There are many examples of epidemiological associa­
tions defining causative factors in disease, e.g. the asso­
ciation between cigarette smoking and lung cancer 
(p. 699). However, as illustrated above, the complexity 
of the interactions between physical, social and eco­
nomic determinants of health means that successful pre­
vention is often difficult. Moreover, the life course 
perspective illustrates that it may be necessary to inter­
vene early in life or even before birth, to prevent impor­
tant disease in later life. Successful prevention is likely 
to require many interventions across the life course and 
at several levels in the hierarchy of systems. The exam­
ples below illustrate this principle.
ENVIRONMENTAL DISEASES
The term ‘homeostasis’ describes the capacity to main­
tain the internal milieu by adapting to increases or 
decreases in a given environmental factor. However, 
there are limits to the coping abilities of any system, at 
which ‘too much’ or ‘too little’ of a given environmental 
factor will result in ill health. Too many calories lead to 
obesity, while too few lead to malnutrition. Either invol­
untarily or deliberately, we expose ourselves to many 
poisons and hazards. Examples discussed elsewhere 
include industrial/occupational hazards, such as asbes­
tos (p. 718) and other carcinogens (p. 266). ‘Social’ 
poisons, such as tobacco, alcohol and drugs of misuse, 
also need to be considered (p. 240).
Alcohol
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 
the harmful use of alcohol results in the death of 2.5 
million people annually. Rates of alcohol-related harm 
vary by place and time but have risen dramatically in 
the UK, with Scotland showing the highest rates. (Fig. 
5.2 demonstrates the climbing rates during the 1990s, 
since when rates have stabilised at very high levels.) 
Why did Scotland experience this dramatic increase in 
Fig. 5.2  Alcohol-related deaths in Scotland by year and sex 
(1990–2003). Principal (‘underlying’) and secondary (‘contributing’) 
causes of death. (Source: General Register Office (Scotland))
0
10
20
30
Number of deaths
40
50
60
Male
Female
Total
1990
1995
2000
2003
Environmental diseases
5
101
*Based on Coleman T. Smoking cessation: integrating recent advances with 
clinical practice. Thorax 2001; 56:579–582, with permission from the BMJ 
Publishing Group.
Smokers who are not motivated to try to stop smoking
•	 Record smoking status at regular intervals
•	 Anti-smoking advice
•	 Encourage change in attitude towards smoking to improve 
motivation
Motivated light smokers (< 10/day)
•	 Anti-smoking advice
•	 Anti-smoking support programme
Motivated heavy smokers (10–15/day)
•	 As above plus nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) (minimum 
8 weeks)
Motivated heavy smokers (> 15/day)
•	 As above plus bupropion if NRT and behavioural support are 
unsuccessful and patient remains motivated
5.3  Methods for smoking cessation*
‘Placebo or will-power alone has a ~2% chance of abstinence 
for ≥ 6 months. This can be increased by the percentage 
shown by:
•	 written self-help materials: 1%
•	 opportunistic advice from doctor: 2%
•	 face-to-face behavioural support from specialist: 4–7%
•	 proactive telephone counselling: 2%
•	 NRT with limited or intensive behavioural support: 5–12%
•	 bupropion with intensive behavioural support: 9%.’
•	 Health Education Board for Scotland, Edinburgh; 2000.
5.4  Smoking cessation
Young female smokers are often motivated more by the 
desire to ‘stay thin’ or ‘look cool’ than to avoid an illness 
in middle life.
Even if a smoker decides to quit, there are a variety 
of influences in the wider environment that reduce the 
chances of sustained success, including peer pressure, 
cigarette advertising, and finding oneself in circum­
stances where one previously smoked. The tobacco 
industry works very hard to maintain and expand the 
smoking habit, and its advertising budget is much 
greater than that available to health promoters.
Strategies to help individuals quit smoking are out­
lined in Boxes 5.3 and 5.4. Although the success rates are 
modest, these interventions are cost-effective and form 
an important part of the overall anti-tobacco strategy.
Obesity
Obesity is a condition characterised by an excess of body 
fat. In its simplest terms, obesity can be considered to 
result from an imbalance between the amount of energy 
consumed in the diet and the amount of energy expended 
through exercise and bodily functions. People who are 
obese are more likely to develop a range of chronic con­
ditions. In 2006, the number of obese and overweight 
people in the world overtook the numbers who are 
Poverty
•	 Respiratory disease exacerbated or caused by air pollution
•	 Exposure to unnecessary hazards in the workplace or living 
environment
•	 Poor hygiene causing diarrhoeal diseases and debilitating 
intestinal parasitic infections
•	 Malnutrition
•	 Cardiovascular disease
Affluence
•	 Physical inactivity
•	 Alcohol and drug consumption
•	 High rates of suicide, depression, anxiety and stress
•	 Sexually transmitted infection
•	 Obesity
5.5  Examples of effects of financial resources 
on health
malnourished and underweight. It would, however, be 
wrong to focus only on those who are obese because, in 
countries like the USA and the UK, fat deposition is 
affecting almost the entire population. The weight dis­
tribution of almost the whole population is shifting 
upwards – the slim are becoming less slim while the fat 
are getting fatter. In the UK, this translates into a 
1-kilogram increase in weight per adult per year (on 
average over the adult population). It is now widely 
accepted that we cannot blame the current obesity 
epidemic on individual behaviour and poor choice, 
although many current approaches still focus on indi­
viduals. The best way, therefore, to understand the 
current obesity epidemic is to consider humans as 
‘obesogenic organisms’ who, for the first time in their 
history, find themselves in an obesogenic environment 
– that is, one where people’s circumstances encourage 
them to eat more and exercise less. This includes the 
availability of cheap and heavily marketed energy-rich 
foods, the increase in labour-saving devices (e.g. lifts 
and remote controls) and the increase in passive trans­
port (cars as opposed to walking, cycling, or walking to 
public transport hubs). Our physiology was formed a 
long time ago when food was scarce and we needed 
large amounts of energy in order to find food and stay 
alive. We are stuck with the metabolic and behavioural 
legacy of our evolutionary history – we are organisms 
that are programmed to eat when we can and preserve 
energy whenever possible. It is not surprising that we 
have problems coping with an environment that exerts 
constant pressure to increase energy intake and to 
decrease energy expenditure. The rise in obesity sug­
gests that the effects of our obesogenic environment are 
overriding the biological regulatory mechanisms in 
more and more people. To combat the health impact 
of obesity, therefore, we need to help those who are 
already obese but also develop strategies that impact 
on the whole population and reverse the obesogenic 
environment.
Poverty and affluence
The adverse health and social consequences of poverty 
are well documented: high birth rates, high death rates 
and short life expectancy (Box 5.5). Typically, with 
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
102
industrialisation, the pattern changes: low birth rates, 
low death rates and longer life expectancy (Box 5.6). 
Instead of infections, chronic conditions such as heart 
disease dominate in an older population. Adverse health 
consequences of excessive affluence are also becoming 
apparent. Despite experiencing sustained economic 
growth for the last 50 years, people in many industrial­
ised countries are not growing any happier and the 
litany of socioeconomic problems – crime, congestion, 
inequality – persists. Living in societies that give pride 
of place to economic growth means that there is constant 
pressure to contribute by performing ever harder at 
work and by consuming as much as – or more than – we 
can afford. As a result, people become stressed and may 
adopt unhealthy strategies to mitigate their discomfort; 
they overeat, overshop, or use sex or drugs (legal and 
illegal) as ‘pain-killers’. These behaviours often lead to 
the problems listed in Box 5.5.
Many countries are now experiencing a ‘double 
burden’. They have large populations still living in 
poverty who are suffering from problems such as diar­
rhoea and malnutrition, alongside affluent populations 
(often in cities) who suffer from chronic illness such as 
diabetes and heart disease. Recent research suggests that 
uneven distribution of wealth is a more important deter­
minant of health than the absolute level of wealth; coun­
tries with a more even distribution of wealth enjoy 
longer life expectancies than countries with similar or 
higher gross domestic products (GDPs) but wider distri­
butions of wealth.
Atmospheric pollution
Emissions from industry, power plants and motor vehi­
cles of sulphur oxides, nitrogen oxides, respirable parti­
cles and metals are severely polluting cities and towns 
in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Eastern Europe. 
Increased death rates from respiratory and cardiovascu­
lar disease occur in vulnerable adults, such as those with 
established respiratory disease and the elderly, while 
children experience an increase in bronchitic symptoms. 
In nations like the UK that have reduced their primary 
emissions, the new issue of greenhouse gases has 
emerged. Developing countries also suffer high rates of 
respiratory disease as a result of indoor pollution caused 
mainly by heating and cooking combustion.
•	 Quality of life: the major goal of public health policy in the 
young is to prolong lifespan; in old age, quality of life may be 
more important than its duration.
•	 Life course: the environmental factors that determine life 
expectancy operate throughout the lifespan and begin  
before birth.
•	 Susceptibility to risk: decline in many physiological 
functions increases risks from, for example, extremes of 
temperature, poverty, pollution and accidents in the home.
•	 Reliance on support: in many societies, financial, family 
and community support for older people is declining, with 
increasing risks of social isolation, poverty, malnutrition and 
neglect.
5.6  Environmental factors in disease in old age
Range in air
Range in tissue
Protection
Alpha 
particles
Few 
centimetres
No penetration
Paper
Beta 
particles
Few metres
Few millimetres
Aluminium 
sheet
X-rays/
gamma  
rays
Kilometres
Passes through
Lead
Neutrons
Kilometres
Passes through
Concrete 
or thick 
polythene
5.7  Properties of ionising radiations
Carbon dioxide and  
global warming
Climate change is arguably the world’s most important 
environmental health issue. A combination of increased 
production of carbon dioxide and habitat destruction, 
both caused primarily by human activity, seems to be 
the main cause. The temperature of the globe is rising, 
climate is being affected, and if the trend continues, 
sea levels will rise and rainfall patterns will be altered 
so that both droughts and floods will become more 
common. These have already claimed millions of lives 
during the past 20 years and have adversely affected the 
lives of many more. The economic costs of property 
damage and the impact on agriculture, food supplies 
and prosperity have also been substantial. The health 
impacts of global warming will also include changes in 
the geographical range of some vector-borne infectious 
diseases.
Currently, politicians cannot agree on an effective 
framework of actions to tackle the problem. Meanwhile, 
the industrialised world continues with lifestyles and 
levels of waste that are beyond the planet’s ability to 
sustain. Rapidly growing economies in the world’s two 
most populous states, India and China, are going to be 
a vital part of the unfolding problem or solution.
Radiation exposure
Radiation includes ionising (Box 5.7) and non-ionising 
radiations (ultraviolet (UV), visible light, laser, infrared 
and microwave). Whilst global industrialisation and the 
generation of fluorocarbons have raised concerns about 
loss of the ozone layer, leading to an increased exposure 
to UV rays, and disasters such as the Chernobyl and 
Fukushima nuclear power station explosions have dem­
onstrated the harm of ionising radiation, it is important 
to remember that it can be harnessed for medical benefit. 
Ionising radiation is used in X-rays, computed tomogra­
phy (CT), radionucleotide scans and radiotherapy, and 
non-ionising UV for therapy in skin diseases and laser 
therapy for diabetic retinopathy.
Types of ionising radiation
These include charged subatomic alpha and beta parti­
cles, uncharged neutrons or high-energy electromagnetic 
Environmental diseases
5
103
respectively. Bone necrosis and lymphatic fibrosis are 
characteristic following regional irradiation, particularly 
for breast cancer. The thyroid gland is not inherently 
sensitive but its ability to concentrate iodine makes it 
susceptible to damage after exposure to relatively low 
doses of radioactive iodine isotopes, such as were 
released from Chernobyl.
Stochastic effects
Stochastic (chance) effects occur with increasing proba­
bility as the dose of radiation increases. Carcinogenesis 
represents a stochastic effect. With acute exposures, leu­
kaemias may arise after an interval of around 2–5 years 
and solid tumours after an interval of about 10–20 years. 
Thereafter the incidence rises with time. An individual’s 
risk of developing cancer depends on the dose received, 
the time to accumulate the total dose and the interval 
following exposure.
Management of radiation exposure
The principal problems after large-dose exposures are 
maintenance of adequate hydration, control of sepsis 
and the management of marrow aplasia. Associated 
injuries such as thermal burns need specialist manage­
ment within 48 hours of active resuscitation. Internal 
exposure to radioisotopes should be treated with chelat­
ing agents (such as Prussian blue used to chelate 
137-caesium after ingestion). White cell colony stimula­
tion and haematopoietic stem cell transplantation may 
need to be considered for marrow aplasia.
Extremes of temperature
Thermoregulation
Body heat is generated by basal metabolic activity and 
muscle movement, and lost by conduction (which is 
more effective in water than in air), convection, evapora­
tion and radiation (most important at lower tempera­
tures when other mechanisms conserve heat) (Box 5.8). 
Body temperature is controlled in the hypothalamus, 
which is directly sensitive to changes in core tempera­
ture and indirectly responds to temperature-sensitive 
neurons in the skin. The normal ‘set-point’ of core 
radiations such as X-rays and gamma rays. When they 
interact with atoms, energy is released and the resulting 
ionisation can lead to molecular damage. The clinical 
effects of different forms of radiation depend upon their 
range in air and tissue penetration (see Box 5.7).
Dosage and exposure
The dose of radiation is based upon the energy absorbed 
by a unit mass of tissue and is measured in grays (Gy), 
with 1 Gy representing 1 J/kg. To take account of differ­
ent types of radiation and variations in the sensitivity 
of various tissues, weighting factors are used to produce 
a unit of effective dose, measured in sieverts (Sv). 
This value reflects the absorbed dose weighted for the 
damaging effects of a particular form of radiation and is 
most valuable in evaluating the long-term effects of 
exposure.
‘Background radiation’ refers to our exposure to nat­
urally occurring radioactivity (e.g. radon gas and cosmic 
radiation). This produces an average annual individual 
dose of approximately 2.6 mSv per year, although this 
varies according to local geology.
Effects of radiation exposure
Effects on the individual are classified as either deter­
ministic or stochastic.
Deterministic effects
Deterministic (threshold) effects occur with increasing 
severity as the dose of radiation rises above a threshold 
level. Tissues with actively dividing cells, such as bone 
marrow and gastrointestinal mucosa, are particularly 
sensitive to ionising radiation. Lymphocyte depletion is 
the most sensitive marker of bone marrow injury, and 
after exposure to a fatal dose, marrow aplasia is a 
common cause of death. However, gastrointestinal 
mucosal toxicity may cause earlier death due to pro­
found diarrhoea, vomiting, dehydration and sepsis. The 
gonads are highly radiosensitive and radiation may 
result in temporary or permanent sterility. Eye exposure 
can lead to cataracts and the skin is susceptible to radia­
tion burns. Irradiation of the lung and central nervous 
system may induce acute inflammatory reactions, 
pulmonary fibrosis and permanent neurological deficit 
Mechanism
Hot environment
Cold environment
Heat production
Basal metabolic rate
→
↓ in hypothermia
Muscle activity
↓ by lethargy
↑ by shivering
↓ in severe hypothermia
Heat loss
Conduction*
↑ by vasodilatation
↓ by vasoconstriction
↑↑ in water < 31°C
Convection*
↑ by vasodilatation 
↓ by lethargy
↓ by vasoconstriction
↑ by wind and movement
Evaporation*
↑↑ by sweating
↓ by high humidity
↑ by hyperventilation
Radiation
↑ by vasodilatation
↓ by vasoconstriction (but is the 
major heat loss in dry cold)
*These losses are dependent on the relative ambient and skin temperatures.
5.8  Thermoregulation: responses to hot and cold environments
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
104
Fig. 5.3  Clinical features of abnormal core temperature. The 
hypothalamus normally maintains core temperature at 37°C, but this 
set-point is altered – for example, in fever (pyrexia, p. 296) – and may be 
lost in hypothalamic disease (p. 785). In these circumstances, the clinical 
picture at a given core temperature may be different. 
40
37
35
32
28
23
20
°C
Definitions
Clinical features
Heat stroke
Heat exhaustion
Mild
hypothermia
Severe
hypothermia
Hot and not sweating
Multiple organ failure, shock
Confusion, aggression
Hot and sweating
Dehydration, tachycardia
Irritability, fatigue, headache,
weakness
Tachycardia
Vasoconstriction
Cold and shivering
Confusion
Dehydration
Ataxia
Cold and not shivering
Depressed conscious level
Muscle stiffness
Failed vasoconstriction
Bradycardia, hypotension
ECG: J waves, dysrhythmia
Coma
Absent pupil reflexes
May appear dead
Loss of corneal reflexes
Cardiac standstill
Fig. 5.4  Electrocardiogram showing J waves (arrows) in a 
hypothermic patient. 
temperature is tightly regulated within 37 ± 0.5°C, which 
is necessary to preserve the normal function of many 
enzymes and other metabolic processes. The tempera­
ture set-point is increased in response to infection 
(p. 296).
In a cold environment, protective mechanisms 
include cutaneous vasoconstriction and shivering; 
however, any muscle activity that involves movement 
may promote heat loss by increasing convective loss 
from the skin, and respiratory heat loss by stimulating 
ventilation. In a hot environment, sweating is the main 
mechanism for increasing heat loss. This usually occurs 
when the ambient temperature rises above 32.5°C or 
during exercise.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia exists when the body’s normal thermal 
regulatory mechanisms are unable to maintain heat 
in a cold environment and core temperature falls below 
35°C (Fig. 5.3).
Whilst infants are susceptible to hypothermia because 
of their poor thermoregulation and high body surface 
area to weight ratio, it is the elderly who are at highest 
risk (Box 5.9). Hypothyroidism is often a contributory 
factor in old age, while alcohol and other drugs (e.g. 
phenothiazines) commonly impede the thermoregula­
tory response in younger people. More rarely, hypother­
mia is secondary to glucocorticoid insufficiency, stroke, 
hepatic failure or hypoglycaemia.
Hypothermia also occurs in healthy individuals 
whose thermoregulatory mechanisms are intact but 
insufficient to cope with the intensity of the thermal 
stress. Typical examples include immersion in cold 
water, when core temperature may fall rapidly (acute 
hypothermia), exposure to extreme climates such as 
during hill walking (subacute hypothermia), and slow-
onset hypothermia, as develops in an immobilised 
older individual (subchronic hypothermia). This classi­
fication is important, as it determines the method of 
rewarming.
Clinical features
Diagnosis is dependent on recognition of the environ­
mental circumstances and measurement of core (rectal) 
body temperature. Clinical features depend on the 
degree of hypothermia (see Fig. 5.3).
In a cold patient, it is very difficult to diagnose death 
reliably by clinical means. It has been suggested that, in 
extreme environmental conditions, irreversible hypo­
thermia is probably present if there is asystole (no 
carotid pulse for 1 minute), the chest and abdomen are 
rigid, the core temperature is below 13°C and serum 
potassium is > 12 mmol/L. However, in general, resus­
citative measures should continue until the core tem­
perature is normal and only then should a diagnosis of 
brain death be considered (p. 1161).
Investigations
Blood gases, a full blood count, electrolytes, chest X-ray 
and electrocardiogram (ECG) are all essential investiga­
tions. Haemoconcentration and metabolic acidosis are 
common, and the ECG may show characteristic J waves, 
which occur at the junction of the QRS complex and the 
ST segment (Fig. 5.4). Cardiac dysrhythmias, including 
ventricular fibrillation, may occur. Although the arterial 
oxygen tension may be normal when measured at room 
•	 Age-associated changes: impairments in vasomotor 
function, skeletal muscle response and sweating mean that 
older people react more slowly to changes in temperature.
•	 Increased comorbidity: thermoregulatory problems are 
more likely in the presence of pathology such as 
atherosclerosis and hypothyroidism, and medication such as 
sedatives and hypnotics.
•	 Hypothermia: may arise as a primary event, but more 
commonly complicates other acute illness, e.g. pneumonia, 
stroke or fracture.
•	 Ambient temperature: financial pressures and older 
equipment may result in inadequate heating during cold 
weather.
5.9  Thermoregulation in old age
Environmental diseases
5
105
added. Adequate analgesia is necessary, as rewarming 
is very painful. Vasodilators such as pentoxifylline (a 
phosphodiesterase inhibitor) have been shown to 
improve tissue survival. Once it has thawed, the injured 
part must not be re-exposed to the cold, and should be 
dressed and rested. Whilst wound débridement may be 
necessary, amputations should be delayed for 60–90 
days, as good recovery may occur over an extended 
period.
Non-freezing cold injury  
(trench or immersion foot)
This results from prolonged exposure to cold, damp con­
ditions. The limb (usually the foot) appears cold, ischae­
mic and numb, but there is no freezing of the tissue. On 
rewarming, the limb appears mottled and thereafter 
becomes hyperaemic, swollen and painful. Recovery 
may take many months, during which there may be 
chronic pain and sensitivity to cold. The pathology 
remains uncertain but probably involves endothelial 
injury. Gradual rewarming is associated with less pain 
than rapid rewarming. The pain and associated paraes­
thesia are difficult to control with conventional analgesia 
and may require amitriptyline (50 mg nocte), best insti­
tuted early. The patient is at risk of further damage on 
subsequent exposure to the cold.
Chilblains
Chilblains are tender, red or purplish skin lesions that 
occur in the cold and wet. They are often seen in horse 
riders, cyclists and swimmers, and are more common in 
women than men. They are short-lived, and although 
painful, not usually serious.
Heat-related illness
When generation of heat exceeds the body’s capacity 
for heat loss, core temperature rises. Non-exertional 
heat illness (NEHI) occurs with high environmental tem­
perature in those with attenuated thermoregulatory 
control mechanisms: the elderly, the young, those with 
comorbidity or those taking drugs that affect thermo­
regulation (particularly phenothiazines, diuretics and 
alcohol). Exertional heat illness (EHI), on the other hand, 
typically develops in athletes when heat production 
exceeds the body’s ability to dissipate it.
temperature, the arterial PO2 in the blood falls by 7% 
for each 1°C fall in core temperature. Serum aspartate 
aminotransferase and creatine kinase may be elevated 
secondary to muscle damage and the serum amylase is 
often high due to subclinical pancreatitis. If the cause of 
hypothermia is not obvious, additional investigations 
for thyroid and pituitary dysfunction (p. 737), hypo­
glycaemia (p. 807) and the possibility of drug intoxica­
tion (p. 209) should be performed.
Management
Following resuscitation, the objectives of management 
are to rewarm the patient in a controlled manner while 
treating associated hypoxia (by oxygenation and ventila­
tion if necessary), fluid and electrolyte disturbance, 
and cardiovascular abnormalities, particularly dys­
rhythmias. Careful handling is essential to avoid pre­
cipitating the latter. The method of rewarming is 
dependent not on the absolute core temperature, but on 
haemodynamic stability and the presence or absence of 
an effective cardiac output.
Mild hypothermia
Outdoors, continued heat loss is prevented by sheltering 
the patient from the cold, replacing wet clothing, cover­
ing the head and insulating him or her from the ground. 
Once in hospital, even in the presence of profound hypo­
thermia, if there is an effective cardiac output then 
forced-air rewarming, heat packs placed in axilla, groin 
and around the abdomen, inhaled warmed air and cor­
rection of fluid and electrolyte disturbances are usually 
sufficient. Rewarming rates of 1–2°C per hour are effec­
tive in leading to a gradual and safe return to physiologi­
cal normality. Underlying conditions should be treated 
promptly (e.g. hypothyroidism with triiodothyronine 
10 µg IV 3 times daily; p. 743).
Severe hypothermia
In the case of severe hypothermia with cardiopulmonary 
arrest (non-perfusing rhythm), the aim is to restore 
perfusion, and rapid rewarming at a rate greater than 
2°C per hour is required. This is best achieved by 
cardiopulmonary bypass or extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation. If these are unavailable, then veno–veno 
haemofiltration, and pleural, peritoneal, thoracic or 
bladder lavage with warmed fluids are alternatives. 
Monitoring of cardiac rhythm and arterial blood gases, 
including H+ (pH) is essential. Significant acidosis may 
require correction (p. 445).
Cold injury
Freezing cold injury (frostbite)
This represents the direct freezing of body tissues and 
usually affects the extremities: in particular, the fingers, 
toes, ears and face. Risk factors include smoking, periph­
eral vascular disease, dehydration and alcohol con­
sumption. The tissues may become anaesthetised before 
freezing and, as a result, the injury often goes unrecog­
nised at first. Frostbitten tissue is initially pale and 
doughy to the touch and insensitive to pain (Fig. 5.5). 
Once frozen, the tissue is hard.
Rewarming should not occur until it can be achieved 
rapidly in a water bath. Give oxygen and aspirin 300 mg 
as soon as possible. Frostbitten extremities should be 
rewarmed in warm water at 37–39°C, with antiseptic 
Fig. 5.5  Frostbite in a female Everest sherpa. 
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
106
Acclimatisation mechanisms to environmental heat 
include stimulation of the sweat mechanism with 
increased sweat volume, reduced sweat sodium content 
and secondary hyperaldosteronism to maintain body 
sodium balance. The risk of heat-related illness falls as 
acclimatisation occurs. Heat illness can be prevented to 
a large extent by adequate replacement of salt and water, 
although excessive water intake alone should be avoided 
because of the risk of dilutional hyponatraemia (p. 437).
A spectrum of illnesses occurs in the heat (see Fig. 
5.3). The cause is usually obvious but the differential 
diagnosis should be considered (Box 5.10).
Heat cramps
These painful muscle contractions occur following vig­
orous exercise and profuse sweating in hot weather. 
There is no elevation of core temperature. The mecha­
nism is considered to be extracellular sodium depletion 
as a result of persistent sweating, exacerbated by replace­
ment of water but not salt. Symptoms usually respond 
rapidly to rehydration with oral rehydration salts or 
intravenous saline.
Heat syncope
This is similar to a vasovagal faint (p. 555) and is related 
to peripheral vasodilatation in hot weather.
Heat exhaustion
Heat exhaustion occurs with prolonged exertion in hot 
and humid weather, profuse sweating and inadequate 
salt and water replacement. There is an elevation in 
core (rectal) temperature to between 37°C and 40°C, 
leading to the clinical features shown in Figure 5.3. 
Blood analyses may show evidence of dehydration 
with mild elevation of the blood urea, sodium and 
haematocrit. Treatment involves removal of the patient 
from the heat, and active evaporative cooling using 
tepid sprays and fanning (strip–spray–fan). Fluid losses 
are replaced with either oral rehydration mixtures or 
intravenous isotonic saline. Up to 5 L positive fluid 
balance may be required in the first 24 hours. Untreated, 
heat exhaustion may progress to heat stroke.
Heat stroke
Heat stroke occurs when the core body temperature 
rises above 40°C and is a life-threatening condition. The 
symptoms of heat exhaustion progress to include head­
ache, nausea and vomiting. Neurological manifestations 
include a coarse muscle tremor and confusion, aggres­
sion or loss of consciousness. The patient’s skin feels 
very hot, and sweating is often absent due to failure of 
thermoregulatory mechanisms. Complications include 
hypovolaemic shock, lactic acidosis, disseminated intra­
vascular coagulation, rhabdomyolysis, hepatic and renal 
failure, and pulmonary and cerebral oedema.
Fig. 5.6  Change in inspired oxygen tension and blood oxygen 
saturation at altitude. The blue curve shows changes in oxygen 
availability at altitude and the red curve shows the typical resultant 
changes in arterial oxygen saturation in a healthy person. Oxygen 
saturation varies between individuals according to the shape of the 
oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation curve and the ventilatory response to 
hypoxaemia. (To convert kPa to mmHg, multiply by 7.5.)
4
22
Partial pressure of oxygen (kPa)
Pressurised
aircraft cabin
(< 2400 m)
Summit
of Everest
(8848 m)
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Arterial oxygen saturation (%)
Arterial
oxygen
saturation
     Partial
  pressure of 
inspired oxygen
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Altitude above sea level (m)
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Highest
permanent
habitation
(5200 m)
The patient should be resuscitated with rapid cooling 
by spraying with water, fanning and ice packs in the 
axillae and groins. Cold crystalloid intravenous fluids 
are given but solutions containing potassium should be 
avoided. Over-aggressive fluid replacement must be 
avoided, as it may precipitate pulmonary oedema or 
further metabolic disturbance. Appropriate monitoring 
of fluid balance, including central venous pressure, is 
important. Investigations for complications include 
routine haematology and biochemistry, coagulation 
screen, hepatic transaminases (aspartate aminotrans­
ferase and alanine aminotransferase), creatine kinase 
and chest X-ray. Once emergency treatment is estab­
lished, heat stroke patients are best managed in inten­
sive care.
With appropriate treatment, recovery from heat 
stroke can be rapid (within 1–2 hours) but patients who 
have had core temperatures higher than 40°C should be 
monitored carefully for later onset of rhabdomyolysis, 
renal damage and other complications before discharge 
from hospital. Clear advice to avoid heat and heavy 
exercise during recovery is important.
High altitude
The physiological effects of high altitude are significant. 
On Everest, the barometric pressure of the atmosphere 
falls from sea level by approximately 50% at base camp 
(5400 m) and approximately 70% at the summit (8848 m). 
The proportions of oxygen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide 
in air do not change with the fall in pressure but their 
partial pressure falls in proportion to barometric pres­
sure (Fig. 5.6). Oxygen tension within the pulmonary 
alveoli is further reduced at altitude because the partial 
pressure of water vapour is related to body temperature 
and not barometric pressure, and so is proportionately 
greater at altitude, accounting for only 6% of barometric 
pressure at sea level, but 19% at 8848 m.
•	 Heat illness (heat  
exhaustion, heat stroke)
•	 Sepsis, including  
meningitis
•	 Malaria
•	 Drug overdose
•	 Malignant hyperpyrexia
•	 Thyroid storm (p. 742)
5.10  Differential diagnosis in patients with 
elevated core body temperature
Environmental diseases
5
107
High-altitude pulmonary oedema
High-altitude pulmonary oedema (HAPE) is a life-
threatening condition that usually occurs in the first 4 
days after ascent above 2500 m. Unlike HACE, HAPE 
may occur de novo without the preceding signs of AMS. 
Presentation is with symptoms of dry cough, exertional 
dyspnoea and extreme fatigue. Later, the cough becomes 
wet and sputum may be blood-stained. Tachycardia and 
tachypnoea occur at rest and crepitations may often be 
heard in both lung fields. There may be profound hypox­
aemia, pulmonary hypertension and radiological evi­
dence of diffuse alveolar oedema. It is not known 
whether the alveolar oedema is a result of mechanical 
stress on the pulmonary capillaries associated with the 
high pulmonary arterial pressure, or an effect of hypoxia 
on capillary permeability. Reduced arterial oxygen satu­
ration is not diagnostic but is a marker for disease 
progression.
Treatment is directed at reversal of hypoxia with 
immediate descent and oxygen administration. Nifedi­
pine (20 mg 4 times daily) should be given to reduce 
pulmonary arterial pressure, and oxygen therapy in a 
portable pressurised bag should be used if descent is 
delayed.
Chronic mountain sickness  
(Monge’s disease)
This occurs on prolonged exposure to altitude and has 
been reported in residents of Colorado, South America 
and Tibet. Patients present with headache, poor concen­
tration and other signs of polycythaemia. They are 
cyanosed and often have finger clubbing.
High-altitude retinal haemorrhage
This occurs in over 30% of trekkers at 5000 m. The 
haemorrhages are usually asymptomatic and resolve 
spontaneously. Visual defects can occur with haemor­
rhage involving the macula, but there is no specific 
treatment.
Venous thrombosis
This has been reported at altitudes over 6000 m. Risk 
factors include dehydration, inactivity and the cold. The 
use of the oral contraceptive pill at high altitude should 
be considered carefully, as this is an additional risk 
factor.
Refractory cough
A cough at high altitude is common and usually benign. 
It may be due to breathing dry, cold air and increased 
mouth breathing, with consequent dry oral mucosa. This 
may be indistinguishable from the early signs of HAPE.
Air travel
Commercial aircraft usually cruise at 10 000–12 000 m, 
with the cabin pressurised to an equivalent of around 
2400 m. At this altitude, the partial pressure of oxygen 
is 16 kPa (120 mmHg), leading to a PaO2 in healthy 
people of 7.0–8.5 kPa (53–64 mmHg). Oxygen saturation 
is also reduced, but to a lesser degree (see Fig. 5.6). 
Although well tolerated by healthy people, this degree 
of hypoxia may be dangerous in patients with respira­
tory disease.
Physiological effects  
of high altitude
Reduction in oxygen tension results in a fall in arterial 
oxygen saturation (see Fig. 5.6). This varies widely 
between individuals, depending on the shape of the 
sigmoid oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation curve (see 
Fig. 8.3, p. 183) and the ventilatory response. Acclimati­
sation to hypoxaemia at high altitude involves a 
shift in this dissociation curve (dependent on 2,3- 
diphosphoglycerate (DPG)), erythropoiesis, haemocon­
centration, and hyperventilation resulting from hypoxic 
drive (which is then sustained despite hypocapnia by 
restoration of cerebrospinal fluid pH to normal in pro­
longed hypoxia). This process takes several days, so 
travellers need to plan accordingly.
Illnesses at high altitude
Ascent to altitudes up to 2500 m or travel in a pressu­
rised aircraft cabin is harmless to healthy people. Above 
2500 m high-altitude illnesses may occur in previously 
healthy people, and above 3500 m these become com­
mon. Sudden ascent to altitudes above 6000 m, as expe­
rienced by aviators, balloonists and astronauts, may 
result in decompression illness with the same clinical 
features as seen in divers (see below), or even loss of 
consciousness. However, most altitude illness occurs in 
travellers and mountaineers.
Acute mountain sickness
Acute mountain sickness (AMS) is a syndrome com­
prised principally of headache, together with fatigue, 
anorexia, nausea and vomiting, difficulty sleeping or 
dizziness. Ataxia and peripheral oedema may be present. 
Its aetiology is not fully understood but it is thought 
that hypoxaemia increases cerebral blood flow and 
hence intracranial pressure. Symptoms occur within 
6–12 hours of an ascent and vary in severity from trivial 
to completely incapacitating. The incidence in travellers 
to 3000 m may be 40–50%, depending on the rate of 
ascent.
Treatment of mild cases consists of rest and simple 
analgesia; symptoms usually resolve after 1–3 days at a 
stable altitude, but may recur with further ascent. Occa­
sionally there is progression to cerebral oedema. Persist­
ent symptoms indicate the need to descend but may 
respond to acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibi­
tor that induces a metabolic acidosis and stimulates ven­
tilation; acetazolamide may also be used as prophylaxis 
if a rapid ascent is planned.
High-altitude cerebral oedema
The cardinal symptoms of high-altitude cerebral oedema 
(HACE) are ataxia and altered consciousness. This is 
rare, life-threatening and usually preceded by AMS. In 
addition to features of AMS, the patient suffers confu­
sion, disorientation, visual disturbance, lethargy and 
ultimately loss of consciousness. Papilloedema and 
retinal haemorrhages are common and focal neurologi­
cal signs may be found.
Treatment is directed at improving oxygenation. 
Descent is essential and dexamethasone (8 mg immedi­
ately and 4 mg 4 times daily) should be given. If descent 
is impossible, oxygen therapy in a portable pressurised 
bag may be helpful.
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
108
cause of accidental death throughout the world and is 
particularly common in young children (Box 5.11). In 
about 10% of cases, no water enters the lungs and death 
follows intense laryngospasm (‘dry’ drowning). Pro­
longed immersion in cold water, with or without water 
inhalation, results in a rapid fall in core body tempera­
ture and hypothermia (p. 104).
Following inhalation of water, there is a rapid onset 
of ventilation–perfusion imbalance with hypoxaemia, 
and the development of diffuse pulmonary oedema. 
Fresh water is hypotonic and, although rapidly absorbed 
across alveolar membranes, impairs surfactant function, 
which leads to alveolar collapse and right-to-left shunt­
ing of unoxygenated blood. Absorption of large amounts 
of hypotonic fluid can result in haemolysis. Salt water is 
hypertonic and inhalation provokes alveolar oedema, 
but the overall clinical effect is similar to that of fresh­
water drowning.
Clinical features
Those rescued alive (near-drowning) are often uncon­
scious and not breathing. Hypoxaemia and metabolic 
acidosis are inevitable features. Acute lung injury 
usually resolves rapidly over 48–72 hours, unless infec­
tion occurs (Fig. 5.7). Complications include dehydra­
tion, hypotension, haemoptysis, rhabdomyolysis, renal 
failure and cardiac dysrhythmias. A small number of 
patients, mainly the more severely ill, progress to 
develop the acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS; p. 192).
Survival is possible after immersion for up to 30 
minutes in very cold water, as the rapid development 
of hypothermia after immersion may be protective, 
particularly in children. Long-term outcome depends 
on the severity of the cerebral hypoxic injury and 
is predicted by the duration of immersion, delay in 
resuscitation, intensity of acidosis and the presence of 
cardiac arrest.
Management
Initial management requires cardiopulmonary resusci­
tation with administration of oxygen and maintenance 
of the circulation (p. 558). It is important to clear the 
airway of foreign bodies and protect the cervical spine. 
Continuous positive airways pressure (CPAP; p. 193) 
should be considered for spontaneously breathing 
patients with oxygen saturations below 94%. Observa­
tion is required for a minimum of 24 hours. Prophylactic 
antibiotics are only required if exposure was to obvi­
ously contaminated water.
Advice for patients with respiratory disease
The British Thoracic Society has published guidance on 
the management of patients with respiratory disease 
who want to fly. Specialist pre-flight assessment is 
advised for all patients who have hypoxaemia (oxygen 
saturation < 95%) at sea level, and includes spirometry 
and a hypoxic challenge test with 15% oxygen (per­
formed in hospital). Air travel may have to be avoided 
or undertaken only with inspired oxygen therapy during 
the flight. Asthmatic patients should be advised to 
carry their inhalers in their hand baggage. Following 
pneumothorax, flying should be avoided while air 
remains in the pleural cavity, but can be considered after 
proven resolution or definitive (surgical) treatment.
Advice for other patients
Other circumstances in which patients are more suscep­
tible to hypoxia require individual assessment. These 
include cardiac dysrhythmia, sickle-cell disease and 
ischaemic heart disease. Most airlines decline to carry 
pregnant women after the 36th week of gestation. In 
complicated pregnancies it may be advisable to avoid air 
travel at an earlier stage. Patients who have had recent 
abdominal surgery, including laparoscopy, should 
avoid flying until all intraperitoneal gas is reabsorbed. 
Divers should not fly for 24 hours after a dive requiring 
decompression stops.
Ear and sinus pain due to changes in gas volume 
are common but usually mild, although patients with 
chronic sinusitis and otitis media may need specialist 
assessment. A healthy mobile tympanic membrane visu­
alised during a Valsalva manœuvre usually suggests a 
patent Eustachian tube.
On long-haul flights, patients with diabetes mellitus 
may need to adjust their insulin or oral hypoglycaemic 
dosing according to the timing of in-flight and subse­
quent meals (p. 825). Advice is available from Diabetes 
UK and other websites. Patients should be able to 
provide documentary evidence of the need to carry 
needles and insulin.
Deep venous thrombosis
Air travellers have an increased risk of venous throm­
bosis (p. 1008), due to a combination of factors, includ­
ing loss of venous emptying because of prolonged 
immobilisation (lack of muscular activity) and reduced 
barometric pressure on the tissues, together with haemo­
concentration as a result of oedema and perhaps a 
degree of hypoxia-induced diuresis.
Venous thrombosis can probably be prevented by 
avoiding dehydration and excess alcohol, and exercising 
muscles during the flight. Without a clear cost–benefit 
analysis, prophylaxis with aspirin or heparin cannot be 
recommended routinely, but may be considered in high-
risk cases.
Under water
Drowning and near-drowning
Drowning is defined as death due to asphyxiation fol­
lowing immersion in a fluid, whilst near-drowning is 
defined as survival for longer than 24 hours after suf­
focation by immersion. Drowning remains a common 
Infants/young children
•	 Domestic baths
•	 Garden pools
Adolescents
•	 Swimming pools
•	 Rivers, sea, etc.
Adults
•	 Water sports, boating,  
fishing
•	 Occupational
Older people
•	 Domestic baths
5.11  Most common causes of drowning by age
Environmental diseases
5
109
disorders usually present once the diver returns to the 
surface: decompression illness (DCI) and barotrauma.
Clinical features
Decompression illness
This includes decompression sickness (DCS) and arterial 
gas embolism (AGE). Whilst the vast majority of symp­
toms of decompression illness present within 6 hours of 
a dive, they can also be provoked by flying and thus 
patients may present to medical services at sites far 
removed from the dive.
Exposure of individuals to increased partial pres­
sures of nitrogen results in additional nitrogen being 
dissolved in body tissues; the amount dissolved depends 
on the depth/pressure and on the duration of the dive. 
On ascent, the tissues become supersaturated with nitro­
gen, and this places the diver at risk of producing a 
critical quantity of gas (bubbles) in tissues if the ascent 
is too fast. The gas so formed may cause symptoms 
locally, by bubbles passing through the pulmonary vas­
cular bed (Box 5.13) or by embolisation elsewhere. Arte­
rial embolisation may occur if the gas load in the venous 
system exceeds the lungs’ abilities to excrete nitrogen, 
or when bubbles pass through a patent foramen ovale 
(present asymptomatically in 25–30% of adults; p. 528). 
Although DCS and AGE can be indistinguishable, their 
early treatment is the same.
Barotrauma
During the ascent phase of a dive, the gas in the diver’s 
lungs expands due to the decreasing pressure. The diver 
must therefore ascend slowly and breathe regularly; if 
ascent is rapid or the diver holds his/her breath, the 
expanding gas may cause lung rupture (pulmonary 
barotrauma). This can result in pneumomediastinum, 
pneumothorax or AGE due to gas passing directly into 
the pulmonary venous system. Other air-filled body 
cavities may be subject to barotrauma, including the ear 
and sinuses.
Fig. 5.7  Near-drowning. Chest X-ray of a 39-year-old farmer, 2 weeks 
after immersion in a polluted freshwater ditch for 5 minutes before rescue. 
Airspace consolidation and cavities in the left lower lobe reflect secondary 
staphylococcal pneumonia and abscess formation. 
Diving-related illness
The underwater environment is extremely hostile. Other 
than drowning, most diving illness is related to changes 
in barometric pressure and its effect on gas behaviour.
Ambient pressure under water increases by 101 kPa 
(1 atmosphere) for every 10 metres of seawater (msw) 
depth. As divers descend, the partial pressures of the 
gases they are breathing increase (Box 5.12), and the 
blood and tissue concentrations of dissolved gases rise 
accordingly. Nitrogen is a weak anaesthetic agent, and 
if the inspiratory pressure of nitrogen is allowed to 
increase above −320 kPa (i.e. a depth of approximately 
30 msw), it produces ‘narcosis’, resulting in impairment 
of cognitive function and manual dexterity, not unlike 
alcohol intoxication. For this reason, compressed air can 
only be used for shallow diving. Oxygen is also toxic at 
inspired pressures above approximately 40 kPa (induc­
ing apprehension, muscle twitching, euphoria, sweat­
ing, tinnitus, nausea and vertigo), so 100% oxygen 
cannot be used as an alternative. For dives deeper than 
approximately 30 msw, mixtures of oxygen with nitro­
gen and/or helium are used.
Whilst drowning remains the most common diving-
related cause of death, another important group of 
Depth
Lung 
volume
Barometric 
pressure
PiO2
PiN2
Surface
100%
101 kPa (1 atmos)
21 kPa
79 kPa
10 m
50%
202 kPa (2 atmos)
42 kPa
159 kPa
20 m
33%
303 kPa (3 atmos)
63 kPa
239 kPa
30 m
25%
404 kPa (4 atmos)
84 kPa
319 kPa
5.12  Physics of breathing compressed air while 
diving in sea water
Evolution
•	 Progressive
•	 Static
•	 Relapsing
•	 Spontaneously improving
Manifestations
•	 Pain: often large joints, e.g. shoulder (‘the bends’)
•	 Neurological: any deficit is possible
•	 Audiovestibular: vertigo, tinnitus, nystagmus; may mimic 
inner ear barotrauma
•	 Pulmonary: chest pain, cough, haemoptysis, dyspnoea; may 
be due to arterial gas embolism
•	 Cutaneous: itching, erythematous rash
•	 Lymphatic: tender lymph nodes, oedema
•	 Constitutional: headache, fatigue, general malaise
Dive profile
•	 Depth
•	 Type of gas used
•	 Duration of dive
*Information required by diving specialists to decide appropriate treatment. 
See contact details on page 132.
5.13  Assessment of a patient with 
decompression illness*
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
110
Management
The patient is nursed horizontally, and airway, breath­
ing and circulation are assessed. Treatment includes the 
following:
•	 High-flow oxygen is given by a tight-fitting mask 
using a rebreathing bag. This assists in the washout 
of excess inert gas (nitrogen) and may reduce the 
extent of local tissue hypoxia resulting from focal 
embolic injury.
•	 Fluid replacement (oral or intravenous) corrects the 
intravascular fluid loss from endothelial bubble 
injury and the dehydration associated with 
immersion. Maintenance of an adequate peripheral 
circulation is important for the excretion of excess 
dissolved gas.
•	 Recompression is the definitive therapy. Transfer 
to a recompression chamber facility may be by 
surface or air, provided that the altitude remains 
low (< 300 m) and the patient continues to breathe 
100% oxygen. Recompression reduces the volume  
of gas within tissues and puts nitrogen back into 
solution.
The majority of patients make a complete recovery 
with treatment, although a small but significant propor­
tion are left with neurological disability.
NUTRITIONAL FACTORS AND DISEASE
Obtaining adequate nutrition is a fundamental require­
ment for survival of every individual and species. The 
politics of food provision for humans are complex, and 
constitute a prominent factor in wars, natural disasters 
and the global economy. In recent decades, economic 
success has been rewarded by plentiful nutrition 
unknown to previous generations, which has led to a 
pandemic of obesity and its serious consequences for 
health. Yet, in many parts of the world, famine and 
under-nutrition still represent a huge burden. Quality, 
as well as quantity, of food influences health, with gov­
ernmental advice on healthy diets maximising fruit and 
vegetable intakes (Fig. 5.8). Inappropriate diets have 
Fig. 5.8  Proportion of key food groups recommended for a 
healthy, well-balanced diet. Crown copyright – see p. 132. 
Fruit and
vegetables
Food and
drinks high in
fat and/or sugar
Milk and
dairy foods
Bread, rice,
potatoes, pasta
and other starchy
foods
Meat, fish,
eggs, beans
and other non-dairy
sources of protein
been linked with diseases such as coronary heart disease 
and cancer. Deficiencies of simple vitamins or minerals 
lead to avoidable conditions such as anaemia due to iron 
deficiency or blindness due to severe vitamin A defi­
ciency. A proper understanding of nutrition is therefore 
essential in dealing with the needs of individual patients 
and to inform the planning of public policy.
Physiology of nutrition
Nutrients in the diet can be classified into ‘macronutri­
ents’, which are eaten in relatively large amounts to 
provide fuel for energy, and ‘micronutrients’ (e.g. vita­
mins and minerals), which do not contribute to energy 
balance but are required in small amounts because they 
are not synthesised in the body.
Energy balance
The laws of thermodynamics dictate that energy balance 
is achieved when energy intake = energy expenditure 
(Fig. 5.9).
Energy expenditure has several components. The 
basal metabolic rate (BMR) describes the obligatory 
energy expenditure required to maintain metabolic 
functions in tissues and hence sustain life. It is most 
closely predicted by fat-free mass (i.e. total body mass 
minus fat mass), which is lower in females and older 
people (Fig. 5.9B). Extra metabolic energy is consumed 
during growth, pregnancy and lactation, and when 
febrile. Metabolic energy is also required for thermal 
regulation, and expenditure is higher in cold or hot envi­
ronments. The energy required for digestion of food 
(diet-induced thermogenesis (DIT); Fig. 5.9D) accounts 
for approximately 10% of total energy expenditure, with 
protein requiring more energy than other macronutri­
ents. Another component of energy expenditure is gov­
erned by the level of muscular activity, which can vary 
considerably with occupation and lifestyle (Fig. 5.9C). 
Physical activity levels are usually defined as multiples 
of BMR.
Energy intake is determined by the ‘macronutrient’ 
content of food. Carbohydrates, fat, protein and alcohol 
provide fuel for oxidation in the mitochondria to gener­
ate energy (as adenosine triphosphate (ATP); p. 45). The 
energy provided by each of these elements differs:
•	 carbohydrates (16 kJ/g)
•	 fat (37 kJ/g)
•	 protein (17 kJ/g)
•	 alcohol (29 kJ/g).
Regulation of energy balance
Energy intake and expenditure are highly regulated 
(Fig. 5.10). A link with reproductive function ensures 
that pregnancy is most likely to occur during times of 
nutritional plenty when both mother and baby have a 
better chance of survival. Improved nutrition is thought 
to be the reason for the increasingly early onset of 
puberty in many societies. At the other extreme, ano­
rexia nervosa and excessive exercise can lead to 
amenorrhoea (p. 255).
Regulation of energy balance is coordinated in the 
hypothalamus, which receives afferent signals that indi­
cate nutritional status in the short term (e.g. the stomach 
Nutritional factors and disease
5
111
circuits that connect with the cerebral cortex and auto­
nomic nervous system.
Responses to under- and over-nutrition
These complex regulatory pathways allow adaptation to 
variations in nutrition. In response to starvation, repro­
ductive function is suppressed, BMR is reduced, and 
there are profound psychological effects, including 
energy conservation through lethargy. These adjust­
ments can ‘defend’ body weight within certain limits. 
hormone ghrelin, which falls immediately after eating 
and rises gradually thereafter, to suppress satiety and 
signal that it is time for the next meal) and the long term 
(e.g. the adipose hormone leptin, which increases with 
growing fat mass and may also link fat mass to repro­
ductive function). The hypothalamus responds with 
changes in many local neurotransmitters that alter activ­
ity in a number of pathways that influence energy 
balance (see Fig. 5.10), including hormones acting on the 
pituitary gland (see Fig. 20.2, p. 737), and neural control 
Fig. 5.9  Determinants of energy balance.  A Energy intake is shown as national averages, highlighting the differences in sources of energy in 
different countries (but obscuring substantial regional variations). The targets are recommendations as a percentage of food energy only (Source: Dept of 
Health 1991). For WHO target, see Box 5.17 (p. 114). In the UK, it is assumed that 5% of energy intake will be derived from alcohol.  B Data for normal 
basal metabolic rate (BMR) were obtained from healthy men and women in various countries. BMR declines from middle age and is lower in women, even 
after adjustment for body size because of differences in fat-free mass.  C Energy is required for movement and activity. Physical activity level (PAL) is the 
multiple of BMR by which total energy expenditure is increased by activity.  D Energy is consumed in order to digest food. Leisure or sport activity 
increases PAL by −0.3 for each 30–60 minutes of moderate exercise performed 4–5 times per week. The UK population median for PAL is 1.6, with 
estimates of 1.5 for the ‘less active’ and 1.8 for the ‘more active’. 
Immobile
Sedentary work
Standing work
Active leisure/
sport*
Strenuous work
Soldier
Athlete
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Physical activity level (PAL)
   Total energy expenditure
   Basal metabolic rate
Male
Female
Energy expenditure =
B  Basal metabolic rate
D  Diet-induced thermogenesis
C  Physical activity
A  Dietary intake =   food    +   alcohol 
17%
Protein
35%
Fat
48%
Carbohydrate
10%
Protein
15%
Fat
75%
Carbohydrate
17%
Protein
33%
Fat
50%
Carbohydrate
UK target food intakes
Current food intakes
Energy intake
Energy expenditure
India
UK
1 megajoule (MJ)
= 239 kilocalorie (kcal)
= energy stored in ~ 34 g fat
18 – 29
30 – 39
40 – 64
Age (years)
• Higher with greater fat-free mass
• Lower with ageing
• Increases with cold, heat, fever
• Higher in smokers
0
5
10
Energy expenditure 
(MJ/day)
=
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
112
Fig. 5.10  Regulation of energy balance and its link with reproduction.  indicates factors that are stimulated by eating and induce satiety. 
 indicates factors that are suppressed by eating and inhibit satiety. 
Eating behaviour
Habit
Hedonic
response
to food
Satiety
Muscle
Adipose tissue
Energy expenditure/storage
Fertility
Neuro-endocrine responses
(growth hormone, cortisol, thyroxine)
Autonomic nervous system
Reproductive
hormones
Adipose tissue
Hypothalamus
Stomach
Pancreas
Small bowel
Ghrelin
Leptin
Insulin
Peptide YY
Oxyntomodulin
Glucagon-like peptide-1
Pancreatic polypeptide
However, in the low-insulin state of starvation (see Fig. 
21.2, p. 801), fuels are liberated from stores initially in 
glycogen (in liver and muscle), then in triglyceride 
(lipolysis in adipose tissue, with excess free fatty acid 
supply to the liver leading to ketosis) and finally in 
protein (proteolysis in muscle).
In response to over-nutrition, BMR is increased, and 
extra energy is consumed in the work of carrying 
increased fat stores, so that body weight is again 
‘defended’ within certain limits. In the high-insulin state 
of over-nutrition, excess energy is invested in fatty acids 
and stored as triglycerides; these are deposited princi­
pally in adipose tissue but they may also accumulate in 
the liver (non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; p. 959) and 
skeletal muscle. In the absence of hypothalamic function 
(e.g. in those with craniopharyngioma; see Fig. 20.30, 
p. 794) or in rare patients with mutations in relevant 
genes (e.g. in leptin or melanocortin-4 receptors), loss of 
response to satiety signals, together with loss of adaptive 
changes in energy expenditure, result in relentless 
weight gain.
Macronutrients  
(energy-yielding nutrients)
Carbohydrates
Types of carbohydrate and their dietary sources are 
listed in Box 5.14. The ‘available’ carbohydrates (starches 
and sugars) are broken down to monosaccharides before 
absorption from the gut (p. 842), and supply over 
half the energy in a normal, well-balanced diet (see 
Fig. 5.9A). No individual carbohydrate is an essential 
nutrient, as carbohydrates can be synthesised de novo 
from glycerol or protein. However, if the available 
carbohydrate intake is less than 100 g per day, increased 
lipolysis leads to ketosis (see Fig. 21.5, p. 804).
Dietary guidelines do not restrict the intake of intrin­
sic sugars in fruit and vegetables or the sugars in milk. 
However, intake of non-milk extrinsic sugars (sucrose, 
maltose, fructose), which increase the risk of dental 
caries and diabetes mellitus, should be limited. Indi­
viduals who do not produce lactase (‘lactose-intolerant’) 
are advised to avoid or limit dairy products and foods 
with added lactose. Starches in cereal foods, root foods 
and legumes provide the largest proportion of energy 
in most diets around the world. All starches are poly­
mers of glucose, linked by the same 1–4 glycosidic 
linkages. However, some starches are digested promptly 
by salivary and then pancreatic amylase, producing 
rapid delivery of glucose to the blood. Other starches 
are digested more slowly, either because they are pro­
tected in the structure of the food, because of their 
crystal structure, or because the molecule is unbranched 
(amylose). These differences are the basis for the ‘glycae­
mic index’ of foods. This is the area under the curve of 
the rise in blood glucose concentration in the 2 hours 
following ingestion of 50 g carbohydrate, expressed as a 
percentage of the response to 50 g anhydrous glucose. 
There is emerging evidence linking high glycaemic 
index foods with obesity and type 2 diabetes (p. 806). 
Nutritional factors and disease
5
113
Sugar alcohols (e.g. sorbitol) that are used as replace­
ment sweeteners can cause diarrhoea if eaten in large 
amounts.
Dietary fibre
Dietary fibre is plant food that is not digested by human 
enzymes in the gastrointestinal tract. Most dietary fibre 
is known as the ‘non-starch polysaccharides’ (NSP) (see 
Box 5.14). A small percentage of ‘resistant’ dietary starch 
may also pass unchanged into the large intestine. Dietary 
fibre can be broken down by the resident bacteria in the 
colon to produce short-chain fatty acids. This is essential 
fuel for the enterocytes and contributes to bowel health. 
The extent of flatus formed is dependent on the food 
source.
Some types of NSP, notably the hemicellulose of 
wheat, increase the water-holding capacity of colonic 
contents and the bulk of faeces. They relieve simple 
constipation, appear to prevent diverticulosis and may 
reduce the risk of cancer of the colon. Other viscous, 
indigestible polysaccharides like pectin and guar gum 
are important in the upper gastrointestinal tract, where 
they slow gastric emptying, contribute to satiety, and 
reduce bile salt absorption and hence plasma cholesterol 
concentration.
Fats
Fat has the highest energy density of the macronutrients 
(37 kJ/g) and excessive consumption may be an insidi­
ous cause of obesity (see Fig. 5.9A). Free fatty acids are 
absorbed in chylomicrons (pp. 450 and 841; see Fig. 22.5, 
p. 842), allowing access of complex molecules into the 
circulation. Fatty acid structures are shown in Figure 
5.11. The principal polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) in 
plant seed oils is linoleic acid (18 : 2 ω6). This and alpha-
linolenic acid (18 : 3 ω3) are the ‘essential’ fatty acids, 
which humans cannot synthesise de novo. They undergo 
further desaturation and elongation, to produce, for 
example, γ-linolenic acid (18 : 3 ω6) and arachidonic acid 
(20 : 4 ω6). These are precursors of prostaglandins and 
eicosanoids, and form part of the structure of lipid 
membranes in all cells. Fish oils are rich in ω3 PUFA 
(e.g. eicosapentaenoic (20 : 5 ω3) and docosahexaenoic 
(22 : 6 ω3), which promote the anti-inflammatory cascade 
of prostaglandin production and occur in the lipids of 
the human brain and retina. They inhibit thrombosis by 
competitively antagonising thromboxane A2 formation. 
Substituting saturated fat (i.e. from animal sources: 
butter, ghee or lard) with PUFA in the diet can lower the 
concentration of circulating low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) cholesterol and may help prevent coronary heart 
disease. High intakes of trans fatty acids (TFA) (isomers 
of the natural cis fatty acids) reflect the use of oils that 
have been partially hydrogenated in the food industry. 
It is recommended that TFAs are limited to < 2% of the 
dietary fat intake, as they are associated with cardiovas­
cular disease. Changes in industrial practice in the UK 
and US have meant that TFA intake is now below 1%, 
with the residual amounts coming from milk as a result 
of ruminant digestion.
Cholesterol is also absorbed directly from food in 
chylomicrons and is an important substrate for steroid 
and sterol synthesis, but not an important source of 
energy.
Fig. 5.11  Schematic representation of fatty acids. Standard 
nomenclature specifies the number of carbon atoms and indicates the 
number and position of the double bond(s) relative to the methyl (–CH3, ω) 
end of the molecule after a colon. 
CH3
COOH
Polyunsaturated fatty acid, e.g. linoleic acid (18:2 ω6)
CH3
COOH
Monounsaturated fatty acid, e.g. oleic acid (18:1 ω9)
CH3
COOH
Saturated fatty acid, e.g. myristic acid (14:0 )
18
14
1
CH2
CH
Class
Components
Examples
Source
Free sugars
Monosaccharides
Disaccharides
Glucose, fructose
Sucrose, lactose, maltose
Intrinsic: fruits, milks, vegetables
Extrinsic (extracted, refined): beet or cane sucrose, 
high-fructose corn syrup
Short-chain carbohydrates
Oligosaccharides
Maltodextrins,  
fructo-oligosaccharides
Starch polysaccharides
Rapidly digestible
Slowly digestible
Resistant
Cereals (wheat, rice), root vegetables (potato), 
legumes (lentils, beans, peas)
Non-starch polysaccharides
(NSP, dietary fibre)
Fibrous
Viscous
Cellulose
Hemicellulose
Pectins
Gums
Plants
Sugar alcohols
Sorbitol, xylitol
Sorbitol: stone fruits (apples, peaches, prunes)
Xylitol: maize, berry fruits
Both used as low-calorie sugar alternatives
5.14  Dietary carbohydrates
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
114
and minimise the risks of excessive refined sugar 
(dental caries, high glycaemic index/diabetes mellitus), 
saturated fat or trans fat (obesity, coronary heart 
disease). Recommended dietary fibre intake is based on 
avoiding risks of colonic disease. The usual recom­
mended protein intake for a healthy man doing light 
work is 65–100 g/day. The minimum requirement is 
around 40 g of protein with a high proportion of essen­
tial amino acids or a high biological value.
Clinical assessment and investigation  
of nutritional status
The diverse manifestations of inadequate nutrition 
dictate that its clinical assessment and investigation 
involve many systems. Energy balance is reflected in 
body composition, which is most readily assessed by 
clinical anthropometric measurements. It can also be 
tested non-invasively by the measurement of body fat 
by bio-impedance or dual energy X-ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA) scanning. Abnormal micronutrient status is 
commonly manifest in clinical signs in the skin and 
mucous membranes, or in other systems.
A dietary history provides useful information, espe­
cially when obtained by a dietitian. A weighed food 
diary is considered to be the gold standard dietary 
assessment but is rarely conducted in clinical practice.
Anthropometric measurements
Body mass index (BMI) is useful for categorising under- 
and over-nutrition. It is the weight in kilograms divided 
by the height in metres, squared. For example, an adult 
weighing 70 kg with a height of 1.75 m has a BMI of 
70/1.752 = 22.9 kg/m2. If height cannot be determined 
(e.g. in older people with kyphosis or in those who 
cannot stand), a surrogate measure is:
•	 the demispan: measured from the sternal notch to the 
middle finger; height = 0.73 × (2 × demispan) + 0.43
•	 knee height:
females (60–80 years): height (cm) = (knee height 
(cm) × 1.91) − (age (years) × 0.17) + 75.00
Proteins
Proteins are made up of some 20 different amino acids, 
of which nine are ‘essential’ (Box 5.15), i.e. they cannot 
be synthesised in humans but are required for synthesis 
of important proteins. Another group of five amino 
acids are termed ‘conditionally essential’, meaning that 
they can be synthesised from other amino acids, pro­
vided there is an adequate dietary supply. The remain­
ing amino acids can be synthesised in the body by 
transamination, provided there is a sufficient supply of 
amino groups.
The nutritive or ‘biological’ value of different pro­
teins depends on the relative proportions of essential 
amino acids they contain. Proteins of animal origin, par­
ticularly from eggs, milk and meat, are generally of 
higher biological value than proteins of vegetable origin, 
which are low in one or more of the essential amino 
acids. However, when two different vegetable proteins 
are eaten together (e.g. a cereal and a legume), their 
amino acid contents are complementary and produce an 
adequate mix, an important principle in vegan diets.
Dietary recommendations for macronutrients
Recommendations for energy intake (Box 5.16) and 
proportions of macronutrients (Box 5.17) have been 
calculated to provide a balance of essential nutrients 
Essential amino acids
•	 Tryptophan
•	 Histidine
•	 Methionine
•	 Threonine
•	 Isoleucine
•	 Valine
•	 Phenylalanine
•	 Lysine
•	 Leucine
Conditionally essential amino acids and their precursors
•	 Cysteine: methionine, serine
•	 Tyrosine: phenylalanine
•	 Arginine: glutamine/glutamate, aspartate
•	 Proline: glutamate
•	 Glycine: serine, choline
5.15  Amino acids
Circumstances
Daily requirements*
Females
Males
At rest (basal 
metabolic rate)
5.4 MJ (1300 kcal)
6.7 MJ (1600 kcal)
Less active
8.0 MJ (1900 kcal)
9.9 MJ (2400 kcal)
Population 
median
8.8 MJ (2100 kcal)
10.8 MJ (2600 kcal)
More active
9.6 MJ (2300 kcal)
11.8 MJ (2800 kcal)
*These are based on a healthy target body mass index (BMI) of 22.5 kg/m2. 
For a female, height is 162 cm and weight 59.0 kg; for a male, height is 
175 cm and weight 68.8 kg. Previous average recommendations of 8.1 MJ 
(1950 kcal, usually rounded up to 2000 kcal) for females and 10.7 MJ 
(2500 kcal) for males should continue to be used, as these fall within 
experimental error.
5.16  Daily adult energy requirements in health
Nutrient (% of total energy 
unless indicated)
Target limits for average 
population intakes
Lower
Upper
Total fat
15
30
Saturated fatty acids
0
10
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
6
10
Trans fatty acids
0
2
Dietary cholesterol (mg/day)
0
300
Total carbohydrate
55
75
Free sugars
0
10
Complex carbohydrate
50
70
Dietary fibre (g/day)
As non-starch polysaccharides
16
24
As total dietary fibre
27
40
Protein
10
15
5.17  WHO recommended population 
macronutrient goals
Disorders of altered energy balance 
5
115
males (60–80 years): height (cm) = (knee height 
(cm) × 2.05) + 59.01.
BMI does not discriminate between fat mass and lean 
body mass and can be increased by muscle mass (e.g. in 
athletes). Moreover, there are ethnic differences in body 
fat content; at the same BMI, Asians have more body fat 
than Europeans. For optimal health, the BMI should be 
18.5–24.9 kg/m2.
An indication of the degree of abdominal obesity 
is the waist circumference, measured at the level of 
the umbilicus. Hip circumference can be measured at 
the level of the greater trochanters; waist : hip ratios 
show whether the distribution of fat is android or 
gynoid (see below). Skinfold measurements can be 
used to calculate body fat content, whereas relative 
loss of muscle and subcutaneous fat can be estimated 
by measuring mid-arm circumference (at the middle of 
the humerus) and skinfold thickness over the triceps 
(using special callipers); muscle mass is estimated by 
subtracting triceps skinfold thickness from mid-arm 
circumference.
DISORDERS OF ALTERED  
ENERGY BALANCE
Obesity
Obesity is widely regarded as a pandemic, with poten­
tially disastrous consequences for human health. 
Over one-quarter of adults in the UK were obese (i.e. 
BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) in 2010, compared with 7% prevalence 
in 1980 and 16% in 1995. Moreover, almost two-thirds 
of the UK adult population are overweight (BMI ≥ 
25 kg/m2), although there is considerable regional and 
age group variation. In developing countries, average 
national rates of obesity are low, but these figures 
may disguise high rates of obesity in urban communi­
ties; for example, nearly one-quarter of women in urban 
India are overweight.
There is increasing public awareness of the health 
implications of obesity. Many patients will seek medical 
help for their obesity, others will present with one of the 
complications of obesity, and increasing numbers are 
being identified during health screening examinations.
Complications of obesity
Obesity has adverse effects on both mortality and mor­
bidity (Box 5.18). Changes in mortality are difficult to 
analyse due to the confounding effects of lower body 
weight in cigarette smokers and those with other ill­
nesses (such as cancer). However, it is clear that the 
lowest mortality rates are seen in Europeans in the BMI 
range 18.5–24 kg/m2 (and at lower BMI in Asians). It is 
suggested that obesity at age 40 years can reduce life 
expectancy by up to 7 years for non-smokers and by 13 
years for smokers. Coronary heart disease (Fig. 5.12) is 
the major cause of death but cancer rates are also 
increased in the overweight, especially colorectal cancer 
in males and cancer of the gallbladder, biliary tract, 
breast, endometrium and cervix in females. Obesity has 
little effect on life expectancy above 70 years of age, but 
the obese do spend a greater proportion of their active 
life disabled. Epidemic obesity has been accompanied 
by an epidemic of type 2 diabetes (p. 806) and osteo­
arthritis, particularly of the knee. Although an increased 
body size results in greater bone density through 
increased mechanical stress, it is not certain whether 
this translates to a lower incidence of osteoporotic frac­
tures (p. 1120). Obesity may have profound psychologi­
cal consequences, compounded by stigmatisation of the 
obese in many societies.
Body fat distribution
For some complications of obesity, the distribution 
rather than the absolute amount of excess adipose tissue 
appears to be important. Increased intra-abdominal 
fat causes ‘central’ (‘abdominal’, ‘visceral’, ‘android’  
or ‘apple-shaped’) obesity, which contrasts with subcu­
taneous fat accumulation causing ‘generalised’ (‘gynoid’ 
or ‘pear-shaped’) obesity; the former is more common 
in men and is more closely associated with type 2 
diabetes, the metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular 
disease (see Box 5.18). The key difference between these 
depots of fat may lie in their vascular anatomy, with 
intra-abdominal fat draining into the portal vein and 
thence directly to the liver. Thus many factors that are 
released from adipose tissue (including free fatty acids; 
‘adipokines’, such as tumour necrosis factor-α, adipo­
nectin and resistin; and steroid hormones) may be at 
higher concentration in the liver and hence induce 
insulin resistance and promote type 2 diabetes (p. 805). 
Recent research has also highlighted the importance 
of fat deposition within specific organs, especially the 
Risk factors
Outcomes
‘Metabolic syndrome’
Type 2 diabetes
Coronary heart disease
Hypertension
Stroke
Hyperlipidaemia
Diabetes complications
Liver fat accumulation
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
Cirrhosis
Restricted ventilation
Exertional dyspnoea
Obstructive sleep apnoea
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome 
(Pickwickian syndrome)
Mechanical effects 
of weight
Urinary incontinence
Osteoarthritis
Varicose veins
Increased peripheral 
steroid interconversion 
in adipose tissue
Hormone-dependent cancers 
(breast, uterus)
Polycystic ovarian syndrome 
(infertility, hirsutism; p. 764)
Others
Psychological morbidity (low 
self-esteem, depression)
Socioeconomic disadvantage (lower 
income, less likely to be promoted)
Gallstones
Colorectal cancer
Skin infections (groin and 
submammary candidiasis; 
hidradenitis)
5.18  Complications of obesity
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
116
the available food energy, leading to obesity in the urban 
population in parallel with persisting under-nutrition in 
some rural communities. In affluent societies, a signifi­
cant proportion of this food supply is discarded. In the 
US, the average daily energy intake of men reportedly 
rose from 10.2 MJ (2450 kcal) in 1971 to 11.0 MJ 
(2618 kcal) in 2000. Portion sizes, particularly of energy-
dense foods such as drinks with highly refined sugar 
content and salty snacks, have increased. However, data 
in the UK suggest that energy intakes have declined 
(which may in part be due to deliberate restriction or 
‘dieting’), but this is apparently insufficient to compen­
sate for the decrease in physical activity levels in recent 
years. Obesity is correlated positively with the number 
of hours spent watching television, and inversely with 
levels of physical activity (e.g. stair climbing). It is 
suggested that minor activities such as fidgeting and 
chewing gum may contribute to energy expenditure and 
protect against obesity.
Susceptibility to obesity
Susceptibility to obesity and its adverse consequences 
undoubtedly varies between individuals. It is not true 
that obese subjects have a ‘slow metabolism’, since their 
BMR is higher than that of lean subjects. Twin and adop­
tion studies confirm a genetic influence on obesity. The 
pattern of inheritance suggests a polygenic disorder, 
with small contributions from a number of different 
genes, together accounting for 25–70% of variation in 
weight. Recent results from ‘genome-wide’ association 
studies of polymorphisms in large numbers of people 
(p. 53) have identified a handful of genes that influence 
obesity, some of which encode proteins known to be 
involved in the control of appetite or metabolism and 
some of which have unknown function. However, these 
genes account for less than 5% of the variation in body 
weight.
A few rare single-gene disorders have been identified 
that lead to severe childhood obesity. These include 
mutations of the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R), which 
account for approximately 5% of severe early-onset 
obesity; defects in the enzymes processing propio­
melanocortin (POMC, the precursor for adrenocortico­
trophic hormone (ACTH)) in the hypothalamus; and 
mutations in the leptin gene (see Fig. 5.9). The latter can 
be treated by leptin injections. Additional genetic condi­
tions in which obesity is a feature include the Prader–
Willi (see Box 3.3, p. 54) and Lawrence–Moon–Biedl 
syndromes.
liver, as an important determinant of metabolic risk in 
the obese.
Aetiology
Accumulation of fat results from a discrepancy between 
energy consumption and energy expenditure that is too 
large to be defended by the hypothalamic regulation of 
BMR. A continuous small daily positive energy balance 
of only 0.2–0.8 MJ (50–200 kcal; < 10% of intake) would 
lead to weight gain of 2–20 kg over a period of 4–10 
years. Given the cumulative effects of subtle energy 
excess, body fat content shows ‘tracking’ with age such 
that obese children usually become obese adults. Weight 
tends to increase throughout adult life, as BMR and 
physical activity decrease (see Fig. 5.9).
The pandemic of obesity reflects changes in both 
energy intake and energy expenditure (Box 5.19), 
although both are difficult to measure reliably. The esti­
mated average global daily supply of food energy per 
person increased from approximately 9.8 MJ (2350 kcal) 
in the 1960s to approximately 11.7 MJ (2800 kcal) in the 
1990s, but its delivery is unequal. For example, in India 
it is estimated that 5% of the population receives 40% of 
Fig. 5.12  Risks of diabetes and cardiovascular disease in 
overweight and obese women. Data are from the Nurses’ Health Study 
in the USA, mostly of Caucasian women. In some ethnic groups (e.g. South 
Asians, Native Americans) and in people with higher waist circumference, 
the metabolic complications are even more severe at a given level of BMI. 
0
1
2
3
4
Relative risk for
cardiovascular disease
< 21
21– 22.9 23– 24.9
25– 28.9
> 29
0
Relative risk for
type 2 diabetes
< 25
25 – 30
> 30
Normal weight
Overweight
Obese
Body mass index (kg/m2)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Increasing energy intake
•	 ↑ Portion sizes
•	 ↑ Snacking and loss of 
regular meals
•	 ↑ Energy-dense food 
(mainly fat)
•	 ↑ Affluence
Decreasing energy expenditure
•	 ↑ Car ownership
•	 ↓ Walking to school/work
•	 ↑ Automation; ↓ manual 
labour
•	 ↓ Sports in schools
•	 ↑ Time spent on computer 
games and watching TV
•	 ↑ Central heating
5.19  Some reasons for the increasing prevalence 
of obesity – the ‘obesogenic’ environment
Disorders of altered energy balance 
5
117
substantial weight or has gained weight at a faster rate 
than previously, and is not taking relevant drugs (see 
Box 5.20), is more likely to have an underlying disorder 
such as hypothyroidism (p. 743) or Cushing’s syndrome 
(p. 773). All obese patients should have thyroid function 
tests performed on one occasion, and an overnight 
dexamethasone suppression test or 24-hour urine free 
cortisol if Cushing’s syndrome is suspected. Mono­
genic and ‘syndromic’ causes of obesity are usually only 
relevant in children presenting with severe obesity.
Assessment of the diverse complications of obesity 
(see Box 5.18) requires a thorough history, examination 
and screening investigations. The impact of obesity on 
the patient’s life and work is a major consideration. 
Assessment of other cardiovascular risk factors is 
important. Blood pressure should be measured with 
a large cuff, if required (p. 608). Associated type 2 
diabetes and dyslipidaemia are detected by measuring 
blood glucose or HbA1c and a serum lipid profile, 
ideally in a fasting morning sample. Elevated serum 
transaminases occur in patients with non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease (p. 959).
Management
The health risks of obesity are largely reversible. Inter­
ventions proven to reduce weight in obese patients also 
ameliorate cardiovascular risk factors. Lifestyle advice 
that lowers body weight and increases physical exercise 
reduces the incidence of type 2 diabetes (p. 820). Given 
the high prevalence of obesity and the large magni­
tude of its risks, population strategies to prevent and 
reverse obesity are high on the public health priority 
list for many countries. Initiatives include promoting 
healthy eating in schools, enhancing walking and cycling 
options for commuters, and liaising with the food indus­
try to reduce energy and fat content and to label foods 
appropriately. Unfortunately, ‘low-fat’ foods are often 
still energy-dense, and current lifestyles with labour-
saving devices, sedentary work and passive leisure 
activities have much lower energy requirements than 
the manual labour and household duties of previous 
generations.
Most patients seeking assistance with obesity are 
motivated to lose weight but have attempted to do so 
previously without long-term success. Often weight will 
have oscillated between periods of successful weight 
loss and then regain of weight (‘recidivism’). These 
patients may hold misconceptions that they have an 
underlying disease, inaccurate perceptions of their 
energy intake and expenditure, and an unrealistic view 
of the target weight that they would regard as a ‘success’. 
An empathetic explanation of energy balance, which 
recognises that some individuals are more susceptible to 
obesity than others and may find it more difficult to lose 
and sustain body weight loss, is important. Exclusion of 
underlying ‘hormone imbalance’ with simple tests is 
reassuring and shifts the focus on to consideration of 
energy balance. Appropriate goals for weight loss 
should be agreed, recognising that the slope of the rela­
tionship between obesity and many of its complications 
becomes steeper with increasing BMI, so that a given 
amount of weight loss achieves greater risk reduction at 
higher levels of BMI. A reasonable goal for most patients 
is to lose 5–10% of body weight.
Reversible causes of obesity and weight gain
In a small minority of patients presenting with obesity, 
specific causal factors can be identified and treated 
(Box 5.20). These patients are distinguished from those 
with idiopathic obesity by their short history, with a 
recent marked change in the trajectory of their adult 
weight gain.
Clinical assessment and investigations
In assessing an individual presenting with obesity, the 
aims are to:
•	 quantify the problem
•	 exclude an underlying cause
•	 identify complications
•	 reach a management plan.
Severity of obesity can be quantified using the BMI 
(Box 5.21). A waist circumference of > 102 cm in men or 
> 88 cm in women indicates that the risk of metabolic 
and cardiovascular complications of obesity is high.
A dietary history may be helpful in guiding dietary 
advice, but is notoriously susceptible to under-reporting 
of food consumption. It is important to consider ‘patho­
logical’ eating behaviour (such as binge eating, noctur­
nal eating or bulimia; p. 255), which may be the most 
important issue to address in some patients. Alcohol is 
an important source of energy intake and should be 
considered in detail.
The history of weight gain may help diagnose 
underlying causes. A patient who has recently gained 
Endocrine factors
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Cushing’s syndrome
•	 Insulinoma
•	 Hypothalamic tumours or 
injury
Drug treatments
•	 Atypical antipsychotics  
(e.g. olanzapine)
•	 Sulphonylureas, 
thiazolidinediones, insulin
•	 Pizotifen
•	 Corticosteroids
•	 Sodium valproate
•	 β-blockers
5.20  Potentially reversible causes of weight gain
BMI (kg/m2)
Classification*
Risk of obesity comorbidity
18.5–24.9
Reference 
range
Negligible
25.0–29.9
Overweight
Mildly increased
> 30.0
Obese
30.0–34.9
Class I
Moderate
35.0–39.9
Class II
Severe
> 40.0
Class III
Very severe
*Classification of the WHO and International Obesity Task Force. The 
Western Pacific Region Office of WHO recommends that, amongst Asians, 
BMI > 23.0 is overweight and > 25.0 is obese.
5.21  Quantifying obesity with body mass index 
(weight/height2)
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
118
The management plan will vary according to the 
severity of the obesity (see Box 5.21) and the associated 
risk factors and complications. It will also be influenced 
by availability of resources; health-care providers and 
regulators have generally been careful not to recom­
mend expensive interventions (especially long-term 
drug therapy and surgery) for everyone who is over­
weight. Instead, most guidelines focus resources on 
short-term interventions in those who have high health 
risks and comorbidities associated with their obesity, 
and who have demonstrated their capacity to alter their 
lifestyle to achieve weight loss (Fig. 5.13).
Lifestyle advice
Behavioural modification to avoid some of the effects of 
the ‘obesogenic’ environment (see Box 5.19) is the cor­
nerstone of long-term control of weight. Regular eating 
patterns and maximising physical activity are advised, 
with reference to the modest extra activity required to 
increase physical activity level (PAL) ratios (see Fig. 
5.9C, p. 111). Where possible, this should be incorpo­
rated in the daily routine (e.g. walking rather than 
driving to work), since this is more likely to be sus­
tained. Alternative exercise (e.g. swimming) may be 
considered if musculoskeletal complications prevent 
walking. Changes in eating behaviour (including food 
Fig. 5.13  Therapeutic options for obesity. Relevant comorbidities 
include type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, sleep 
apnoea, and waist circumference > 102 cm in men or 88 cm in women. 
This is an approximate consensus of the numerous national guidelines, 
which vary slightly in their recommendations and are revised every few 
years. 
↑Exercise
Eating behaviour modification
Treat cardiovascular risk factors
Supervised low-calorie diet
Drugs
Surgery
BMI cut-offs
in absence of
comorbidity
40
30
25
35
27
25
BMI cut-offs
in presence of
comorbidity
selection, portion size control, avoidance of snacking, 
regular meals to encourage satiety, and substitution of 
sugar with artificial sweeteners) should be discussed. 
Regular support from a dietitian or attendance at a 
weight loss group may be helpful.
Weight loss diets
In overweight people, adherence to the lifestyle advice 
given above may gradually induce weight loss. In obese 
patients, more active intervention is usually required to 
lose weight before conversion to the ‘weight mainte­
nance’ advice given above. A significant industry has 
developed in marketing diets for weight loss. These vary 
substantially in their balance of macronutrients (Box 
5.22), but there is little evidence that they vary in their 
medium-term (1-year) efficacy. Most involve recom­
mending a reduction of daily total energy intake of 
−2.5 MJ (600 kcal) from the patient’s normal consump­
tion. Modelling data that take into account the reduced 
energy expenditure as weight is lost suggest that a 
reduction of energy intake of 100 kJ per day will lead to 
an eventual bodyweight change of about 1 kg, with half 
of the weight change being achieved in about 1 year and 
95% of the weight change in about 3 years. Weight loss 
is highly variable, with patient compliance being the 
major determinant of success. There is some evidence 
that weight loss diets are most effective in their early 
weeks, and that compliance is improved by novelty of 
the diet; this provides some justification for switching to 
a different dietary regimen when weight loss slows on 
the first diet. Vitamin supplementation is wise in those 
diets in which macronutrient balance is markedly 
disturbed.
In some patients, more rapid weight loss is required, 
e.g. in preparation for surgery. There is no role for star­
vation diets, which risk profound loss of muscle mass 
and the development of arrhythmias (and even sudden 
death) secondary to elevated free fatty acids, ketosis and 
deranged electrolytes. Very-low-calorie diets (VLCDs) 
are recommended for short-term rapid weight loss, 
producing losses of 1.5–2.5 kg/week, compared to 
0.5 kg/week on conventional regimens, but require the 
supervision of an experienced physician and nutrition­
ist. The composition of the diet should ensure a minimum 
of 50 g of protein each day for men and 40 g for women 
to minimise muscle degradation. Energy content should 
be a minimum of 1.65 MJ (400 kcal) for women of height 
< 1.73 m, and 2.1 MJ (500 kcal) for all men and for 
women taller than 1.73 m. Side-effects are a problem in 
Diet
% 
carbohydrate
% fat
% protein
Comments
Normal (typical developed country)
50
30
15
Moderate fat (e.g. Weight Watchers)
60
25
15
Maintains balance in macronutrients and 
micronutrients while reducing energy-
dense fats
Low carbohydrate (e.g. Atkins)
10
60
30
Induction of ketosis may suppress hunger
High protein (e.g. Zone)
43
30
27
Protein has greater satiety effect than 
other macronutrients
Low fat (e.g. Ornish)
70
13
17
5.22  Low-calorie diet therapy for obesity
Disorders of altered energy balance 
5
119
the early stages and include orthostatic hypotension, 
headache, diarrhoea and nausea.
Drugs
A huge investment has been made by the pharmaceuti­
cal industry in finding drugs for obesity. The side-effect 
profile has limited the use of many agents, with notable 
withdrawals from clinical use of sibutramine (increased 
cardiovascular events) and rimonabant (psychiatric 
side-effects) in recent years; only one drug, orlistat, is 
currently licensed for long-term use. A number of other 
agents are in development, so the situation could change 
rapidly over the next few years. There is no role for 
diuretics, or for thyroxine therapy without biochemical 
evidence of hypothyroidism.
Orlistat inhibits pancreatic and gastric lipases and 
thereby decreases the hydrolysis of ingested triglycer­
ides, reducing dietary fat absorption by approximately 
30%. The drug is not absorbed and adverse side-effects 
relate to the effect of the resultant fat malabsorption 
on the gut: namely, loose stools, oily spotting, faecal 
urgency, flatus and the potential for malabsorption of 
fat-soluble vitamins. Orlistat is taken with each of the 
three main meals of the day and the dose can be adjusted 
(60–120 mg) to minimise side-effects. Its efficacy is 
shown in Figure 5.14; these effects may be explained 
because patients taking orlistat adhere better to low-fat 
diets in order to avoid unpleasant gastrointestinal 
side-effects.
Drug therapy is usually reserved for patients with 
high risk of complications from obesity (see Fig. 5.13), 
and its optimum timing and duration are controversial. 
Although life-long therapy is advocated for many drugs 
that reduce risk on the basis of relatively short-term 
research trials (e.g. drugs for hypertension and osteo­
porosis), some patients who continue to take anti-obesity 
drugs tend to regain weight with time; this may partly 
reflect age-related weight gain, but significant weight 
gain should prompt reinforcement of lifestyle advice 
Fig. 5.14  Effects of orlistat and bariatric surgery on weight loss.  A Data are from Torgerson JS, et al. Diabetes Care 2004; 27:155–161.
 B Data for surgery are from Sjostrom L, et al. New Engl J Med 2004; 351:2683–2693. Each obese subject undergoing surgery was matched with a 
control subject whose obesity was ‘treated’ by standard non-operative interventions. Note that the maximum weight loss achieved with orlistat was 
approximately 11 %; surgery achieves much more substantial and prolonged weight loss. 
Years of follow-up
Change in body weight (%)
Change in body weight (%)
–45
–40
–35
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
Control
Banding
Vertical banded
gastroplasty
Gastric
bypass
Placebo
+ lifestyle
Orlistat
+ lifestyle
p < 0.001
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Years of follow-up
–45
–40
–35
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
A
B
and, if this is unsuccessful, drug therapy should be dis­
continued (see Fig. 5.14).
Surgery
‘Bariatric’ surgery is by far the most effective long-term 
treatment for obesity (see Fig. 5.14 and Box 5.23) and is 
Procedure
Expected 
weight loss (% 
excess weight)
Adverse effects
Gastric 
banding
50–60%
Band slippage, erosion, 
stricture
Port-site infection
Mortality < 0.2% in 
experienced centres
Sleeve 
gastrectomy
50–60%
Iron deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Mortality < 0.2% in 
experienced centres
Roux-en-Y 
gastric 
bypass
70–80%
Internal hernia
Stomal ulcer
Dumping syndrome
Hypoglycaemia
Iron deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Vitamin D deficiency
Mortality 0.5%
Duodenal 
switch
Up to 100%
Steatorrhoea
Protein-calorie malnutrition
Iron deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Calcium, zinc, copper 
deficiency
Mortality 1%
5.23  Effectiveness and adverse effects of 
laparoscopic bariatric surgical procedures
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
120
BMI (kg/m2)
Classification
> 20
Adequate nutrition
18.5–20
Marginal
< 18.5
Under-nutrition
17–18.4
Mild
16–17
Moderate
< 16
Severe
5.24  Classification of under-nutrition in adults by 
body mass index (weight/height2)
Treatment of additional risk factors
Obesity must not be treated in isolation and other risk 
factors must be addressed, including smoking, excess 
alcohol consumption, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidae­
mia, hypertension and obstructive sleep apnoea. Treat­
ment of these is discussed in the relevant chapters.
Under-nutrition
Starvation and famine
There remain regions of the world, particularly rural 
Africa, where under-nutrition due to famine is endemic, 
the prevalence of BMI < 18.5 kg/m2 (Box 5.24) in adults 
is as high as 20%, and growth retardation due to under-
nutrition affects 50% of children.
WHO reports that chronic under-nutrition is respon­
sible for more than half of all childhood deaths world­
wide. Starvation is manifest as marasmus (malnutrition 
with marked muscle-wasting), or, when additional com­
plicating mechanisms, such as oxidative stress, come 
into play, malnourished children can develop kwashi­
orkor (malnutrition with oedema). Growth retardation 
is due to deficiency of key nutrients, e.g. protein, zinc, 
potassium, phosphorus and sulphur. Treatment of these 
the only anti-obesity intervention that has been associ­
ated with reduced mortality. Bariatric surgery should be 
contemplated in motivated patients who have very high 
risks of complications of obesity (see Fig. 5.13), in whom 
extensive dietary and drug therapy has been insuffi­
ciently effective. It is usually reserved for those with 
severe obesity (BMI > 40 kg/m2), or those with a BMI > 
35 kg/m2 and significant complications, such as type 2 
diabetes or obstructive sleep apnoea. Only experienced 
specialist surgeons should undertake these procedures, 
in collaboration with a multidisciplinary team. Several 
approaches are used (Fig. 5.15) and all can be performed 
laparoscopically. The mechanism of weight loss may not 
simply relate to limiting the stomach or absorptive 
capacity, but rather in disrupting the release of ghrelin 
from the stomach or promoting the release of other pep­
tides from the small bowel, thereby enhancing satiety 
signalling in the hypothalamus. Diabetes may improve 
rapidly after surgery, particularly after gastric bypass, 
and although this may be attributed to severe energy 
restriction in the perioperative period, it is possible that 
increased release of incretin hormones such as glucagon-
like peptide (GLP)-1 may contribute to the improvement 
in glucose control. Complications depend upon the 
approach. Mortality is low in experienced centres, but 
post-operative respiratory problems, wound infection 
and dehiscence, staple leaks, stomal stenosis, marginal 
ulcers and venous thrombosis may occur. Additional 
problems may arise at a later stage, such as pouch and 
distal oesophageal dilatation, persistent vomiting, 
‘dumping’ (p. 875) and micronutrient deficiencies, 
particularly of folate, vitamin B12 and iron, which 
are of concern especially to women contemplating 
pregnancy.
Cosmetic surgical procedures may be considered in 
obese patients after successful weight loss. Apronec­
tomy is usually advocated to remove an overhang of 
abdominal skin, especially if infected or ulcerated. This 
operation is of no value for long-term weight reduction 
if food intake remains unrestricted.
Fig. 5.15  Bariatric surgical procedures.  A Laparoscopic banding, with the option of a reservoir band and subcutaneous access to restrict the 
stomach further after compensatory expansion has occurred.  B Sleeve gastrectomy.  C Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  D Biliopancreatic diversion with 
duodenal switch. 
A
B
C
D
Access
port
Oesophagus
Gastric band
Gastric sleeve
Pylorus
Resected
stomach
The small
intestine is
connected to
the stomach
pouch
Unused portion
of the
small intestine
Removed portion
of stomach
Biliopancreatic
loop
Digestive
loop
Duodenal
switch
75–100 cm
common
loop
Disorders of altered energy balance 
5
121
Diarrhoea can lead to depletion of sodium, potassium 
and magnesium. The high mortality rate in famine 
situations is often due to outbreaks of infection, e.g. 
typhus or cholera, but the usual signs of infection may 
not be apparent. In advanced starvation, patients become 
completely inactive and may assume a flexed, fetal posi­
tion. In the last stage of starvation, death comes quietly 
and often quite suddenly. The very old are most vulner­
able. All organs are atrophied at necropsy, except the 
brain, which tends to maintain its weight.
Investigations
In a famine, laboratory investigations may be impracti­
cal, but will show that plasma free fatty acids are 
increased and there is ketosis and a mild metabolic 
acidosis. Plasma glucose is low but albumin concentra­
tion is often maintained because the liver still functions 
normally. Insulin secretion is diminished, glucagon 
and cortisol tend to increase, and reverse T3 replaces 
normal triiodothyronine (p. 738). The resting metabolic 
rate falls, partly because of reduced lean body mass 
and partly because of hypothalamic compensation 
(see Fig. 5.9, p. 111). The urine has a fixed specific 
gravity and creatinine excretion becomes low. There 
may be mild anaemia, leucopenia and thrombocyto­
penia. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is normal 
unless there is infection. Tests of delayed skin hyper­
sensitivity, e.g. to tuberculin, are falsely negative. The 
electrocardiogram shows sinus bradycardia and low 
voltage.
Management
Whether in a famine or in wasting secondary to disease, 
the severity of under-nutrition is graded according to 
BMI (see Box 5.24). People with mild starvation are in 
no danger; those with moderate starvation need extra 
feeding; those who are severely underweight need hos­
pital care.
In severe starvation, there is atrophy of the intestinal 
epithelium and of the exocrine pancreas, and the bile is 
dilute. It is critical that the condition is managed by 
experts. When food becomes available, it should be 
given by mouth in small, frequent amounts at first, using 
a suitable formula preparation (Box 5.27). Individual 
energy requirements can vary by 30%. During rehabili­
tation, more concentrated formula can be given with 
additional food that is palatable and similar to the 
usual staple meal. Salt should be restricted and micro­
nutrient supplements may be essential (e.g. potassium, 
magnesium, zinc and multivitamins). Between 6.3 and 
8.4 MJ/day (1500–2000 kcal/day) will arrest progres­
sive under-nutrition, but additional energy may be 
required for regain of weight. During refeeding, a weight 
gain of 5% body weight per month indicates satisfactory 
progress. Other care is supportive, and includes atten­
tion to the skin, adequate hydration, treatment of infec­
tions, and careful monitoring of body temperature since 
thermoregulation may be impaired.
Circumstances and resources are different in every 
famine, but many problems are non-medical and concern 
organisation, infrastructure, liaison, politics, procure­
ment, security and ensuring that food is distributed on 
the basis of need. Lastly, plans must be made for the 
future for prevention and/or earlier intervention if 
similar circumstances prevail.
Decreased energy intake
•	 Famine
•	 Persistent regurgitation or vomiting
•	 Anorexia, including depression and anorexia nervosa
•	 Malabsorption (e.g. small intestinal disease)
•	 Maldigestion (e.g. pancreatic exocrine insufficiency)
Increased energy expenditure
•	 Increased BMR (thyrotoxicosis, trauma, fever, cancer, 
cachexia)
•	 Excessive physical activity (e.g. marathon runners)
•	 Energy loss (e.g. glycosuria in diabetes)
•	 Impaired energy storage (e.g. Addison’s disease, 
phaeochromocytoma)
5.25  Causes of under-nutrition and weight loss 
in adults
•	 Gastroenteritis and Gram-negative septicaemia
•	 Respiratory infections, especially bronchopneumonia
•	 Certain viral diseases, especially measles and herpes simplex
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Streptococcal and staphylococcal skin infections
•	 Helminthic infestations
5.26  Infections associated with starvation
childhood conditions is not discussed in this adult medi­
cine textbook.
In adults, starvation is the result of chronic under-
nutrition, i.e. sustained negative energy (calorie) balance. 
Causes are shown in Box 5.25. Causes of weight loss are 
considered further on page 859.
Clinical assessment
In starvation, the severity of malnutrition can be assessed 
by anthropometric measurements, such as BMI (see Box 
5.24). Demispan and mid-arm circumference measure­
ments (p. 114) are most useful in monitoring progress 
during treatment. The clinical features of severe under-
nutrition in adults include:
•	 weight loss
•	 thirst, craving for food, weakness and feeling cold
•	 nocturia, amenorrhoea or impotence
•	 lax, pale, dry skin with loss of turgor and, 
occasionally, pigmented patches
•	 cold and cyanosed extremities, pressure sores
•	 hair thinning or loss (except in adolescents)
•	 muscle-wasting, best demonstrated by the loss of 
the temporalis and periscapular muscles and 
reduced mid-arm circumference
•	 loss of subcutaneous fat, reflected in reduced 
skinfold thickness and mid-arm circumference
•	 hypothermia, bradycardia, hypotension and small 
heart
•	 oedema, which may be present without 
hypoalbuminaemia (‘famine oedema’)
•	 distended abdomen with diarrhoea
•	 diminished tendon jerks
•	 apathy, loss of initiative, depression, introversion, 
aggression if food is nearby
•	 susceptibility to infections (Box 5.26).
Under-nutrition often leads to vitamin deficiencies, 
especially of thiamin, folate and vitamin C (see below). 
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
122
Fig. 5.16  Screening hospitalised patients for risk of malnutrition. Acute illnesses include decompensated liver disease, cancer cachexia or being 
kept ‘nil by mouth’. Adapted from the British Association of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool’ (www.bapen.org.uk).
Weight loss score
Unplanned loss in 6 months
< 5%
5 – 10%
> 10%
= 0
= 1
= 2
BMI score
> 20
18.5 – 20
< 18.5
= 0
= 1
= 2
Acute disease score
Acute illness with no
nutritional intake
for 5 days  = 2
Total = 1
Medium risk
Total  = 0
Low risk
Total ≥ 2
High risk
Total score
• Routine clinical care
• Repeat screen weekly
• Document dietary intake 
 for 3 days
• Repeat screen weekly
• Refer to dietitian/nutrition
  support team
• Review plan weekly
Nutrient (per 100 mL)
F-75 diet1
F-100 diet2
Energy
315 kJ 
(75 kcal)
420 kJ (100 kcal)
Protein (g)
0.9
2.9
Lactose (g)
1.3
4.2
Potassium (mmol)
3.6
5.9
Sodium (mmol)
0.9
1.9
Magnesium (mmol)
0.43
0.73
Zinc (mg)
2.0
2.3
Copper (mg)
0.25
0.25
Percentage of 
energy from
Protein
5
12
Fat
32
53
Osmolality (osmol/L)
333
419
Dose
170 kJ/kg 
(40 kcal/kg)
630–920 kJ/kg 
(150–220 kcal/kg)
Rate of feeding by 
mouth
2.2 (mL/kg/
hr)
Gradual increase in 
volume, 6 times daily
1F-75 is prepared from milk powder (25 g), sugar (70 g), cereal flour 
(35 g), vegetable oil (27 g) and vitamin and mineral supplements, made up 
to 1 L with water.
2F-100 (1 L) contains milk powder (80 g), sugar (50 g), vegetable oil (60 g) 
and vitamin and mineral supplements (no cereal).
5.27  WHO recommended diets for refeeding
•	 Body composition: muscle mass is decreased and 
percentage body fat increased.
•	 Energy expenditure: with the fall in lean body mass, BMR is 
decreased and energy requirements are reduced.
•	 Weight loss: after weight gain throughout adult life, weight 
often falls beyond the age of 70 years. This may reflect 
decreased appetite, loss of smell and taste, and decreased 
interest in and financial resources for food preparation, 
especially after loss of a partner.
•	 BMI: less reliable in old age as height is lost (due to 
kyphosis, osteoporotic crush fractures, loss of intervertebral 
disc spaces). Alternative measurements include arm 
demispan and knee height (p. 114), which can be 
extrapolated to estimate height.
5.28  Energy balance in old age
Under-nutrition in hospital
Under-nutrition is a common problem in the hospital 
setting. In the UK, approximately one-third of patients 
are affected by moderate or severe under-nutrition on 
admission. The elderly are particularly at risk (Box 5.28). 
Once in hospital, many patients lose weight due to 
factors such as poor appetite, poor dental health, concur­
rent illness and even being kept ‘nil by mouth’ for 
investigations. Under-nutrition is poorly recognised in 
hospital and has serious consequences. Physical effects 
include impaired immunity and muscle weakness, 
which in turn affect cardiac and respiratory function, 
and delayed wound healing after surgery with increased 
risks of post-operative infection. The undernourished 
patient is often apathetic and withdrawn, which may be 
mistaken for a depressive illness and can affect coopera­
tion with treatment and rehabilitation.
This can be averted with proper monitoring and 
involvement of an appropriate multidisciplinary team. 
As a minimum standard, all patients should be weighed 
on admission to hospital and at least weekly until dis­
charge. A scoring system for identifying patients at 
nutritional risk is shown in Figure 5.16.
Nutritional support of the hospital patient
Normal diet
As a first step, patients should be encouraged to eat a 
normal and adequate diet. This is often neglected and 
there is evidence of substantial wastage in hospital food. 
In patients at risk of under-nutrition (see Fig. 5.16), 
quantities eaten should be recorded on a food chart. 
Hospital staff must identify and overcome barriers to 
adequate food intake, such as unpalatability of food, 
cultural and religious factors influencing acceptability of 
Disorders of altered energy balance 
5
123
food, difficulty with hand dexterity (arthritis, stroke), 
immobility in bed, or poor oral health. Hospital catering 
departments have an important role in providing accept­
able and adequate meals.
Dietary supplements
If sufficient nutritional intake cannot be achieved 
from normal diet alone, then dietary supplements 
should be used. These are drinks with high energy and 
protein content, and are available in cartons as manufac­
tured, flavoured products or are made in the hospital 
kitchen from milk products and egg. They should be 
prescribed, and administered by nursing staff, to ensure 
that they are taken regularly. Dietary supplements do 
not significantly affect the patient’s consumption of 
normal food.
Enteral tube feeding
Patients who are unable to swallow may require artifi­
cial nutritional support: for example, after acute stroke 
or throat surgery, or when there are long-term neuro­
logical problems such as motor neuron disease and mul­
tiple sclerosis. The enteral route should always be used 
if possible, since feeding via the gastrointestinal tract 
preserves the integrity of the mucosal barrier. This pre­
vents bacteraemia and, in intensive care patients, reduces 
the risk of multi-organ failure (p. 198).
If the need for artificial nutritional support is thought 
to be short-term, then feeding is instituted using a fine-
bore nasogastric tube. The position of the tube in the 
stomach must be confirmed before any fluid is adminis­
tered, as severe respiratory complications can occur if 
fluid is inadvertently infused into a bronchus (Box 22.48, 
p. 879). Thereafter, specially prepared liquid feeds are 
administered either by continuous infusion or using a 
bolus technique. If the patient fails to absorb the admin­
istered feed or vomits it, this may indicate gastric outlet 
obstruction or gastric stasis, which can be overcome by 
placing a nasojejunal tube.
If long-term artificial enteral feeding is needed, a per­
cutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) should be 
sited (Fig. 5.17). A PEG tube is more comfortable for the 
patient, since there is no irritation to the nasal mucosa. 
The tube is less likely to become displaced or to be 
pulled out, so the feed can be given more reliably. 
However, inserting a gastrostomy is an invasive proce­
dure, especially in frail patients with significant comor­
bidities. It may be complicated by local infection (30%) 
and inadvertent puncture of other intra-abdominal 
organs, causing peritonitis and bleeding, so the indica­
tion for placement must be carefully considered. It takes 
approximately 10 days for a fibrous tract to form around 
the PEG tube. If the PEG is displaced or removed during 
that time, there is a high risk of peritonitis. If a problem 
occurs with food absorption, a jejunal extension can be 
placed through the PEG tube and liquid feed adminis­
tered directly into the small bowel.
Parenteral nutrition
Intravenous feeding should only be used when enteral 
feeding is impossible. Parenteral feeding is expensive 
and carries higher risks of complications. There is little 
benefit if parenteral feeding is required for less than 
1 week.
There are a number of possible routes for parenteral 
nutrition:
•	 Peripheral venous cannula. This can only be used for 
low-osmolality solutions due to the development of 
thrombophlebitis, and is unsuitable for patients 
with high nutritional requirements.
•	 Peripherally inserted cannula (PIC). A 20 cm 
cannula is placed in a mid-arm vein. Once  
again, hyperosmolar solutions cannot be  
used.
Fig. 5.17  Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement.  A Finger pressure on the anterior abdominal wall is noted by the 
endoscopist.  B Following insertion of a cannula through the anterior abdominal wall into the stomach, a guidewire is threaded through the cannula and 
grasped by the endoscopic forceps or snare.  C The endoscope is withdrawn with the guidewire. The gastrostomy tube is then attached to the guidewire.
 D The guidewire and tube are pulled back through the mouth, oesophagus and stomach to exit on the anterior abdominal wall, and the endoscope is 
repassed to confirm the site of placement of the retention device. The latter closely abuts the gastric mucosa; its position is maintained by an external 
fixation device (see inset). It is also possible to place PEG tubes using fluoroscopic guidance in patients in whom endoscopy is difficult (radiologically 
inserted gastrostomy (RIG)). 
A
B
C
D
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
124
failure and certain cancers (especially of the lung and 
upper gastrointestinal tract). Although there is decreased 
energy intake with loss of appetite, the main cause is 
thought to be increased metabolic rate through the pro­
duction of key cytokines and other proteolytic factors.
MICRONUTRIENTS, MINERALS AND 
THEIR DISEASES
Vitamins
Vitamins are organic substances with key roles in certain 
metabolic pathways, and are categorised into those that 
are fat-soluble (vitamins A, D, E and K) and those that 
are water-soluble (vitamins of the B complex group and 
vitamin C).
Recommended daily intakes of micronutrients (Box 
5.30) vary between countries and the nomenclature has 
become potentially confusing. In the UK, the ‘reference 
nutrient intake’ (RNI) has been calculated as the mean 
plus two standard deviations (SD) of daily intake in the 
population, which therefore describes normal intake for 
97.5% of the population. The lower reference nutrient 
intake (LRNI) is the mean minus 2 SD, below which 
would be considered deficient in most of the population. 
These dietary reference values (DRV) have superseded 
the terms RDI (recommended daily intakes) and RDA 
(recommended daily amounts). Other countries use dif­
ferent terminology. Additional amounts of some micro­
nutrients may be required in pregnancy and lactation 
(Box 5.31).
Vitamin deficiency diseases are most prevalent 
in developing countries but still occur in developed 
•	 Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC). A 60 cm 
cannula is inserted into a vein in the antecubital 
fossa. The distal end lies in a central vein, allowing 
hyperosmolar solutions to be used.
•	 Central line. The subclavian route is preferred to the 
internal jugular vein, due to lower infection rates. 
Hyperosmolar solutions can be used without 
difficulty. Lines need to be handled with strict 
aseptic technique, and a single-lumen tube is 
preferred, to prevent infection.
If access has been gained to a central vein, nutritional 
support is usually given as an ‘all-in-one’ mixture. 
The main energy source is provided by carbohydrate, 
usually as glucose. The solution also contains amino 
acids, lipid emulsion, electrolytes, trace elements and 
vitamins. These are mixed as a large bag in a sterile 
environment, with the constituents adjusted according 
to the results of regular blood monitoring. Relevant tests 
include:
•	 daily: urea and electrolytes, glucose
•	 twice weekly: liver function tests, calcium, 
phosphate, magnesium
•	 weekly: full blood count, zinc, triglycerides
•	 monthly: copper, selenium, manganese.
If the patient develops fever or other features of sep­
ticaemia, it should be assumed to be due to a line infec­
tion (p. 200). Blood cultures should be taken, the existing 
line removed, the tip sent for bacteriological analysis, 
and a new line inserted.
Refeeding syndrome
When nutritional support is given to an under-nourished 
patient, there is a rapid conversion from a catabolic to 
an anabolic state. Administration of carbohydrates 
stimulates release of insulin, leading to cellular uptake 
of phosphate, potassium and magnesium, which may 
provoke significant falls in serum levels. The resulting 
electrolyte imbalance can have serious consequences, 
such as cardiac arrhythmias, so careful monitoring is 
essential. In patients who are thiamin-deficient, Wer­
nicke’s encephalopathy can be precipitated by refeed­
ing with carbohydrates (p. 253); this is prevented 
by administering thiamin before starting nutritional 
support.
Legal and ethical aspects of artificial  
nutritional support
The ability to intervene with artificial nutritional support 
raises many legal and ethical dilemmas (pp. 9 and 291). 
Starvation will inevitably lead to death, but inability to 
eat may be part of the terminal stages of a disease 
process. Difficult decisions are raised by situations such 
as strokes, which affect swallowing. The instigation of 
feeding may speed recovery and lead to better func­
tional outcome; on the other hand, feeding might 
prolong the process of dying in severe stroke. There will 
be different approaches to these decisions, depending on 
the local availability of resources as well as legal, cul­
tural and religious influences. Some guidelines are given 
in Box 5.29.
Cachexia
Cachexia is the weight loss and muscle-wasting associ­
ated with chronic illness, which is characteristic of 
chronic infections such as HIV-AIDS, end-stage organ 
*Based on British Association for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition guidelines 
(www.bapen.org.uk).
•	 Care of the sick involves the duty of providing adequate fluid 
and nutrients
•	 Food and fluid should not be withheld from a patient who 
expresses a desire to eat and drink, unless there is a 
medical contraindication (e.g. risk of aspiration)
•	 A treatment plan should include consideration of nutritional 
issues and should be agreed by all members of the 
health-care team
•	 In the situation of palliative care, tube feeding should only be 
instituted if it is needed to relieve symptoms
•	 Tube feeding is usually regarded in law as a medical 
treatment. Like other treatments, the need for such support 
should be reviewed on a regular basis and changes made in 
the light of clinical circumstances
•	 A competent adult patient must give consent for any invasive 
procedures, including the passage of a nasogastric tube or 
the insertion of a central venous cannula
•	 If a patient is unable to give consent, the health-care team 
should act in that person’s best interests, taking into account 
any wishes previously expressed by the patient and the 
views of family
•	 Under certain specified circumstances (e.g. anorexia 
nervosa), it will be appropriate to provide artificial nutritional 
support to the unwilling patient
5.29  Ethical and legal considerations in the 
management of artificial nutritional support*
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases
5
125
Vitamin
Sources*
Reference nutrient intake (RNI)
Rich
Important
Fat-soluble
A (retinol)
Liver
Milk and milk products, eggs, fish oils
700 µg men
600 µg women
D (cholecalciferol)
Fish oils
UV exposure to skin
10 µg if > 65 yrs or no sunlight 
exposure
Egg yolks, margarine, fortified cereals
E (tocopherol)
Sunflower oil
Vegetables, nuts, seed oils
No RNI. Safe intake:
4 mg men
3 mg women
K (phylloquinone, 
menaquinone)
Green vegetables
Soya oil, menaquinones produced by intestinal 
bacteria
No RNI. Safe intake: 1 µg/kg
Water-soluble
B1 (thiamin)
Pork
Cereals, grains, beans
0.8 mg per 9.68 MJ (2000 kcal) 
energy intake
B2 (riboflavin)
Milk
Milk and milk products, breakfast cereals, bread
1.3 mg men
1.1 mg women
B3 (niacin, nicotinic 
acid, nicotinamide)
Meat, cereals
17 mg men
13 mg women
B6 (pyridoxine)
Meat, fish, potatoes, 
bananas
Vegetables, intestinal microflora synthesis
1.4 mg men
1.2 mg women
Folate
Liver
Green leafy vegetables, fortified breakfast cereals
200 µg
B12 (cobalamin)
Animal products
Bacterial colonisation
1.5 µg
Biotin
Egg yolk
Intestinal flora
No RNI. Safe intake: 10–200 µg
C (ascorbic acid)
Citrus fruit
Fresh fruit, fresh and frozen vegetables
40 mg
*Rich sources contain the nutrient in high concentration but are not generally eaten in large amounts; important sources contain less but contribute most 
because larger amounts are eaten.
5.30  Summary of clinically important vitamins
5.31  Nutrition in pregnancy and lactation
•	 Energy requirements: increased in both the mother and fetus, 
but can be met through reduced maternal energy expenditure.
•	 Micronutrient requirements: adaptive mechanisms ensure 
increased uptake of minerals in pregnancy, but extra 
increments of some are required during lactation (see Box 
5.33). Additional increments of some vitamins are 
recommended during pregnancy and lactation:
—	 Vitamin A: for growth and maintenance of the fetus, and to 
provide some reserve (important in some countries to 
prevent blindness associated with vitamin A deficiency). 
Teratogenic in excessive amounts.
—	 Vitamin D: to ensure bone and dental development in the 
infant. Higher incidences of hypocalcaemia, 
hypoparathyroidisim and defective dental enamel have 
been seen in infants of women not taking vitamin D 
supplements at > 50° latitude.
—	 Folate: to avoid neural tube defects (see Box 5.32).
—	 Vitamin B12: in lactation only.
—	 Thiamin: to meet increased fetal energy demands.
—	 Riboflavin: to meet extra demands.
—	 Niacin: in lactation only.
—	 Vitamin C: for the last trimester to maintain maternal 
stores as fetal demands increase.
—	 Iodine: in countries with high consumption of staple foods 
(e.g. brassicas, maize, bamboo shoots) that contain 
goitrogens (thiocyanates or perchlorates) that interfere with 
iodine uptake, supplements prevent infants being born with 
cretinism.
countries. Older people (and alcoholics) are at risk of 
deficiencies in B vitamins and in vitamins D and C. 
Nutritional deficiencies in pregnancy can affect either 
the mother or the developing fetus, and extra increments 
of vitamins are recommended in the UK (see Boxes 5.31 
and 5.32). Darker-skinned individuals living at higher 
latitude, and those who cover up or do not go outside 
are at increased risk of vitamin D deficiency due to 
inadequate sunlight exposure. Dietary supplements 
are recommended for these ‘at-risk’ groups. Some 
nutrient deficiencies are induced by diseases or drugs. 
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
‘Folate supplementation in advance of conception and during  
the first trimester reduces the incidence of neural tube  
defects by –70%.’
•	 De-Regil LM, et al. Effects and safety of periconceptional folate supplementation 
for preventing birth defects. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010, 
issue 4. Art. no. CD001056.
5.32  Periconceptual folate supplementation and 
neural tube defects
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
126
Fig. 5.18  Eye signs of vitamin A deficiency.  A Bitot’s spots 
in xerophthalmia, showing the white triangular plaques (arrows). 
 B Keratomalacia in a 14-month-old child. There is liquefactive necrosis 
affecting the greater part of the cornea, with typical sparing of the superior 
aspect. (B) From WHO 1976 – see p. 132. 
A
B
Deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins are seen in condi­
tions of fat malabsorption (e.g. biliary obstruction).
Some vitamins also have pharmacological actions 
when given at supraphysiological doses, e.g. the use of 
vitamin A (p. 1282) for acne. Taking vitamin supple­
ments is fashionable in many countries, although there 
is no evidence of benefit. Toxic effects are most serious 
with high dosages of vitamins A, B6 and D.
Investigation of suspected vitamin deficiency or 
excess may involve biochemical assessment of body 
stores (Box 5.33). However, measurements in blood 
should be interpreted carefully in conjunction with the 
clinical presentation.
Fat-soluble vitamins
Vitamin A (retinol)
Pre-formed retinol is found only in foods of animal 
origin. Vitamin A can also be derived from carotenes, 
which are present in green and coloured vegetables 
and some fruits. Carotenes provide most of the total 
vitamin A in the UK, and constitute the only supply in 
vegans. Retinol is converted to several other important 
molecules:
•	 11-cis retinaldehyde is part of the photoreceptor 
complex in rods of the retina.
•	 Retinoic acid induces differentiation of epithelial 
cells by binding to specific nuclear receptors, which 
induce responsive genes. In vitamin A deficiency, 
mucus-secreting cells are replaced by keratin-
producing cells.
•	 Retinoids are necessary for normal growth, fetal 
development, fertility, haematopoiesis and immune 
function.
Globally, the most important consequence of 
vitamin A deficiency is irreversible blindness in young 
children. Asia is most notably affected and the problem 
is being addressed through widespread vitamin A 
Nutrient
Biochemical assessments of deficiency or excess
Vitamin A
Serum retinol may be low in deficiency
Serum retinyl esters: when vitamin A toxicity is suspected
Vitamin D
Plasma/serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D (25(OH)D): reflects body stores (liver and adipose tissue)
Plasma/serum 1,25(OH)2D: difficult to interpret
Vitamin E
Serum tocopherol : cholesterol ratio
Vitamin K
Coagulation assays (e.g. prothrombin time)
Plasma vitamin K
Vitamin B1 (thiamin)
Red blood cell transketolase activity or whole-blood vitamin B1
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
Red blood cell glutathione reductase activity or whole-blood vitamin B2
Vitamin B3 (niacin)
Urinary metabolites: 1-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide, 1-methylnicotinamide
Vitamin B6
Plasma pyridoxal phosphate or erythrocyte transaminase activation coefficient
Vitamin B12
Plasma B12: poor measure of overall vitamin B12 status but will detect severe deficiency
Alternatives (methylmalonic acid and holotranscobalamin) are not used routinely
Folate
Red blood cell folate
Plasma folate: reflects recent intake but also detects unmetabolised folic acid from foods and supplements
Vitamin C
Leucocyte ascorbic acid: assesses vitamin C tissue stores
Plasma ascorbic acid: reflects recent (daily) intake
5.33  Biochemical assessment of vitamin status
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases
5
127
α-tocopherol. Vitamin E has many direct metabolic 
actions:
•	 It prevents oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids 
in cell membranes by free radicals.
•	 It helps maintain cell membrane structure.
•	 It affects DNA synthesis and cell signalling.
•	 It is involved in the anti-inflammatory and immune 
systems.
Human deficiency is rare and has only been described 
in premature infants and in malabsorption. It can 
cause a mild haemolytic anaemia, ataxia and visual 
scotomas. Vitamin E intakes are considered safe up to 
3200 mg/day (1000-fold greater than recommended 
intakes). Diets rich in vitamin E are consumed in 
countries with lower rates of coronary heart disease. 
However, randomised controlled trials have not demon­
strated cardioprotective effects of vitamin E or other 
antioxidants.
Vitamin K
Vitamin K is supplied in the diet mainly as vitamin K1 
(phylloquinone) in the UK, or as vitamin K2 (menaqui­
none) from fermented products in parts of Asia. Vitamin 
K2 is also synthesised by bacteria in the colon. Vitamin 
K is a co-factor for carboxylation reactions: in parti­
cular, the production of γ-carboxyglutamate (gla). Gla 
residues are found in four of the coagulation factor pro­
teins (II, VII, IX and X; p. 997), conferring their capacity 
to bind to phospholipid surfaces in the presence of 
calcium. Other important gla proteins are osteocalcin 
and matrix gla protein, which are important in bone 
mineralisation.
Vitamin K deficiency leads to delayed coagulation 
and bleeding. In obstructive jaundice, dietary vitamin K 
is not absorbed and it is essential to administer the 
vitamin in parenteral form before surgery. Warfarin and 
related anticoagulants (p. 1019) act by antagonising 
vitamin K. Vitamin K is given routinely to newborn 
babies to prevent haemorrhagic disease. Symptoms of 
excess have been reported only in infants, with synthetic 
preparations linked to haemolysis and liver damage.
Water-soluble vitamins
Thiamin (vitamin B1)
Thiamin is widely distributed in foods of both vegetable 
and animal origin. Thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP) is 
a co-factor for enzyme reactions involved in the 
supplementation programmes. Adults are not usually at 
risk because liver stores can supply vitamin A when 
foods containing vitamin A are unavailable.
Early deficiency causes impaired adaptation to the 
dark (night blindness). Keratinisation of the cornea 
(xerophthalmia) gives rise to characteristic Bitot’s spots, 
and progresses to keratomalacia, with corneal ulcera­
tion, scarring and irreversible blindness (Fig. 5.18). In 
countries where vitamin A deficiency is endemic, preg­
nant women should be advised to eat dark-green, leafy 
vegetables and yellow fruits (to build up stores of retinol 
in the fetal liver), and infants should be fed the same. 
WHO is according high priority to prevention in com­
munities where xerophthalmia occurs, giving single 
prophylactic oral doses of 60 mg retinyl palmitate (pro­
viding 200 000 U retinol) to pre-school children. This 
also reduces mortality from gastroenteritis and respira­
tory infections.
Repeated moderate or high doses of retinol can cause 
liver damage, hyperostosis and teratogenicity. Women 
in countries where deficiency is not endemic are there­
fore advised not to take vitamin A supplements in preg­
nancy. Retinol intake may also be restricted in those at 
risk of osteoporosis. Acute overdose leads to nausea and 
headache, increased intracranial pressure and skin desq­
uamation. Excessive intake of carotene can cause pig­
mentation of the skin (hypercarotenosis); this gradually 
fades when intake is reduced.
Vitamin D
The natural form of vitamin D, cholecalciferol or vitamin 
D3, is formed in the skin by the action of UV light on 
7-dehydrocholesterol, a metabolite of cholesterol. Few 
foods contain vitamin D naturally and skin exposure to 
sunlight is the main source. Moving away from the 
equator, the intensity of UV light decreases, so that at 
a latitude above 50° (including northern Europe), 
vitamin D is not synthesised in winter, and even above 
30° there is seasonal variation. The body store accumu­
lated during the summer is consumed during the winter. 
Vitamin D is converted in the liver to 25-hydroxy vitamin 
D (25(OH)D), which is further hydroxylated in the 
kidneys to 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D (1,25 (OH)2D), the 
active form of the vitamin (see Fig. 25.55, p. 1127). 
1,25(OH)2D activates specific intracellular receptors 
which influence calcium metabolism, bone mineralisa­
tion and tissue differentiation. The synthetic form, ergo­
calciferol, or vitamin D2, is considered to be less potent 
than the endogenous D3.
Recommended dietary intakes aim to prevent rickets 
and osteomalacia. There is increasing evidence that 
vitamin D is important for immune and muscle function, 
and may reduce falls in the elderly (p. 172). Margarines 
are fortified with vitamin D in the UK, and milk is forti­
fied in some parts of Europe and in North America.
The effects of vitamin D deficiency (calcium defi­
ciency, rickets and osteomalacia) are described on page 
1125. An analogue of vitamin D (calcipotriol) is used for 
treatment of skin conditions such as psoriasis. Excessive 
doses of cholecalciferol, ergocalciferol or the hydroxy­
lated metabolites cause hypercalcaemia (p. 767).
Vitamin E
There are eight related fat-soluble substances with 
vitamin E activity. The most important dietary form is 
•	 Requirements: although energy requirements fall with age, 
those for micronutrients do not. If dietary intake falls, a 
vitamin-rich diet is required to compensate.
•	 Vitamin D: levels are commonly low due to reduced dietary 
intake, decreased sun exposure and less efficient skin 
conversion. This leads to bone loss and fractures. 
Supplements should be given to those in institutional care 
and those with recurrent falls.
•	 Vitamin B12 deficiency: a causal relationship with dementia 
has not been identified, but it does produce neuropsychiatric 
effects and should be checked in all those with declining 
cognitive function.
5.34  Vitamin deficiency in old age
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
128
metabolism of macronutrients (carbohydrate, fat and 
alcohol), including:
•	 decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-co-enzyme A, 
which bridges between glycolysis and the 
tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle
•	 transketolase activity in the hexose monophosphate 
shunt pathway
•	 decarboxylation of α-ketoglutarate to succinate in 
the Krebs cycle.
In thiamin deficiency, cells cannot metabolise glucose 
aerobically to generate energy as ATP. Neuronal cells 
are most vulnerable, since they depend almost exclu­
sively on glucose for energy requirements. Impaired 
glucose oxidation also causes an accumulation of 
pyruvic and lactic acids, which produce vasodilatation 
and increased cardiac output.
Deficiency – beri-beri
In the developed world, thiamin deficiency is mainly 
encountered in chronic alcoholics. Poor diet, impaired 
absorption, storage and phosphorylation of thiamin in 
the liver, and the increased requirements for thiamin to 
metabolise ethanol all contribute. In the developing 
world, deficiency usually arises as a consequence of a 
diet based on polished rice. The body has very limited 
stores of thiamin, so deficiency is manifest after only 1 
month on a thiamin-free diet. There are two forms of the 
disease in adults:
•	 Dry (or neurological) beri-beri manifests with chronic 
peripheral neuropathy and with wrist and/or foot 
drop, and may cause Korsakoff’s psychosis and 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy (p. 253).
•	 Wet (or cardiac) beri-beri causes generalised oedema 
due to biventricular heart failure with pulmonary 
congestion.
In dry beri-beri, response to thiamin administration 
is not uniformly good. However, multivitamin therapy 
seems to produce some improvement, suggesting 
that other vitamin deficiencies may be involved. 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy and wet beri-beri should 
be treated without delay with intravenous vitamin B 
and C mixture (‘Pabrinex’, p. 253). Korsakoff’s psychosis 
is irreversible and does not respond to thiamin 
treatment.
Riboflavin (vitamin B2)
Riboflavin is required for the flavin co-factors involved 
in oxidation–reduction reactions. It is widely distributed 
in animal and vegetable foods. Levels are low in staple 
cereals but germination increases its content. It is 
destroyed under alkaline conditions by heat and by 
exposure to sunlight.
Deficiency is rare in developed countries. It mainly 
affects the tongue and lips and manifests as glossitis, 
angular stomatitis and cheilosis. The genitals may be 
affected, as well as the skin areas rich in sebaceous 
glands, causing nasolabial or facial dyssebacea. Rapid 
recovery usually follows administration of riboflavin 
10 mg daily by mouth.
Niacin (vitamin B3)
Niacin encompasses nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. 
Nicotinamide is an essential part of the two pyridine 
nucleotides, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) 
and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADP), which play a key role as hydrogen acceptors 
and donors for many enzymes. Niacin can be synthe­
sised in the body in limited amounts from the amino 
acid tryptophan.
Deficiency – pellagra
Pellagra was formerly endemic among poor people who 
subsisted chiefly on maize, which contains niacytin, a 
form of niacin that the body is unable to utilise. Pellagra 
can develop in only 8 weeks in individuals eating diets 
that are very deficient in niacin and tryptophan. It 
remains a problem in parts of Africa, and is occasionally 
seen in alcoholics and in patients with chronic small 
intestinal disease in developed countries. Pellagra can 
occur in Hartnup’s disease, a genetic disorder character­
ised by impaired absorption of several amino acids, 
including tryptophan. It is also seen occasionally in car­
cinoid syndrome (p. 784), when tryptophan is consumed 
in the excessive production of 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(5-HT). Pellagra has been called the disease of the 
three Ds:
•	 Dermatitis. Characteristically, there is erythema 
resembling severe sunburn, appearing 
symmetrically over the parts of the body exposed  
to sunlight, particularly the limbs and especially  
on the neck, but not the face (Casal’s necklace,  
Fig. 5.19). The skin lesions may progress to 
vesiculation, cracking, exudation and secondary 
infection.
•	 Diarrhoea. This is often associated with anorexia, 
nausea, glossitis and dysphagia, reflecting the 
presence of a non-infective inflammation that 
extends throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
•	 Dementia. In severe deficiency, delirium occurs 
acutely and dementia develops in chronic cases.
Fig. 5.19  Dermatitis due to pellagra (niacin deficiency). The 
lesions appear on those parts of the body exposed to sunlight. The classic 
‘Casal’s necklace’ can be seen around the neck and upper chest. From 
Karthikeyan and Thappa 2002 – see p. 132. 
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases
5
129
deficiency has also been associated with heart disease, 
dementia and cancer. There is mandatory fortification of 
flour with folic acid in the US and voluntary fortification 
of many foods across Europe. There are now concerns 
that this may contribute to the increased incidence of 
colon cancer through promotion of the growth of polyps.
Hydroxycobalamin (vitamin B12)
Vitamin B12 is a co-factor in folate co-enzyme recycling 
and nerve myelination. Vitamin B12 and folate are par­
ticularly important in DNA synthesis in red blood cells 
(p. 1024). The haematological disorders (macrocytic or 
megaloblastic anaemias) due to their deficiency are dis­
cussed on pages 1024–1026. Vitamin B12, but not folate, 
is needed for the integrity of myelin, so that vitamin B12 
deficiency is also associated with neurological disease 
(see Box 24.35, p. 1024).
Neurological consequences of vitamin B12 deficiency
In older people and chronic alcoholics, vitamin B12 defi­
ciency arises from insufficient intake and/or from 
malabsorption. Several drugs, including neomycin, can 
render vitamin B12 inactive. Adequate intake of folate 
maintains erythropoiesis and there is a concern that for­
tification of foods with folate may mask underlying 
vitamin B12 deficiency. In severe deficiency there is insid­
ious, diffuse and uneven demyelination. It may be 
clinically manifest as peripheral neuropathy or spinal 
cord degeneration affecting both posterior and lateral 
columns (‘subacute combined degeneration of the spinal 
cord’; p. 1222), or there may be cerebral manifestations 
(resembling dementia) or optic atrophy. Vitamin B12 
therapy improves symptoms in most cases.
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
Ascorbic acid is the most active reducing agent in 
the aqueous phase of living tissues and is involved 
in intracellular electron transfer. It takes part in the 
hydroxylation of proline and lysine in protocollagen to 
hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine in mature collagen. 
It is very easily destroyed by heat, increased pH and 
light, and is very soluble in water; hence many tradi­
tional cooking methods reduce or eliminate it. Claims 
that high-dose vitamin C improves immune function 
(including resistance to the common cold) and choles­
terol turnover remain unsubstantiated.
Deficiency – scurvy
Vitamin C deficiency causes defective formation of col­
lagen with impaired healing of wounds, capillary haem­
orrhage and reduced platelet adhesiveness (normal 
platelets are rich in ascorbate) (Fig. 5.20). Precipitants 
and clinical features of scurvy are shown in Box 5.35. A 
dose of 250 mg vitamin C 3 times daily by mouth should 
saturate the tissues quickly. The deficiencies of the 
patient’s diet also need to be corrected and other vitamin 
supplements given if necessary. Daily intakes of more 
than 1 g/day have been reported to cause diarrhoea and 
the formation of renal oxalate stones.
Other dietary organic compounds
There are a number of non-essential organic compounds 
with purported health benefits such as reducing risk of 
heart disease or cancer. Groups of compounds such as 
the flavonoids and phytoestrogens show bioactivity 
Treatment is with nicotinamide, given in a dose of 
100 mg 3 times daily orally or parenterally. The response 
is usually rapid. Within 24 hours, the erythema dimin­
ishes, the diarrhoea ceases and a striking improvement 
occurs in the patient’s mental state.
Toxicity
Excessive intakes of niacin may lead to reversible 
hepatotoxicity. Nicotinic acid is a lipid-lowering agent, 
but at doses above 200 mg a day gives rise to vasodila­
tory symptoms (‘flushing’ and/or hypotension).
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
Pyridoxine, pyridoxal and pyridoxamine are different 
forms of vitamin B6 that undergo phosphorylation to 
produce pyridoxal 5-phosphate (PLP). PLP is the 
co-factor for a large number of enzymes involved in the 
metabolism of amino acids. Vitamin B6 is available in 
most foods.
Deficiency is rare, although certain drugs, such as 
isoniazid and penicillamine, act as chemical antagonists 
to pyridoxine. Pyridoxine administration is effective 
in isoniazid-induced peripheral neuropathy and some 
cases of sideroblastic anaemia. Large doses of vitamin 
B6 have an antiemetic effect in radiotherapy-induced 
nausea. Although vitamin B6 supplements have become 
popular in the treatment of nausea in pregnancy, carpal 
tunnel syndrome and premenstrual syndrome, there is 
no convincing evidence of benefit. Very high doses of 
vitamin B6 taken for several months can cause a sensory 
polyneuropathy.
Biotin
Biotin is a co-enzyme in the synthesis of fatty acids, 
isoleucine and valine and is also involved in gluconeo­
genesis. Deficiency results from consuming very large 
quantities of raw egg whites (> 30% energy intake) 
because the avidin they contain binds to and inactivates 
biotin in the intestine. It may also be seen after long 
periods of total parenteral nutrition. The clinical features 
of deficiency include scaly dermatitis, alopecia and 
paraesthesia.
Folate (folic acid)
Folates exist in many forms. The main circulating form 
is 5-methyltetrahydrofolate. The natural forms are prone 
to oxidation. Folic acid is the stable synthetic form. 
Folate works as a methyl donor for cellular methylation 
and protein synthesis. It is directly involved in DNA 
and RNA synthesis, and requirements increase during 
embryonic development.
Folate deficiency may cause three major birth defects 
(spina bifida, anencephaly and encephalocele) resulting 
from imperfect closure of the neural tube, which takes 
place 3–4 weeks after conception. The UK Department 
of Health advises that women who have experienced a 
pregnancy affected by a neural tube defect should take 
5 mg of folic acid daily from before conception and 
throughout the first trimester (see Box 5.32, p. 125). All 
women planning a pregnancy are advised to include 
good sources of folate in their diet, and to take folate 
supplements throughout the first trimester. Liver is the 
richest source of folate but an alternative source (e.g. 
leafy vegetables) is advised in early pregnancy because 
of the high vitamin A content of liver (p. 126). Folate 
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
130
through their respective antioxidant and oestrogenic or 
anti-oestrogenic activities. Flavonoids (of which there 
are a number of different classes of compound) are 
found in fruit and vegetables, tea and wine; phytoestro­
gens are found in soy products (with higher intakes in 
parts of Asia compared to Europe and the US) and 
pulses. Caffeine from tea and coffee and carbonated 
beverages affects the nervous system and can improve 
mental performance in the short term, with adverse 
effects seen at higher intakes. Intake of non-carbonic 
organic acids (which are not metabolised to carbon 
dioxide), e.g. oxalates, may be restricted in individuals 
prone to kidney stones.
Inorganic micronutrients
A number of inorganic elements are essential dietary 
constituents for humans (Box 5.36). Deficiency is seen 
when there is inadequate dietary intake of minerals or 
excessive loss from the body. Toxic effects have also 
been observed from self-medication and disordered 
absorption or excretion. Examples of clinical toxicity 
include excess of iron (haemochromatosis or haemo­
siderosis), fluoride (fluorosis; p. 223), copper (Wilson’s 
disease) and selenium (selenosis, seen in parts of China). 
For most minerals, the available biochemical markers do 
not accurately reflect dietary intake and dietary assess­
ment is required.
Fig. 5.20  Scurvy.  A Gingival swelling and bleeding.  B Perifollicular hyperkeratosis. From Ho, et al. 2007 – see p. 132. 
A
B
Precipitants
Increased requirement
Dietary deficiency
•	 Trauma, surgery, burns, 
infections
•	 Smoking
•	 Drugs (corticosteroids, 
aspirin, indometacin, 
tetracycline)
•	 Lack of dietary fruit and 
vegetables for > 2 mths
•	 Infants fed exclusively on 
boiled milk
Clinical features
•	 Swollen gums which 
bleed easily
•	 Perifollicular and petechial 
haemorrhages
•	 Ecchymoses
•	 Haemarthrosis
•	 Gastrointestinal bleeding
•	 Anaemia
•	 Poor wound healing
5.35  Scurvy – vitamin C deficiency
Calcium and phosphorus
Calcium is the most abundant cation in the body and 
powerful homeostatic mechanisms control circulating 
ionised calcium levels (pp. 766 and 1126). WHO’s dietary 
guidelines for calcium differ between countries, with 
higher intakes usually recommended in places with 
higher fracture prevalence. Between 20 and 30% of 
calcium in the diet is absorbed, depending on vitamin D 
status and food source. Calcium requirements depend 
on phosphorus intakes, with an optimum molar ratio 
(Ca : P) of 1 : 1. Excessive phosphorus intakes (e.g. 
1–1.5 g/day) with a Ca : P of 1 : 3 have been shown to 
cause hypocalcaemia and secondary hyperparathy­
roidism (p. 768).
Calcium absorption may be impaired in vitamin D 
deficiency (pp. 766 and 1126) and in malabsorption sec­
ondary to small intestinal disease. Calcium deficiency 
causes impaired bone mineralisation and can lead to 
osteomalacia in adults. The potential benefits of high 
calcium intake in osteoporosis are discussed on page 
1124. Too much calcium can lead to constipation and 
toxicity has been observed in ‘milk-alkali syndrome’  
(p. 767).
Dietary deficiency of phosphorus is rare (except 
in older people with limited diets) since it is present 
in nearly all foods and phosphates are added to a 
number of processed foods. Phosphate deficiency in 
adults occurs:
•	 in patients with renal tubular phosphate loss (p. 448)
•	 due to prolonged high dosage of aluminium 
hydroxide (p. 488)
•	 sometimes when alcoholics are fed with high-
carbohydrate foods
•	 in patients receiving parenteral nutrition if 
inadequate phosphate is provided.
Deficiency causes hypophosphataemia (p. 448) and 
muscle weakness secondary to ATP deficiency.
Iron
Iron is involved in the synthesis of haemoglobin, and is 
required for the transport of electrons within cells and 
in a number of enzyme reactions. Non-haem iron in 
cereals and vegetables is poorly absorbed but makes the 
greater contribution to overall intake, compared to the 
well-absorbed haem iron from animal products. Fruits 
and vegetables containing vitamin C enhance iron 
absorption, while the tannins in tea reduce it. Dietary 
calcium reduces iron uptake from the same meal, which 
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases
5
131
Mineral
Sources1
Reference nutrient intake (RNI)
Rich
Important
Calcium
Milk and milk products, tofu
Milk, boned fish, green vegetables, beans
700 mg2
Phosphorus
Most foods contain phosphorus
550 mg2
Marmite® and dry-roasted peanuts
Milk, cereal products, bread and meat
Magnesium
Whole grains, nuts
Unprocessed and wholegrain foods
300 mg men
270 mg women2
Iron
Liver, red meat (haem iron)
Non-haem iron from vegetables, 
wholemeal bread
8.7 mg
14.8 mg women < 50 yrs
Zinc
Red meat, seafood
Dairy produce, wholemeal bread
9.5 mg men
7 mg women2
Iodine
Edible seaweeds
Milk and dairy products
140 µg
Selenium
Fish, wheat grown in  
selenium-rich soils
Fish
75 µg men
60 µg women2
Copper
Shellfish, liver
Bread, cereal products, vegetables
1.2 mg2
Fluoride
Drinking water, tea
No RNI. Safe intake: 0.5 mg/kg
Potassium
Dried fruit, potatoes, coffee
Fresh fruit, vegetables, milk
3500 mg
Sodium
Table salt, anchovies
Processed foods, bread, bacon
1600 mg
1Rich sources contain the nutrient in high concentration but are not generally eaten in large amounts; important sources contain less but contribute most 
because larger amounts are eaten. 2Increased amounts are required in women during lactation.
5.36  Summary of clinically important minerals
may precipitate iron deficiency in those with borderline 
iron stores. There is no physiological mechanism for 
excretion of iron, so homeostasis depends on the regula­
tion of iron absorption (see Fig. 24.20, p. 1022). This is 
regulated at the level of duodenal enterocytes by hepci­
din. The expression of hepcidin (a peptide secreted by 
hepatocytes in the duodenum) is suppressed when body 
iron is low, leading to enhanced efflux of iron into the 
circulation. The normal daily loss of iron is 1 mg, arising 
from desquamated surface cells and intestinal losses. A 
regular loss of only 2 mL of blood per day doubles the 
iron requirement. On average, an additional 20 mg of 
iron is lost during menstruation, so pre-menopausal 
women require about twice as much iron as men (and 
more if menstrual losses are heavy).
The major consequence of iron deficiency is anaemia 
(p. 1021). This is one of the most important nutritional 
causes of ill health in all parts of the world. In the UK, 
it is estimated that 10% women are iron-deficient. 
Dietary iron overload is occasionally observed and 
results in iron accumulation in the liver and, rarely, cir­
rhosis. Haemochromatosis results from an inherited 
increase in iron absorption (p. 972).
Iodine
Iodine is required for synthesis of thyroid hormones 
(p. 738). It is present in sea fish, seaweed and most plant 
foods grown near the sea. The amount of iodine in soil 
and water influences the iodine content of most foods. 
Iodine is lacking in the highest mountainous areas of the 
world (e.g. the Alps and the Himalayas) and in the soil 
of frequently flooded plains (e.g. Bangladesh).
About a billion people in the world are estimated 
to have an inadequate iodine intake and hence are at 
risk of iodine deficiency disorder. Goitre is the most 
common manifestation, affecting about 200 million 
people (p. 752).
In those areas where most women have endemic 
goitre, 1% or more of babies are born with cretinism 
(characterised by mental and physical retardation). 
There is a higher than usual prevalence of deafness, 
slowed reflexes and poor learning in the remaining pop­
ulation. The best way of preventing neonatal cretinism 
is to ensure adequate levels of iodine during pregnancy. 
This can be achieved by intramuscular injections with 
1–2 mL of iodised poppy seed oil (475–950 mg iodine) 
to women of child-bearing age every 3–5 years, by 
administration of iodised oil orally at 6-monthly or 
yearly intervals to adults and children, or by providing 
iodised salt for cooking.
Zinc
Zinc is present in most foods of vegetable and animal 
origin. It is an essential component of many enzymes, 
including carbonic anhydrase, alcohol dehydrogenase 
and alkaline phosphatase.
Acute zinc deficiency has been reported in patients 
receiving prolonged zinc-free parenteral nutrition and 
causes diarrhoea, mental apathy, a moist, eczematoid 
dermatitis, especially around the mouth, and loss of 
hair. Chronic zinc deficiency occurs in dietary defi­
ciency, malabsorption syndromes, alcoholism and its 
associated hepatic cirrhosis. It causes the clinical fea­
tures seen in the very rare congenital disorder known as 
acrodermatitis enteropathica (growth retardation, hair 
loss and chronic diarrhoea). Zinc deficiency is thought 
to be responsible for one-third of the world’s popula­
tion not reaching their optimal height. In the Middle 
East, chronic deficiency has been associated with dwarf­
ism and hypogonadism. In starvation, zinc deficiency 
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease 
5
132
causes thymic atrophy, and zinc supplements may accel­
erate the healing of skin lesions, promote general well-
being, improve appetite and reduce the morbidity 
associated with the under-nourished state, and lower 
the mortality associated with diarrhoea and pneumonia 
in children.
Selenium
The family of seleno-enzymes includes glutathione per­
oxidase, which helps prevent free radical damage to 
cells, and monodeiodinase, which converts thyroxine to 
triiodothyronine (p. 738). North American soil has a 
higher selenium content than European and Asian soil, 
and the decreasing reliance of Europe on imported 
American food in recent decades has resulted in a 
decline in dietary selenium intake.
Selenium deficiency can cause hypothyroidism, 
cardiomyopathy in children (Keshan’s disease) and 
myopathy in adults. Excess selenium can cause heart 
disease.
Fluoride
Fluoride helps prevent dental caries, since it increases 
the resistance of the enamel to acid attack. It is a com­
ponent of bone mineral and some studies have shown 
anti-fracture effects at low doses, but excessive intakes 
may compromise bone structure.
If the local water supply contains more than 1 part 
per million (ppm) of fluoride, the incidence of dental 
caries is low. Soft waters usually contain no fluoride, 
whilst very hard waters may contain over 10 ppm. The 
benefit of fluoride is greatest when it is taken before the 
permanent teeth erupt, while their enamel is being laid 
down. The addition of traces of fluoride (at 1 ppm) to 
public water supplies is now a widespread practice. 
Chronic fluoride poisoning is occasionally seen where 
the water supply contains > 10 ppm fluoride. It can also 
occur in workers handling cryolite (aluminium sodium 
fluoride), used in smelting aluminium. Fluoride poison­
ing is described on page 223. Pitting of teeth is a result 
of too much fluoride as a child.
Sodium, potassium  
and magnesium
Western diets are high in sodium due to the sodium 
chloride (salt) that is added to processed food. In the UK, 
it is suggested that daily salt intakes are kept well below 
6 g. The roles of sodium, potassium and magnesium, 
along with the disease states associated with abnormal 
intakes or disordered metabolism, are discussed in 
Chapter 16.
Other essential inorganic nutrients
These include chloride (a counter-ion to sodium and 
potassium), cobalt (required for vitamin B12), sulphur (a 
constituent of methionine and cysteine), manganese 
(needed for or activates many enzymes) and chromium 
(necessary for insulin action). Deficiency of chromium 
presents as hyperglycaemia and has been reported in 
adults as a rare complication of prolonged parenteral 
nutrition.
Copper metabolism is abnormal in Wilson’s disease 
(p. 973). Deficiency occasionally occurs but only in 
young children, causing microcytic hypochromic 
anaemia, neutropenia, retarded growth, skeletal rarefac­
tion and dermatosis.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publichealth/Nutrition/index. 
htm UK Department of Health information on food 
composition and dietary surveys.
www.diversalertnetwork.org Advice on the clinical 
management of diving illness and emergency assistance 
services.
www.hpa.org.uk/radiation The Health Protection Agency 
provides information and links on all forms of radiation for 
patients and professionals.
www.nice.org.uk NICE guidelines for nutritional support and 
obesity.
www.who.int/nutrition WHO recommendations and 
intervention programmes for macronutrient- and 
micronutrient-related diseases.
www.who.int/topics/global_burden_of_disease/en/ The 
WHO global burden of disease project.
Telephone numbers
•	 In the UK, two organisations provide advice on  
the clinical management of diving illness and the 
availability of the nearest recompression facility:
•	 Aberdeen Royal Infirmary +44 (0)845 48 6008 
Hyperbaric doctor on call
•	 Royal Navy +44 (0)7831 151523.
•	 Outside the UK, contact the Divers Alert Network (DAN; 
see above).
Figure acknowledgements
Fig. 5.1 Adapted by Rao M, Prasad S, Adshead F, et al. The 
built environment and health. Lancet 2007; 370:1112, from 
an original model by Whitehead M, Dahlgren G. What 
can be done about inequalities in health? Lancet 1991; 
338:1059–1063.
Fig. 5.8 Crown copyright. Department of Health in 
association with the Welsh Government, the Scottish 
Government and the Food Standards Agency in North 
Ireland.
Fig. 5.18B WHO. Report of a joint WHO/USAID meeting, 
vitamin A deficiency and xerophthalmia (WHO technical 
report series no. 5 W); 1976.
Fig. 5.19 Karthikeyan K, Thappa DM. Pellagra and skin. Int 
J Dermatol 2002; 41:476–481.
Fig. 5.20AB Ho V, Prinsloo P, Ombiga J. Persistent anaemia 
due to scurvy. Journal of the New Zealand Medical 
Association 2007; 120(1262):62. Reproduced with 
permission.
133
6 
Infectious agents 134
Normal flora 136
Host–pathogen interactions 137
Investigation of infection 138
Direct detection 139
Culture 140
Specific immunological tests 141
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing 143
Epidemiology of infection 143
Infection prevention and control 145
Health care-acquired infection 145
Outbreaks of infection 147
Immunisation 148
Principles of  
infectious disease
R.P. Hobson
D.H. Dockrell
Treatment of infectious diseases 149
Principles of antimicrobial therapy 149
Beta-lactam antibiotics 154
Macrolide and lincosamide antibiotics 156
Ketolides 156
Aminoglycosides 156
Quinolones and fluoroquinolones 157
Glycopeptides 157
Folate antagonists 158
Tetracyclines and glycylcyclines 158
Nitroimidazoles 158
Other antibacterial agents 158
Antifungal agents 159
Antiviral agents 160
Antiparasitic agents 162
Principles of infectious disease 
6
134
major cause of disease worldwide. Key challenges 
remain in tackling infection in resource-poor countries 
and in the emergence of new infectious agents and 
antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms. This chapter 
describes the biological and epidemiological principles 
of infectious diseases and the general approach to their 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment. Specific infectious 
diseases are described in Chapters 13–15 and many of 
the organ-based chapters.
INFECTIOUS AGENTS
The concept of an infectious agent was established by 
Robert Koch in the 19th century (Box 6.1). Although 
fulfilment of ‘Koch’s postulates’ became the standard for 
the definition of an infectious agent, they do not apply 
to uncultivable organisms (e.g. Mycobacterium leprae, 
Tropheryma whipplei) or members of the normal human 
flora (e.g. Escherichia coli, Candida spp.). The following 
groups of infectious agents are now recognised.
Prions
Prions are unique amongst infectious agents in that they 
are devoid of any nucleic acid. They appear to be trans-
mitted by acquisition of a normal mammalian protein 
(prion protein, PrPC) which is in an abnormal conforma-
tion (PrPSC, containing an excess of beta-sheet protein); 
the abnormal protein inhibits the 26S proteasome, which 
can degrade misfolded proteins, leading to accumula-
tion of the abnormally configured PrPSC protein instead 
of normal PrPC. The result is accumulation of protein 
which forms amyloid in the central nervous system, 
causing a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (see 
Box 13.40, p. 329, and p. 1211).
Viruses
Viruses are incapable of independent replication, instead 
subverting host cellular processes to ensure synthesis of 
their nucleic acids and proteins. A virus that infects a 
bacterium is a bacteriophage (phage). Viruses contain 
genetic material (genome), which may be single- or 
double-stranded DNA or RNA. Retroviruses transcribe 
their RNA into DNA by reverse transcription. An anti-
genically unique protein coat (capsid) encloses the 
genome, together forming the nucleocapsid. In many 
viruses, the nucleocapsid is packaged within a lipid 
envelope. Enveloped viruses are less able to survive in 
the environment and are spread by respiratory, sexual 
or blood-borne routes, including arthropod-based 
Infection is the establishment of foreign organisms, or 
‘infectious agents’, in or on a human host. This may 
result in colonisation, if the microorganism exists at 
an anatomical site without causing harm, or infectious 
disease, when the interaction between the host and 
microorganism (pathogen) results in illness. In clinical 
practice, the term ‘infection’ is often used interchange-
ably with ‘infectious disease’. Most pathogens are micro-
organisms, although some are multicellular organisms.
The host–pathogen interaction is dynamic and 
complex. Whilst it is rarely in the microorganism’s inter-
est to kill the host (on which it relies for nutrition and 
protection), the manifestations of disease may aid its 
dissemination (e.g. diarrhoea, sneezing). Conversely, it 
is in the host’s interests to kill microorganisms likely to 
cause disease, whilst preserving colonising organisms, 
which may be beneficial.
Communicable diseases are caused by organisms 
transmitted between hosts, whereas endogenous dis-
eases are caused by organisms already colonising the 
host. Cross-infection with colonising organisms (e.g. 
meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, MRSA) is both 
communicable and endogenous. Opportunistic infec-
tions may be communicable or endogenous and arise 
only in individuals with impaired host defence. The 
chain of infection (Fig. 6.1) describes six essential ele-
ments for communicable disease transmission.
Despite dramatic advances in hygiene, immunisation 
and antimicrobial therapy, infectious diseases are still a 
Fig. 6.1  Chain of infection. The infectious agent is the organism that 
causes the disease. The reservoir is the place where the population of an 
infectious agent is maintained. The portal of exit is the point from which 
the infectious agent leaves the reservoir. Transmission is the process by 
which the infectious agent is transferred from the reservoir to the human 
host, either directly or via a vector or fomite. The portal of entry is the body 
site that is first accessed by the infectious agent. Finally, in order for 
disease to ensue, the person to whom the infectious agent is transmitted 
must be a susceptible host. 
Susceptible
host
Exit
Entry
Transmission
Infectious
agent
Reservoir
1. The same organism must be present in every case of the 
disease
2. The organism must be isolated from the diseased host and 
grown in pure culture
3. The isolate must cause the disease, when inoculated into a 
healthy, susceptible animal
4. The organism must be re-isolated from the inoculated, 
diseased animal
6.1  Definition of an infectious agent – 
Koch’s postulates
Infectious agents
6
135
using a range of characteristics (Box 6.2), with examples 
in Figures 6.3 and 6.4.
Eukaryotes: fungi, protozoa  
and helminths
Eukaryotes contain functional organelles, including 
nuclei, mitochondria and Golgi apparatus. Eukaryotes 
involved in human infection include fungi, protozoa 
(unicellular eukaryotes with a flexible cell membrane, 
p. 353) and helminths (complex multicellular organisms 
including nematodes, trematodes and cestodes, p. 369).
Fungi exist as either moulds (filamentous fungi) or 
yeasts. Dimorphic fungi exist in either form, depending 
on environmental conditions (see Fig. 13.57, p. 382). The 
fungal plasma membrane differs from the human cell 
membrane in that it contains the sterol, ergosterol. Fungi 
have a cell wall made up of polysaccharides, chitin and 
manno-proteins. In most fungi, the main structural 
component of the cell wall is β-1,3-D-glucan, a glucose 
polymer.
Protozoa and helminths are often referred to as para-
sites. Many parasites have complex multi-stage life 
cycles, which involve animal and/or plant hosts in addi-
tion to humans.
transmission. Non-enveloped viruses survive better in 
the environment and are predominantly transmitted by 
faecal–oral or, less often, respiratory routes. A generic 
virus life cycle is shown in Figure 6.2.
Prokaryotes: bacteria (including 
mycobacteria and actinomycetes)
Prokaryotic cells are capable of synthesising their own 
proteins and nucleic acids, and are able to reproduce 
autonomously, although they lack a nucleus. The bacte-
rial cell membrane is bounded by a peptidoglycan cell 
wall, which is thick (20–80 nm) in Gram-positive organ-
isms and thin (5–10 nm) in Gram-negative ones. The 
Gram-negative cell wall is surrounded by an outer mem-
brane containing lipopolysaccharide. Plasmids are rings 
of extra-chromosomal DNA within bacteria, which can 
be transferred between organisms. Bacteria may be 
embedded in a polysaccharide capsule, and motile 
bacteria are equipped with flagella. Although many 
prokaryotes are capable of independent existence, some 
(e.g. Chlamydia trachomatis, Coxiella burnetii) are obligate 
intracellular organisms. Bacteria that replicate in 
artificial culture media are classified and identified 
Fig. 6.2  A generic virus life cycle. Life cycle components common to most viruses are host cell attachment and penetration, virus uncoating, nucleic 
acid and protein synthesis, virus assembly and release. Virus release is achieved either by budding, as illustrated, or by lysis of the cell membrane. Life 
cycles vary between viruses. 
Host cell
2. Penetration
Receptor-mediated endocytosis
or, in some enveloped viruses,
membrane fusion (shown here)
3. Uncoating
Nucleic acid is liberated from the
phagosome (if endocytosed)
and/or capsid by complex
enzymatic and/or receptor-mediated
processes
1. Adsorption
Interaction between host
receptor molecule and
virus ligand (determines
host-specificity of
the virus)
Lipid envelope
Capsid
Nucleic acid
Virus
5. Assembly
Assembly of virus
components is mediated by
host and/or viral enzymes
6. Release
Complete virus particles are
released by budding of host cell
membrane (shown here) or
disintegration of host cell
4. Synthesis
Nucleic acid and protein synthesis
are mediated by host and/or viral
enzymes. These take place in
nucleus or cytoplasm, depending
on the specific virus
Principles of infectious disease 
6
136
NORMAL FLORA
Every human is host to an estimated 1013–1014 colonising 
microorganisms, which constitute the normal flora. Resi-
dent flora are able to survive and replicate at a body site, 
whereas transient flora are present only for short periods. 
Fig. 6.4  Appearances of α- and β-haemolytic streptococci on 
blood agar.  A Alpha-haemolytic streptococci. The colonies cause partial 
haemolysis, which imparts a green tinge to the agar. The organism shown 
is Strep. pneumoniae from the cerebrospinal fluid of a patient with 
meningitis (note also the susceptibility to optochin (O), which is another 
feature used to identify this organism).  B Beta-haemolytic streptococci. 
The colonies cause complete haemolysis, which renders the agar 
transparent. The organism shown is Strep. pyogenes (group A 
β-haemolytic streptococci) from a superficial wound swab. 
A
O
B
Gram stain reaction (see Fig. 6.3)
• Gram-positive (thick peptidoglycan layer), Gram-negative 
(thin peptidoglycan) or unstainable
Microscopic morphology
• Cocci (round cells) or bacilli (elongated cells)
• Presence or absence of capsule
Cell association
• Associated in clusters, chains or pairs
Colonial characteristics
• Colony size, shape or colour
• Effect on culture media (e.g. β-haemolysis of blood agar in 
haemolytic streptococci; see Fig. 6.4)
Atmospheric requirements
• Strictly aerobic (requires O2), strictly anaerobic (requires 
absence of O2), facultatively aerobic (grows with or without 
O2) or micro-aerophilic (requires reduced O2)
Biochemical reactions
• Expression of enzymes (oxidase, catalase, coagulase)
• Ability to ferment or hydrolyse various biochemical substrates
Motility
• Motile or non-motile
Antibiotic susceptibility
• Identifies organisms with invariable susceptibility (e.g. to 
optochin in Streptococcus pneumoniae or metronidazole in 
obligate anaerobes)
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation – time of flight 
mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS)
• A rapid technique that identifies bacteria and some fungi 
from their specific molecular composition
DNA sequencing of bacterial 16s ribosomes
• A highly specific test for definitive identification of organisms 
in pure culture and in samples from normally sterile sites
6.2  How bacteria are identified
Fig. 6.3  Gram film appearances of bacteria on light microscopy (×100). 
Gram-positive cocci
in chains
• Streptococci
Gram-negative cocci
• Neisseria spp.
  (shown here)
• Moraxella spp.
Gram-positive cocci
in clusters
• Staphylococci
Gram-negative bacilli
• Enterobacteriaceae
  (shown here)
• Serratia spp.
• Acinetobacter spp.
• Bacteroides spp.
Gram-positive bacilli
• Clostridium spp.
  (shown here)
• Corynebacterium spp.
• Bacillus spp.
Knowledge of non-sterile body sites and their normal 
flora is required to interpret culture results (Fig. 6.5).
The relationship between human host and normal 
flora is symbiotic, meaning that the organisms are in 
close proximity, and either mutualistic (both organisms 
benefit) or commensal (one organism benefits whilst the 
other derives neither benefit nor harm). The microbiome 
is the total burden of microorganisms, their genes and 
environmental interactions; the human microbiome is 
recognised increasingly as exerting a profound influence 
over human health and disease.
Maintenance of the normal flora is beneficial to 
health. For example, lower gastrointestinal tract bacteria 
synthesise and excrete vitamins (e.g. vitamins K and B12); 
colonisation with normal flora confers ‘colonisation 
resistance’ to infection with pathogenic organisms by 
altering the local environment (e.g. lowering pH), pro-
ducing antibacterial agents (e.g. bacteriocins, fatty acids 
and metabolic waste products), and inducing host anti-
bodies which cross-react with pathogenic organisms.
Conversely, normally sterile body sites must be kept 
sterile. The mucociliary escalator transports environ-
mental material deposited in the respiratory tract to the 
nasopharynx. The urethral sphincter prevents flow from 
the non-sterile urethra to the sterile bladder. Physical 
barriers, including the skin, lining of the gastrointestinal 
Host–pathogen interactions
6
137
Fig. 6.5  Human non-sterile sites and normal flora in health. 
Pharynx
Haemophilus spp.
Moraxella catarrhalis
Neisseria spp. (including N. meningitidis)
Staph. aureus
Strep. pneumoniae
Strep. pyogenes (group A)
Viridans streptococci
Oral cavity
Viridans streptococci
Anaerobic Gram-positive bacilli
(including Actinomyces spp.)
Anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli
     Prevotella spp.
     Fusobacterium spp.
Candida spp.
Small bowel
Distally, progressively increasing numbers
of large bowel bacteria
Candida spp.
Large bowel
Enterobacteriaceae
   Escherichia coli
   Klebsiella spp.
   Enterobacter spp.
   Proteus spp.
Enterococci
   E. faecalis
   E. faecium
Milleri group streptococci
   Strep. anginosus
   Strep. intermedius
   Strep. constellatus
Anaerobic Gram-positive bacilli
   Clostridium spp.
Anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli
   Bacteroides spp.
   Prevotella spp.
Candida spp.
Scalp
As for skin
Nares
Staph. aureus
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Skin
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Staph. aureus
Corynebacterium spp.
Propionibacterium spp.
Malassezia spp.
Hands
Resident: as for skin
Transient: skin flora (including
meticillin-resistant and other
Staph. aureus), bowel flora
(including Clostridium difficile,
Candida spp. and Enterobacteriaceae)
Vagina
Lactobacillus spp.
Staph. aureus
Candida spp.
Enterobacteriaceae
Perineum
As for skin
As for large bowel
tract and mucous membranes, maintain sterility of the 
blood stream, peritoneal and pleural cavities, chambers 
of the eye, subcutaneous tissue and so on.
The normal flora contribute to endogenous disease by 
either excessive growth at the ‘normal’ site (overgrowth) 
or translocation to a sterile site. Overgrowth is exempli-
fied by ‘blind loop’ syndrome (p. 882), dental caries and 
vaginal thrush, in which external factors favour over-
growth of specific components of the normal flora. 
Translocation results from spread along a surface or 
penetration of a closed barrier: for example, in urinary 
tract infection caused by perineal/enteric flora, and in 
surgical site infections, particularly of prosthetic materi-
als, caused by skin flora such as staphy­lococci. Normal 
flora also contribute to disease by cross-infection, in 
which organisms that are colonising one individual 
cause disease when transferred to another, more suscep-
tible, individual.
HOST–PATHOGEN INTERACTIONS
Pathogenicity is the capability of an organism to 
cause disease and virulence is the extent to which 
a pathogen is able to cause disease. Pathogens produce 
proteins and other factors, termed virulence factors, 
which interact with host cells to contribute to disease.
•	 Primary pathogens cause disease in a proportion of 
individuals to whom they are exposed, regardless 
of their immunological status.
•	 Opportunistic pathogens cause disease only in 
individuals whose host defences are compromised; 
for example, by genetic susceptibility or 
immunosuppressive disease or therapy.
Characteristics of  
successful pathogens
Successful pathogens have a number of attributes. They 
compete with host cells and colonising flora by various 
methods, including sequestration of nutrients, use of 
metabolic pathways not used by competing bacteria, 
and production of bacteriocins (small antimicrobial 
peptides/proteins that kill closely related bacteria). 
Motility enables pathogens to reach their site of infec-
tion, often in sterile sites that colonising bacteria do not 
reach, such as the distal airway. Many microorganisms, 
including viruses, use ‘adhesins’ to attach to host cells 
at the site of infection. Other pathogens can invade 
through tissues.
Principles of infectious disease 
6
138
Pathogens may produce toxins, microbial molecules 
that cause adverse effects on host cells, either at the site 
of infection, or remotely following carriage through 
the blood stream. Endotoxin is the lipid A domain of 
Gram-negative bacterial outer membrane lipopolysac-
charide. It is released when bacterial cells are damaged 
and has generalised inflammatory effects. Exotoxins are 
proteins released by living bacteria, which often have 
specific effects on target organs (Box 6.3).
Intracellular pathogens, including viruses, bacteria 
(e.g. Salmonella spp., Listeria monocytogenes and Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis), parasites (e.g. Leishmania spp.) and 
fungi (e.g. Histoplasma capsulatum), are able to survive in 
intracellular environments, including after phagocytosis 
by macrophages.
Pathogenic bacteria express different arrays of genes, 
depending on environmental stress (pH, iron starvation, 
O2 starvation and so on) and anatomical location. In 
quorum sensing, bacteria communicate with one another 
to adapt their replication or metabolism according to 
local population density. Bacteria and fungi may respond 
to the presence of an artificial surface (e.g. prosthetic 
device, venous catheter) by forming a biofilm, which is 
a population of organisms encased in a matrix of extra-
cellular molecules. Biofilm-associated organisms are 
highly resistant to antimicrobial agents.
Genetic diversity enhances the pathogenic capacity of 
bacteria. Some virulence factor genes are found on plas-
mids or in phages and are exchanged between different 
strains or species. The ability to acquire genes from the 
gene pool of all strains of the species (the ‘bacterial 
supragenome’) increases diversity and the potential for 
pathogenicity. Viruses exploit their rapid reproduction 
and potential to exchange nucleic acid with host cells to 
enhance diversity. Once a strain acquires a particularly 
effective combination of virulence genes, it may become 
an epidemic strain, accounting for a large subset of infec-
tions in a particular region. This phenomenon accounts 
for influenza pandemics.
The host response
Innate and adaptive immune and inflammatory 
responses which humans use to control the normal flora 
and respond to pathogens are reviewed in Chapter 4.
Disease
Organism
Antibiotic-associated 
diarrhoea/pseudo-
membranous colitis
Clostridium difficile (p. 308)
Botulism
Clostridium botulinum (p. 1210)
Cholera
Vibrio cholerae (p. 344)
Diphtheria
Corynebacterium diphtheriae (p. 345)
Haemolytic uraemic 
syndrome
Escherichia coli O157 (and other 
strains) (p. 495)
Necrotising 
pneumonia
Staphylococcus aureus (p. 682)
Tetanus
Clostridium tetani (p. 1209)
Toxic shock syndrome
Staphylococcus aureus (p. 331)
6.3  Exotoxin-mediated bacterial diseases
Pathogenesis of infectious disease
The harmful manifestations of infection are determined 
by a combination of the virulence factors of the organ-
ism and the host response to infection. Despite the 
obvious benefits of an intact host response, an excessive 
response is undesirable. Cytokines and antimicrobial 
factors contribute to tissue injury at the site of infection, 
and an excessive inflammatory response may lead to 
hypotension and organ dysfunction (p. 82). The contri-
bution of the immune response to disease manifes­
tations is exemplified by the immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). This is seen, for example, 
in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, 
post-transplantation neutropenia or tuberculosis (which 
causes suppression of T-cell function): there is a para-
doxical worsening of the clinical condition as the 
immune dysfunction is corrected, caused by an exuber-
ant but dysregulated inflammatory response.
The febrile response
Thermoregulation (p. 103) is altered in infectious disease. 
Microbial pyrogens or the endogenous pyrogens 
released during tissue necrosis stimulate specialised 
cells such as monocytes/macrophages to release 
cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-lβ, tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF)-α, IL-6 and interferon (IFN)-γ. 
Cytokine receptors in the pre-optic region of the anterior 
hypothalamus activate phospholipase A, releasing ara-
chidonic acid as substrate for the cyclo-oxygenase 
pathway and producing prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which 
in turn alters the responsiveness of thermosensitive 
neurons in the thermoregulatory centre. Rigors occur 
when the body inappropriately attempts to ‘reset’ core 
temperature to a higher level by stimulating skeletal 
muscle activity and shaking.
The role of the febrile response as a defence mecha-
nism requires further study, but there are data to support 
the hypothesis that raised body temperature interferes 
with the replication and/or virulence of pathogens.
INVESTIGATION OF INFECTION
Patients in whom a diagnosis of infectious disease is 
being considered are investigated with non-specific tests 
that reflect innate immune and acute phase responses 
(p. 82), and specific tests, which detect either a micro­
organism or the host response to the organism (Box 6.4). 
Careful sampling increases the likelihood of diagnosis 
(Box 6.5). Culture results must be interpreted in the 
context of the normal flora at the sampled site (see Fig. 
6.5). The extent to which a microbiological test result 
supports or excludes a particular diagnosis depends on 
its statistical performance (e.g. sensitivity, specificity, 
positive and negative predictive value, p. 5). Sensitivity 
and specificity vary according to the time between infec-
tion and testing, and positive and negative predictive 
values depend on the prevalence of the condition in the 
test population. The complexity of test interpretation is 
illustrated in Figure 6.7 (p. 141), which shows the 
‘windows of opportunity’ afforded by various testing 
methods. Given this complexity, effective communica-
tion between the clinician and the microbiologist is vital 
to ensure accurate test interpretation.
Investigation of infection
6
139
are based on in vitro binding of specific antigen/
antibody and are described below (p. 141). However, 
other methods may be used, such as mouse bioassay for 
detection of Clostridium botulinum toxin or tissue culture 
cytotoxicity assay for C. difficile toxin. In toxin-mediated 
disease, detection of toxin may be of greater relevance 
than identification of the organism itself (e.g. stool C. 
difficile toxin).
Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT)
Specific sequences of microbial DNA and RNA are iden-
tified using a nucleic acid primer which is amplified 
exponentially by enzymes to generate multiple copies 
of the specific sequence. The most commonly used 
amplification method is the polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR; see Fig. 3.12, p. 60). Reverse transcription 
(RT) PCR is used to detect RNA from RNA viruses 
Direct detection
Direct detection methods provide rapid results and may 
be applied to organisms that cannot be grown easily on 
artificial culture media, such as Chlamydia spp. They do 
not usually provide information on antimicrobial sus-
ceptibility or the degree to which organisms are related 
to each other (which is important in the investigation 
of possible outbreaks), unless relevant specific nucleic 
acid sequences are detected by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR).
Detection of whole organisms
Whole organisms are detected by examination of bio-
logical fluids or tissue using a microscope.
•	 Bright field microscopy (in which the test sample is 
interposed between the light source and the 
objective lens) uses stains to enhance visual contrast 
between the organism and its background. 
Examples include Gram staining of bacteria and 
Ziehl–Neelsen or auramine staining of acid- and 
alcohol-fast bacilli (AAFB) in tuberculosis. In 
histopathological examination of tissue samples, 
multiple stains are used to demonstrate not only the 
presence of microorganisms, but also features of 
disease pathology.
•	 Dark field microscopy (in which light is scattered to 
make organisms appear bright on a dark 
background) is used, for example, to examine 
genital chancre fluid in suspected syphilis.
•	 Electron microscopy may be used to examine stool 
and vesicle fluid to detect enteric and herpesviruses, 
respectively, but its use has largely been supplanted 
by nucleic acid detection (see below).
Detection of components  
of organisms
Components of microorganisms detected for diagnostic 
purposes include nucleic acids, cell wall molecules, 
toxins and other antigens. Commonly used examples 
include Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 antigen in 
urine and cryptococcal polysaccharide antigen in cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF). Most antigen detection methods 
Communication
• Discuss samples that may require forwarding to another 
laboratory or processing urgently or by an unusual method 
with laboratory staff before collection
• Communication is the most important requirement for good 
microbiological sampling. If there is doubt about any aspect 
of sampling, it is far better to discuss it with laboratory staff 
beforehand than to risk diagnostic delay by inappropriate 
sampling or sample handling
Indication
• Screening (e.g. collecting ‘routine’ urine, intravenous 
cannulae or sputum) in the absence of clinical evidence of 
infection is rarely appropriate
Container
• Certain tests (e.g. nucleic acid and antigen detection tests) 
require proprietary sample collection equipment
Collection
• Follow sample collection instructions precisely (e.g. proper 
collection of mid-stream, terminal and early morning urine 
samples, skin decontamination prior to blood culture etc.) to 
increase diagnostic yield
Labelling
• Label sample containers and request forms according to 
local policies, with demographic identifiers, specimen type 
and time/date collected
• Include clinical details on request forms
• Identify samples carrying a high risk of infection (e.g. blood 
liable to contain a blood-borne virus) with a hazard label
Packaging
• Close sample containers tightly and package securely 
(usually in sealed plastic bags)
• Attach request forms to samples but not in the same 
compartment (to avoid contamination, should leakage occur)
Storage and transport
• Transport samples to the microbiology laboratory quickly
• If pre-transport storage is required, conditions (e.g. 
refrigeration, incubation, storage at room temperature) vary 
with sample type
• Notify the receiving laboratory prior to arrival of samples, to 
ensure timely processing
6.5  How to provide samples for 
microbiological sampling
Non-specific markers of inflammation/infection
• e.g. Full blood count (FBC), plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), 
procalcitonin, cell counts in urine or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 
CSF protein and glucose
Direct detection of organisms or organism components
• Microscopy
• Detection of organism components (e.g. antigen, toxin)
• Nucleic acid amplification (e.g. polymerase chain reaction)
Culture of organisms
• ± Antimicrobial sensitivity testing
Tests of the host’s specific immune response
• Antibody detection
• Interferon-γ release assays (IGRA)
6.4  Tests used to diagnose infection
Principles of infectious disease 
6
140
possibility of false-positive results from colonising or 
contaminating organisms is remote, and are applied 
to blood, respiratory samples, stool and urine. In 
bacteriology, PCR is used to examine CSF, blood, tissue 
and genital samples, and multiplex PCR is being devel-
oped for use in faeces. PCR is also being used increas-
ingly in mycology and parasitology.
Culture
Microorganisms may be both detected and further char-
acterised by culture from clinical samples (e.g. tissue, 
swabs and body fluids).
•	 In vivo culture (in a living organism) is not used in 
routine diagnostic microbiology.
•	 Ex vivo culture (tissue or cell culture) was widely 
used in the isolation of viruses, but has been largely 
supplanted by nucleic acid amplification techniques.
(e.g. hepatitis C virus and HIV-1). The use of fluorescent-
labelled primers and probes enables ‘real-time’ detection 
of amplified DNA; quantification is based on the princi-
ple that the time taken to reach the detection threshold 
is proportional to the initial number of copies of the 
target nucleic acid sequence. In multiplex PCR, multiple 
primer pairs are used to enable detection of several dif-
ferent organisms in a single assay.
Nucleic acid sequencing is also used to assign micro-
organisms to specific strains according to their geno-
type, which may be relevant to treatment and/or 
prognosis (e.g. in hepatitis C infection, p. 954). Genes 
that are relevant to pathogenicity (such as toxin genes) 
or antimicrobial resistance can also be detected. For 
example, detection of the mecA gene is used to screen 
for MRSA.
NAAT are the most sensitive direct detection methods 
and are particularly useful when a rapid diagnosis is 
required. They are used widely in virology, where the 
Fig. 6.6  An overview of the processing of blood cultures. *In laboratories equipped with MALDI-TOF (p. 136), rapid definitive organism 
identification may be achieved at stage 6 and/or stage 8. 
Department of
Microbiology
1  Patient sampling
Contamination minimised by
aseptic technique
2  Sample handling
Follow local instructions for safety,
labelling, and numbers of samples and
bottles required
3  Specimen transport
Transport samples to laboratory as quickly
as possible. Follow manufacturer’s
instructions for the blood culture system
used if temporary storage is required
4  Incubation
Incubate at 35–37°C for 5–7 days.
Microbial growth is usually detected
by constant automatic monitoring of
CO2. If no growth, specimen is
negative and discarded
5  Growth detection
Time to positivity (TTP) is usually
12–24 hrs in significant bacteraemia,
but may be shorter in overwhelming
sepsis or longer with fastidious
organisms (e.g. Brucella spp.) 
6  Preliminary results*
A Gram film of the blood culture medium is examined and
results are communicated immediately to the clinician
to guide antibiotic therapy
7  Incubation
A small amount of the medium
is incubated on a range of
culture media. Preliminary
susceptibility testing may be
carried out
8  Culture results*
Preliminary
susceptibility results
are communicated to
the clinician
9 Definitive results
Further overnight incubation is     
often required for definitive
identification of organisms,
biochemical testing and additional
susceptibility testing
Overnight incubation required
Urgent communication required
10  Reporting
A final summary is released when all testing is complete. For
clinical care, communication of interim results (Gram film,
preliminary identification and susceptibility) is usually more
important than the final report. Effective clinical–laboratory
communication is vital
Investigation of infection
6
141
Antibody detection
Organism-specific antibody detection is applied mainly 
to blood (Fig. 6.7). Results are typically expressed as 
titres: that is, the reciprocal of the highest dilution of the 
serum at which antibody is detectable (for example, 
detection at serum dilution of 1 : 64 gives a titre of 64). 
‘Seroconversion’ is defined as either a change from 
negative to positive detection or a fourfold rise in titre 
between acute and convalescent serum samples. An 
acute sample is usually taken during the first week of 
disease and the convalescent sample 2–4 weeks later. 
Earlier diagnosis can be achieved by detection of IgM 
antibodies, which are produced early in infection (p. 77). 
A limitation of these tests is that antibody production 
requires a fully functional host immune system, so there 
may be false-negative results in immunocompromised 
patients. Also, other than in chronic infections and with 
IgM detection, antibody tests usually provide a retro-
spective diagnosis.
Antibody detection methods are described below 
(antigen detection methods are also described here as 
they share similar methodology).
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
The principles of the enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA, EIA) are illustrated in Figure 6.8. These 
assays rely on linking an antibody with an enzyme 
which generates a colour change on exposure to a 
chromogenic substrate. Various configurations allow 
detection of antigens or specific subclasses of immu-
noglobulin (e.g. IgG, IgM, IgA). ELISA may also be 
adapted to detect PCR products, using immobilised oli-
gonucleotide hybridisation probe and various detection 
systems.
Immunoblot (Western blot)
Microbial proteins are separated according to molecu-
lar weight by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
(PAGE) and transferred (blotted) on to a nitrocellulose 
membrane, which is incubated with patient serum. 
Binding of specific antibody is detected with an 
•	 In vitro culture (in artificial culture media) of bacteria 
and fungi is used for definitive identification, to test 
for antimicrobial susceptibility and to subtype the 
organism for epidemiological purposes.
However, culture has its limitations. Results are not 
immediate, even for organisms which are easy to grow, 
and negative culture rarely excludes infection com-
pletely. Organisms such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
are inherently slow-growing, typically taking at least 
2 weeks to be detectable, even in specialised systems. 
Certain organisms, such as Mycobacterium leprae and Tro-
pheryma whipplei, cannot be cultivated on artificial media, 
and others (e.g. Chlamydia spp. and viruses) grow only 
in ex vivo systems, which are slow and labour-intensive 
to use.
Blood culture
Rapid microbiological diagnosis is required for blood-
stream infection (BSI; Fig. 6.6). To diagnose BSI, a liquid 
culture medium is inoculated with freshly drawn blood, 
transported to the microbiology laboratory and incu-
bated in a system that monitors it constantly for prod-
ucts of microbial respiration (mainly CO2), generally 
using fluorescence. If growth is detected, organisms are 
identified and sensitivity testing is performed. Tradi-
tionally, identification has been achieved by Gram stain 
and culture. However, MALDI-TOF (see Box 6.2) is 
being used increasingly, as it is rapid and inexpensive, 
and enables identification of organisms directly from the 
blood-culture medium.
Specific immunological tests
Immunological tests may be used to detect the host 
response to a specific microorganism, and can enable the 
diagnosis of infection with organisms that are difficult 
to detect by other methods or are no longer present in 
the host. The term ‘serology’ describes tests carried out 
on serum, and is used to include both antigen and 
antibody detection.
Fig. 6.7  Detection of antigen, nucleic acid and antibody in infectious disease. The acute sample is usually taken during the first week of illness, 
and the convalescent sample 2–4 weeks later. Detection limits and duration of detectability vary between tests and diseases, although in most diseases 
immunoglobulin (Ig) M is detectable within the first 1–2 weeks. 
Acute sample
Nucleic acid (NA)
detection
Antigen
detection
IgM
NA
Ag
IgG
Limit
of detection
Antibody detection: IgM
Antibody detection: IgG (seroconversion)
Antibody detection: IgG
(fourfold rise in titre)
Convalescent sample
Windows
of diagnostic
opportunity
Serum levels
Principles of infectious disease 
6
142
•	 In indirect (passive) agglutination, specific antigen is 
attached to the surface of carrier particles which 
agglutinate when incubated with patient samples 
that contain specific antibodies.
•	 In reverse passive agglutination (an antigen detection 
test), the carrier particle is coated with antibody 
rather than antigen.
Other tests
Immunodiffusion involves antibodies and antigen 
migrating through gels, with or without the assistance 
of electrophoresis, and forming insoluble complexes 
where they meet. The complexes are seen on staining 
as ‘precipitin bands’. Immunodiffusion is used in the 
diagnosis of endemic mycoses (p. 381) and some forms 
of aspergillosis (p. 697).
Immunochromatography is used to detect antigen. 
The system consists of a porous test strip (e.g. a nitro­
cellulose membrane), at one end of which there is 
target-specific antibody, complexed with coloured 
microparticles. Further specific antibody is immobilised 
in a transverse narrow line some distance along the strip. 
Test material (e.g. blood or urine) is added to the 
antibody–particle complexes, which then migrate along 
the strip by capillary action. If these are complexed with 
antigen, they will be immobilised by the specific anti-
body and visualised as a transverse line across the strip. 
If the test is negative, the antibody–particle complexes 
will bind to a line of immobilised anti-immunoglobulin 
antibody placed further along the strip, which acts as a 
negative control. Immunochromatographic tests are 
rapid and relatively cheap to perform, and are appropri-
ate for point-of-care testing, e.g. in HIV 1.
Antibody-independent specific 
immunological tests
Interferon-gamma release assays (IGRA) are being used 
increasingly to diagnose tuberculosis (p. 692). The prin-
ciple of the assay is that T lymphocytes of patients 
infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) release 
IFN-γ when they are exposed to MTB-specific peptides. 
The absence of these peptides in bacille Calmette–Guérin 
(BCG; see Box 6.14) vaccine results in IGRA tests 
being more specific for the diagnosis of tuberculosis 
enzyme–anti-immunoglobulin conjugate similar to that 
used in ELISA, and specificity is confirmed by its loca-
tion on the membrane. Immunoblotting is a highly 
specific test, which may be used to confirm the results 
of less specific tests such as ELISA.
Immunofluorescence assays
Immunofluorescence assays (IFAs) are highly specific. 
In indirect immunofluorescence, a serum sample is incu-
bated with immobilised antigen (e.g. cells known to be 
infected with virus on a glass slide) and antibody 
binding is detected using a fluorescent-labelled anti-
human immunoglobulin (the ‘secondary’ antibody). 
This method can also detect organisms in clinical 
samples (usually tissue or centrifuged cells) using a 
specific antibody in place of patient serum. In direct 
immunofluorescence, clinical samples are incubated 
directly with fluorescent-labelled specific antibodies to 
detect antigen, eliminating the need for secondary 
antibody.
Complement fixation test
In a complement fixation test (CFT), patient serum is 
heat-treated to inactivate complement, and added to 
specific antigen. Any specific antibody present in the 
serum will complex with the antigen. Complement is 
then added to the reaction. If antigen–antibody com-
plexes are present, the complement will be ‘fixed’ 
(consumed). Sheep erythrocytes, coated with an anti-
erythrocyte antibody, are added. The degree of erythro-
cyte lysis reflects the remaining complement and is 
inversely proportional to the level of the specific antigen–
antibody complexes.
Agglutination tests
When antigens are present on the surface of particles 
(e.g. cells, latex particles or microorganisms) and cross-
linked with antibodies, visible clumping (or ‘agglutina-
tion’) occurs.
•	 In direct agglutination, patient serum is added to a 
suspension of organisms that express the test 
antigen. For example, in the Weil–Felix test, host 
antibodies to various rickettsial species cause 
agglutination of Proteus bacteria because they 
cross-react with bacterial cell surface antigens.
Fig. 6.8  Antibody (Ab) and antigen (Ag) detection by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). This can be configured in various ways.
 A Patient Ab binds to immobilised specific Ag, and is detected by addition of anti-immunoglobulin–enzyme conjugate and chromogenic substrate.
 B Patient Ab binds to immobilised Ig subclass-specific Ab, and is detected by addition of specific Ag, followed by antibody–enzyme conjugate and 
chromogenic substrate.  C Patient Ab and antibody–enzyme conjugate bind to immobilised specific Ag. Magnitude of colour change reaction is inversely 
proportional to concentration of patient Ab.  D Patient Ag binds to immobilised Ab, and is detected by addition of antibody–enzyme conjugate and 
chromogenic substrate. In A, the conjugate Ab is specific for human immunoglobulin. In B–D, it is specific for Ag from the disease-causing organism. 
Antibody capture
ELISA
Patient Ab
Ig subclass-specific Ab
Ab specific to Ag from
the disease-causing
organism
Specific Ag
Chromogenic substrate
Antibody–enzyme
conjugate
Competitive antibody
detection ELISA
Double antibody sandwich
ELISA (for antigen detection)
Antibody detection
ELISA
A
B
C
D
Epidemiology of infection
6
143
The patient may require treatment in isolation, or an 
outbreak of disease may need to be investigated in the 
community (Ch. 5). The approach will be specific to the 
microorganism involved (Chs 13–15) but the principles 
are outlined below.
Geographic and temporal  
patterns of infection
Endemic disease
Endemic disease has a constant presence within a given 
geographic area or population. The infectious agent may 
have a reservoir, vector or intermediate host that is 
geographically restricted, or may itself have restrictive 
environmental requirements (e.g. temperature range, 
humidity). The population affected may be geographi-
cally isolated, or the disease may be limited to unvac-
cinated populations. Factors that alter geographical 
restriction include:
•	 expansion of an animal reservoir (e.g. Lyme disease 
from reforestation)
•	 vector escape (e.g. airport malaria)
•	 extension of host range (e.g. schistosomiasis from 
dam construction)
•	 human migration (e.g. severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS) coronavirus)
•	 public health service breakdown (e.g. diphtheria in 
unvaccinated areas)
•	 climate change.
Emerging and re-emerging disease
An emerging infectious disease is one that has newly 
appeared in a population, or has been known for some 
time but is increasing in incidence or geographic range. 
If the disease was previously known and thought to 
have been controlled or eradicated, it is considered to be 
re-emerging. Many emerging diseases are caused by 
organisms which infect animals and have undergone 
adaptations that enable them to infect humans. This is 
exemplified by HIV, which is believed to have origi-
nated in higher primates in Africa. The geographical 
pattern of some recent emerging and re-emerging infec-
tions is shown in Figure 6.10.
Reservoirs of infection
The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) define a res-
ervoir of infection as ‘one or more epidemiologically 
connected populations or environments in which a 
pathogen can be permanently maintained, and from 
which infection is transmitted to a defined target popu-
lation’. Reservoirs of infection may be human, animal or 
environmental.
Human reservoirs
Colonised individuals or those with clinical infectious 
disease may act as reservoirs, e.g. for Staph. aureus 
(including MRSA), which is carried in the nares of 
30–40% of humans, and C. difficile. For infected humans 
to act as reservoirs, the infections caused must be long-
lasting and/or non-fatal, at least in a proportion of those 
affected, to enable onward transmission (e.g. tuberculo-
sis, sexually transmitted infections). Humans are the 
only reservoir for some organisms (e.g. smallpox and 
measles).
infec­tion than the tuberculin skin test (p. 692), because 
the latter may be positive as a result of previous BCG 
vaccination.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing
If growth of microorganisms in culture is inhibited by 
the addition of an antimicrobial agent, the organism is 
considered to be susceptible. Bacteriostatic agents cause 
reversible inhibition of growth and bactericidal agents 
cause cell death; the terms fungistatic/fungicidal are 
equivalent for antifungal agents, and virustatic/
virucidal for antiviral agents. The lowest concentration 
of antimicrobial agent at which growth is inhibited is 
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), and 
the lowest concentration that causes cell death is the 
minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC). If the MIC 
is less than or equal to a predetermined breakpoint 
threshold, the organism is considered susceptible, and if 
the MIC is greater than the breakpoint, it is resistant.
Breakpoints are determined for each antimicrobial 
agent from a combination of pharmacokinetic and clini-
cal data. The relationship between in vitro antimicrobial 
susceptibility and clinical response is complex, as 
response also depends on immune status, pharmaco­
kinetic variability (p. 21), comorbidities that may 
influence pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics, and 
antibiotic dosing, as well as MIC/MBC. Thus, suscepti-
bility testing does not guarantee therapeutic success.
Susceptibility testing is most often carried out by disc 
diffusion (Fig. 6.9). Antibiotic-impregnated filter paper 
discs are placed on an agar plate containing bacteria. 
The antibiotic diffuses through the agar, resulting in a 
concentration gradient centred on the disc. Bacteria are 
unable to grow where the antibiotic concentration 
exceeds the MIC, which may therefore be inferred from 
the size of the zone of inhibition. Susceptibility testing 
methods using antimicrobials diluted in liquid media 
are generally more accurate and reproducible, and are 
used for generating epidemiological data.
Fig. 6.9  Antimicrobial susceptibility testing by disc diffusion. 
The test organism is grown as a ‘lawn’ on an agar plate in the presence of 
antimicrobial-impregnated discs. The organism is considered susceptible if 
the diameter of the zone of inhibition exceeds a predetermined threshold. 
Zone of
inhibition
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF INFECTION
The communicability of infectious disease means that, 
once a clinician has diagnosed an infectious disease, 
potential exposure of other patients must be considered. 
Principles of infectious disease 
6
144
particularly associated with health care-associated 
infection.
The likelihood of infection following transmission of 
an infectious agent depends on organism factors and 
host susceptibility. The number of organisms required 
to cause infection or death in 50% of the exposed popula-
tion is referred to as the ID50 (infectious dose) and 
LD50 (lethal dose), respectively. The incubation period 
is the time between exposure and development of 
disease, and the period of infectivity is the period after 
exposure during which the patient is infectious to others. 
Knowledge of incubation periods and periods of infec-
tivity is important in controlling the spread of disease, 
although for many diseases these estimates are impre-
cise (Boxes 6.6 and 6.7).
Animal reservoirs
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines a zoo-
nosis as ‘a disease or infection that is naturally transmis-
sible from vertebrate animals to humans’. The infected 
animal may be asymptomatic. Zoonotic agents may be 
transmitted via any of the routes described below. 
Primary infection with zoonoses may be transmitted 
onward between humans, causing secondary disease 
(e.g. Q fever, brucellosis, Ebola).
Environmental reservoirs
Many infective pathogens are acquired from an environ-
mental source. However, some of these are maintained 
in human or animal reservoirs, with the environment 
acting only as a conduit for infection.
Transmission of infection
Infectious agents may be transmitted by one or more of 
the following routes:
•	 Respiratory route: inhalation.
•	 Faecal–oral route: ingestion of infectious material 
originating from faecal matter.
•	 Sexually transmitted infections: direct contact between 
mucous membranes.
•	 Blood-borne infections: direct inoculation of infected 
blood or body fluids.
•	 Direct contact: very few organisms are capable of 
causing infection by direct contact with intact skin. 
Most infection by this route requires inoculation or 
contact with damaged skin.
•	 Via a vector or fomite: the vector/fomite bridges 
the gap between the infected host or reservoir  
and the uninfected host. Vectors are animate, and 
include mosquitoes in malaria and dengue, fleas in 
plague and humans in MRSA. Fomites are 
inanimate, and include items such as door handles, 
water taps, ultrasound probes and so on, which are 
Fig. 6.10  Geographic locations of some infectious disease outbreaks, with examples of emerging and re-emerging diseases. (MDR-TB = 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis; SARS = severe acute respiratory syndrome; vCJD = variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease; VRSA = vancomycin-resistant 
Staph. aureus) Adapted from Samaranayake 2006 – see p. 164. 
Whitewater
arroyo virus
vCJD
Diphtheria
Hepatitis C
Marburg haemorrhagic fever
Ebola haemorrhagic fever
Human monkeypox
NDM-1-producing
Enterobacteriaceae
Rift Valley fever
E. coli O104:H4
Plague
Lyme disease
West Nile virus
Dengue
Yellow fever
Lassa fever
Poliomyelitis
Drug-resistant
malaria
Drug-resistant malaria
Yellow fever
Cholera
Cholera
Cholera
Typhoid fever
Anthrax (bioterrorism)
Hantavirus
pulmonary syndrome
VRSA
VRSA
Nipah virus
Hendra virus
Enterovirus 71
Cyclosporiasis
Cryptococcus
gattii
Cryptococcus
gattii
Cryptosporidiosis
MDR-TB
MDR-TB
SARS
Human monkeypox
E. coli O157:H7
E. coli O157:H7
H5N1
influenza
Disease
Infectious period
Chickenpox
From 4 days before2 until 5 days after 
appearance of the rash3
Measles
From 1–2 days before onset of rash; 
duration unknown3
Mumps
Unknown4
Rubella
Unknown, but most infectious during 
prodromal illness3
Scarlet fever
Unknown5
Whooping cough
Unknown5,6
1From Richardson M, Elliman D, Maguire H, et al. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2001; 
20:380–388. These recommendations may differ from local or national 
guidance. 2Transmission before 48 hrs prior to the onset of rash is rare.
3,4,5Exclude from contact with non-immune and immunocompromised 
people for 5 days from 3onset of rash, 4onset of parotitis or 5start of 
antibiotic treatment. 6Exclude for 3 weeks if untreated.
6.6  Periods of infectivity in childhood 
infectious diseases1
Infection prevention and control
6
145
Deliberate release
The deliberate release of infectious agents with the 
intention of causing disease is known as biological 
warfare or bioterrorism, depending on the scale and 
context. Deliberate release incidents have included a 
750-person outbreak of Salmonella typhimurium by con-
tamination of salads in 1984 (Oregon, USA) and 22 cases 
of anthrax (five fatal) from the mailing of finely 
powdered (weaponised) anthrax spores in 2001 (New 
Jersey, USA). Diseases with high potential for deliberate 
release include anthrax, plague, tularaemia, smallpox 
and botulism (through toxin release).
INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL
Infection prevention and control (IPC) describes the 
measures applied to populations with the aim of break-
ing the chain of infection (see Fig. 6.1, p. 134).
Infection
Incubation period
Short incubation periods
Anthrax, cutaneous3
9 hrs to 2 wks
Anthrax, inhalational3
2 days2
Bacillary dysentery5
1–6 days
Cholera3
2 hrs to 5 days
Dengue haemorrhagic fever6
3–14 days
Diphtheria6
1–10 days
Gonorrhoea4
2–10 days
Influenza5
1–3 days
Meningococcaemia3
2–10 days
Norovirus1
1–3 days
SARS coronavirus3
2–7 days2
Scarlet fever5
2–4 days
Intermediate incubation periods
Amoebiasis6
1–4 wks
Brucellosis4
5–30 days
Chickenpox5
11–20 days
Lassa fever3
3–21 days
Malaria3
10–15 days
Measles5
6–19 days
Mumps5
15–24 days
Poliomyelitis6
3–35 days
Psittacosis4
1–4 wks
Rubella5
15–20 days
Typhoid5
5–31 days
Whooping cough5
5–21 days
Long incubation periods
Hepatitis A5
3–7 wks
Hepatitis B4
6 wks to 6 mths
Leishmaniasis, cutaneous6
Weeks to months
Leishmaniasis, visceral6
Months to years
Leprosy3
5–20 yrs
Rabies4
2–8 wks2
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense infection6
Months to years
Tuberculosis5
1–12 mths
1Incubation periods are approximate and may differ from local or national 
guidance. 2Longer incubation periods have been reported.
3WHO. 4Health Protection Agency (now Health Protection England).
5Richardson M, Elliman D, Maguire H, et al. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2001; 
20:380–388. 6Centers for Disease Control, USA.
6.7  Incubation periods of important infections1
Reference sources:
Health care-acquired infection
Admission to a health-care facility in the developed 
world carries a considerable risk of acquiring infec-
tion, estimated by the UK Department of Health 
as 6–10%. Factors that contribute to health care-acquired 
infection (HCAI, or nosocomial infection) are shown 
in Figure 6.11. Many nosocomial bacterial infections 
are caused by organisms that are resistant to numer-
ous antibiotics (multi-resistant bacteria), including 
meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus (MRSA) (p. 330), 
extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Entero-
bacteriaceae, glycopeptide-resistant enterococci (GRE) 
and carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE). 
Other infections of particular concern in hospitals 
include C. difficile (p. 342) and norovirus (p. 327).
IPC measures are described in Box 6.8. The most 
important infection prevention practice is maintenance 
of good hand hygiene (Fig. 6.12). Hand decontamination 
or washing is mandatory before and after every patient 
contact. In most cases, decontamination with alcohol gel 
Institutional
• Handling, storage and disposal of clinical waste
• Containment and safe removal of spilled blood and body 
fluids
• Cleanliness of environment and medical equipment
• Specialised ventilation (e.g. laminar flow, air filtration, 
controlled pressure gradients)
• Sterilisation and disinfection of instruments and equipment
• Food hygiene
• Laundry management
Health-care staff
• Education
• Hand hygiene, including hand-washing (see Fig. 6.12)
• Sharps management and disposal
• Use of personal protective equipment (masks, sterile and 
non-sterile gloves, gowns and aprons)
• Screening health workers for disease (e.g. tuberculosis, 
hepatitis B virus, MRSA)
• Immunisation and post-exposure prophylaxis
Clinical practice
• Antibiotic stewardship (use only when necessary; avoid drugs 
known to select multi-resistant organisms or predispose to 
other infections)
• Aseptic technique (see Box 6.10)
• Perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis
• Screening patients for colonisation or infection (e.g. MRSA, 
GRE, CPE)
Response to infections
• Surveillance to detect alert organism (see text) outbreaks and 
antimicrobial resistance
• Antibiotic chemoprophylaxis to infectious disease contacts, if 
indicated (see Box 6.19)
• Isolation (see Box 6.9)
• Reservoir control
• Vector control
(CPE = carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae; GRE = glycopeptide-
resistant enterococci; MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staphyloccus aureus)
6.8  Measures used in infection prevention and 
control (IPC)
Principles of infectious disease 
6
146
Fig. 6.11  Commonly encountered health care-associated infections (HCAI) and the factors that predispose to them. (ESBL = extended 
spectrum β-lactamases; GRE = glycopeptide-resistant enterococci; MRSA = multidrug-resistant Staph. aureus; RSV = respiratory syncytial virus) 
Antibiotic use, especially
broad-spectrum
Risk factor
Bacteria
Viruses
Other
Contact with health-care staff
Contact with other patients
Contaminated water supply
Device insertion (prosthetic
material, cannulae, shunts, etc.)
Inadequate cleaning of potential
fomites (furniture, shared facilities,
medical equipment, etc.)
Receipt of blood products
Surgical procedures
Urinary catheter insertion
Building work and dust
Likely infecting organisms
Possibility of multi-resistant
organisms, e.g. MRSA, GRE,
ESBL- or carbapenemase-
producing Enterobacteriaceae
Aspergillus spp.
Varicella zoster virus
Respiratory viruses
(RSV, rhinovirus, etc.)
Norovirus and other
enteric viruses
Blood-borne infections
Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia
Strep. pyogenes
Staph. aureus
Pseudomonas spp.
Legionella pneumophila
Environmental Gram-
negative bacilli
Enterobacteriaceae
Enterococci
Coagulase-negative
staphylococci
Clostridium difficile
Acinetobacter spp.
Candida spp.
Fig. 6.12  Hand-washing. Good hand hygiene, whether with soap/water or alcohol handrub, includes areas that are often missed, such as fingertips, 
web spaces, palmar creases and the backs of hands. Adapted from WHO guidance at www.who.int – see p. 164.
Wash hands only when visibly soiled! Otherwise use handrub!
Duration of the entire procedure: 40–60 sec.
1
2
3
Wet hands with water using
elbow-operated or non-
touch taps (if available)
Apply enough soap to cover
all hand surfaces
Rub hands palm to palm
4
5
6
Right palm over left dorsum
with interlaced fingers
and vice versa
Palm to palm with fingers
interlaced
Backs of fingers to
opposing palms with
fingers interlaced
7
8
9
Rotational rubbing of left
thumb clasped in right
palm and vice versa
Rotational rubbing,
backwards and forwards
with clasped fingers of
right hand in left palm
and vice versa
Rinse hands with water
10
11
12
Dry thoroughly with a
single-use towel
If hand-operated taps have
been used, use towel to
turn off tap
...and your hands are safe
is adequate. However, hand-washing (with hot water, 
liquid soap and complete drying) is required after any 
procedure that involves more than casual physical 
contact, or if hands are visibly soiled. In situations where 
the prevalence of C. difficile is high (e.g. a local outbreak), 
alcohol gel decontamination between patient contacts is 
inadequate, as it does not kill C. difficile spores, and 
hands must be washed with soap and water.
Some infections necessitate additional measures to 
prevent cross-infection (Box 6.9). To avoid infection, all 
Infection prevention and control
6
147
‘Skin preparation with chlorhexidine in 70% isopropyl alcohol is 
more effective than povidone-iodine or aqueous antiseptic 
solutions in preventing catheter infections.’
• Pratt RJ, et al. J Hosp Infect 2007; 65S:S1–S64.
6.10  Skin antisepsis prior to insertion of 
central venous catheters
invasive procedures must be performed with strict 
aseptic technique (Box 6.10).
Outbreaks of infection
Descriptive terms are defined in Box 6.11. Confirmation 
of an infectious disease outbreak usually requires evi-
dence from typing (p. 138) that the causal organisms 
have identical genotypic characteristics. If this is found 
not to be the case, the term pseudo-outbreak is used. 
When an outbreak of infection is suspected, a case 
definition is agreed. The number of cases that meet the 
case definition is then assessed by case-finding, using 
methods ranging from administration of questionnaires 
to national reporting systems. Case-finding usually 
includes microbiological testing, at least in the early 
stages of an outbreak. Temporal changes in cases are 
noted in order to plot an outbreak curve, and demo-
graphic details are collected to identify possible sources 
of infection. A case control study, in which recent 
activities (potential exposures) of affected ‘cases’ are 
compared to those of unaffected ‘controls’, may be 
undertaken to establish the outbreak source, and meas-
ures are taken to manage the outbreak and control 
its spread. Good communication between relevant 
personnel during and after the outbreak is important to 
inform practice in future outbreaks.
Surveillance ensures that disease outbreaks are 
either pre-empted or identified early. In hospitals, staff 
are made aware of the isolation of alert organisms, 
which have the propensity to cause outbreaks, and alert 
conditions, which are likely to be caused by such organ-
isms. Analogous systems are used nationally; many 
countries publish lists of organisms and diseases, which, 
if detected (or suspected), must be reported to public 
health authorities (reportable or notifiable diseases). 
Reasons for a disease to be classified as reportable are 
shown in Box 6.12.
Principles of food hygiene
‘Food poisoning’ (p. 306) is largely preventable by food 
hygiene measures. The main principles are:
•	 segregation of uncooked food (which may be 
contaminated with pathogenic microorganisms) 
from cooked food
•	 avoidance of conditions which allow growth  
of pathogenic bacteria before or after  
cooking
•	 adequate bacterial killing during cooking.
Safe storage depends on the temperatures at 
which food bacteria are inhibited and destroyed 
(Fig. 6.13).
6.9  Types of isolation precaution1
Principles of infectious disease 
6
148
Term
Definition
Classification of related cases of infectious disease*
Cluster
An aggregation of cases of a disease which 
are closely grouped in time and place, and 
may or may not exceed the expected number
Epidemic
The occurrence of more cases of disease 
than expected in a given area or among a 
specific group of people over a particular 
period of time
Outbreak
Synonymous with epidemic. Alternatively, a 
localised, as opposed to generalised, 
epidemic
Pandemic
An epidemic occurring over a very wide area 
(several countries or continents) and usually 
affecting a large proportion of the population
Classification of affected patients (cases)
Index case
The first case identified in an outbreak
Primary cases
Cases acquired from a specific source of 
infection
Secondary cases
Cases acquired from primary cases
Types of outbreak
Common source 
outbreak
Exposure to a common source of infection 
(e.g. water-cooling tower, medical staff 
member shedding MRSA). New primary cases 
will arise until the source is no longer present
Point source 
outbreak
Exposure to a single source of infection at a 
specific point in time (e.g. contaminated 
food at a party). Primary cases will develop 
disease synchronously
Person-to-
person spread
Outbreak with both primary and secondary 
cases. May complicate point source or 
common source outbreak
*Adapted from www.cdc.gov.
6.11  Terminology in outbreaks of infection
Fig. 6.13  Important temperatures (°C) in food hygiene. 
0°
5°
7° Normal domestic
     fridge (4°–7°)
37° Body
       temperature
63° Minimum holding
        temperature for
        reheated food
82° Minimum reheat
        temperature
Adequate
holding
temperature
−18–20° Appropriate freezer
             temperature
Refrigeration
Danger zone
— potential for
bacterial growth
Reason for inclusion
Common examples
Endemic/local disease with 
the potential to spread and/or 
cause outbreaks
Influenza, Salmonella, 
tuberculosis
Imported disease with the 
propensity to spread and/or 
cause outbreaks
Typhoid, cholera (depending 
on local epidemiology)
Evidence of a possible 
breakdown in health 
protection/public health 
functions
Legionella, Cryptosporidium
Evidence of a possible 
breakdown in food safety 
practices
Botulism, verotoxigenic  
E. coli
Evidence of a possible failure 
of a vaccination programme
Measles, poliomyelitis, 
pertussis
Disease with the potential to 
be a novel or increasing threat 
to human health
SARS, multi-resistant 
bacteria
Evidence of expansion of the 
range of a reservoir/vector
Lyme disease, rabies, West 
Nile encephalitis
Evidence of possible deliberate 
release
Anthrax, tularaemia, plague, 
smallpox, botulism
6.12  Reasons for including an infectious disease 
on a regional/national list of reportable diseases*
*Given the different geographic ranges of individual diseases, and wide 
national variations in public health services, vaccination programmes and 
availability of resources, reporting regulations vary between regions, states 
and countries. Many diseases are reportable for more than one reason.
Immunisation
Immunisation may be passive or active. Passive immu-
nisation is achieved by administering antibodies tar-
geted against a specific pathogen. Antibodies are 
obtained from blood, so confer some of the risks associ-
ated with blood products (p. 1012). The protection 
afforded by passive immunisation is immediate but of 
short duration (a few weeks or months); it is used to 
prevent or attenuate infection before or after exposure 
(Box 6.13).
Vaccination
Active immunisation is achieved by vaccination with 
whole organisms or organism components (Box 6.14).
Types of vaccine
Whole cell vaccines consist of live or inactivated (killed) 
microorganisms; component vaccines contain only 
extracted or synthesised components of microorganisms 
(e.g. polysaccharides or proteins). Live vaccines contain 
organisms with attenuated (reduced) virulence, which 
induce T-lymphocyte and humoral responses (p. 77) and 
are therefore more immunogenic than inactivated whole 
cell vaccines. The use of live vaccines in immunocom-
promised individuals requires careful consideration.
Component vaccines consisting only of polysac­
charides, such as the pneumococcal polysaccharide 
vaccine (PPV), are poor activators of T-lymphocytes, 
and produce a short-lived antibody response without 
long-lasting memory. Conjugation of polysaccharide to 
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
149
Human normal immunoglobulin (pooled immunoglobulin)
• Hepatitis A (unvaccinated contacts*)
• Measles (if exposed child has heart or lung disease)
Human specific immunoglobulin
• Hepatitis B (sexual partners, inoculation injuries, infants born 
to infected mothers)
• Tetanus (high-risk wounds or when immunisation status is 
incomplete or unknown)
• Rabies
• Chickenpox (immunosuppressed children and adults, 
pregnant women)
6.13  Indications for post-exposure prophylaxis 
with immunoglobulins
*Active immunisation is preferred if contact is with a patient who is within 
1 wk of onset of jaundice.
Live attenuated vaccines
• Measles, mumps, rubella 
(MMR)
• Oral poliomyelitis (OPV, not 
used in UK)
• Tuberculosis (bacille 
Calmette–Guérin, BCG)
• Typhoid (oral typhoid 
vaccine)
• Varicella zoster virus
• Rotavirus
Inactivated (killed) whole-cell vaccines
• Cholera
• Hepatitis A
• Influenza
• Poliomyelitis (inactivated 
polio virus, IPV)
• Rabies
Component vaccines
• Anthrax (adsorbed extracted antigens)
• Diphtheria (adsorbed toxoid)
• Hepatitis B (adsorbed recombinant HBsAg)
• Haemophilus influenzae type B (conjugated capsular 
polysaccharide)
• Human papillomavirus (recombinant capsid proteins)
• Meningococcal, quadrivalent A, C, Y, W135 (conjugated 
capsular polysaccharide)
• Meningococcal, serogroup C (conjugated capsular 
polysaccharide)
• Pertussis (adsorbed extracted antigens)
• Pneumococcal conjugate (PCV; conjugated capsular 
polysaccharide, 13 serotypes)
• Pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPV; purified capsular 
polysaccharide, 23 serotypes)
• Tetanus (adsorbed toxoid)
• Typhoid (purified Vi capsular polysaccharide)
6.14  Vaccines in current clinical use
infectious disease is vaccinated to curtail further spread. 
Vaccination is aimed mainly at preventing infectious 
disease. However, vaccination against human papilloma­
virus (HPV) was introduced to prevent cervical and 
other cancers which complicate HPV infection. Vaccina-
tion guidelines for individuals are shown in Box 6.15.
Vaccination becomes successful once the number of 
susceptible hosts in a population falls below the level 
required to sustain continued transmission of the target 
organism (herd immunity). Naturally acquired small-
pox was declared to have been eradicated worldwide 
in 1980 through mass vaccination. In 1988, the WHO 
resolved to eradicate poliomyelitis by vaccination; the 
number of cases worldwide has since fallen from 
approximately 350 000 per annum to 223 in 2012. Recom-
mended vaccination schedules vary between countries. 
In addition to standard vaccination schedules, catch-up 
schedules are specified for individuals who join vaccina-
tion programmes later than the recommended age.
TREATMENT OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES
The key components of treating infectious disease are:
•	 addressing predisposing factors, e.g. diabetes 
mellitus or known immune deficit (HIV, neutropenia)
•	 antimicrobial therapy
•	 adjuvant therapy, e.g. removal of an indwelling 
catheter (urinary or vascular), abscess drainage or 
débridement of an area of necrotising fasciitis
•	 treatment of the consequences of infection, e.g. the 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS;  
p. 184), inflammation and pain.
For communicable disease, treatment must also take 
into account contacts of the infected patient, and may 
include infection prevention and control activities such 
as isolation, antimicrobial prophylaxis, vaccination and 
contact tracing.
Principles of antimicrobial therapy
When infection is diagnosed, it is important to start 
appropriate antimicrobial therapy promptly. The princi-
ples underlying the choice of antimicrobial agent(s) are 
a protein, as in the Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib) 
vaccine, activates T lymphocytes, which results in a sus-
tained response and immunological memory. Toxoids 
are bacterial toxins that have been modified to reduce 
toxicity but maintain antigenicity. Vaccine response can 
be improved by co-administration with mildly pro-
inflammatory adjuvants, such as aluminium hydroxide.
Use of vaccines
Vaccination may be applied to entire populations or 
to subpopulations at specific risk through travel, occu-
pation or other activities. In ring vaccination, the popu-
lation immediately surrounding a case or outbreak of 
• The principal contraindication to inactivated vaccines is an 
anaphylactic reaction to a previous dose or a component of 
the vaccine
• Live vaccines should not be given in the presence of an 
acute infection, to pregnant women or to the 
immunosuppressed, unless the immunosuppression is mild 
and the benefits outweigh the risks
• If two live vaccines are required, they should be given either 
simultaneously in opposite arms or 4 wks apart
• Live vaccines should not be given for 3 mths after an 
injection of human normal immunoglobulin (HNI)
• HNI should not be given for 2 wks after a live vaccine
• Hay fever, asthma, eczema, sickle-cell disease, topical 
corticosteroid therapy, antibiotic therapy, prematurity and 
chronic heart and lung diseases, including tuberculosis, are 
not contraindications to vaccination
6.15  Guidelines for vaccination against 
infectious disease
Principles of infectious disease 
6
150
discussed below. The process of selecting appropriate 
antimicrobial therapy has been summarised in UK guid-
ance as ‘Start Smart – Then Focus’ (Fig. 6.14).
Antimicrobial action and spectrum
Antimicrobial agents kill microorganisms by inhibiting, 
damaging or destroying a target that is a required com-
ponent of the organism. The range, or spectrum, of 
microorganisms that is killed by a particular antimicro-
bial agent must be considered in selecting therapy. The 
mechanisms of action of the major classes of antibacte-
rial agent are listed in Box 6.16 and appropriate antibi-
otic choices for a range of common infecting organisms 
are shown in Box 6.17. In severe infections and/or 
immunocompromised patients, it is customary to use 
bactericidal agents in preference to bacteriostatic agents.
Empiric versus targeted therapy
Empiric antimicrobial therapy is selected to treat a 
clinical syndrome (e.g. meningitis) before a microbio-
logical diagnosis has been made. Targeted therapy is 
aimed at the causal pathogen(s) of known antimicrobial 
sensitivity. ‘Start Smart – Then Focus’ describes the prin-
ciple of using appropriate broad-spectrum agents in 
empiric therapy, followed by narrow-spectrum agents 
in targeted therapy. Optimum empiric therapy depends 
on the site of infection, patient characteristics and local 
antimicrobial resistance patterns. Hospital antibiotic 
policies are used to guide rational antimicrobial pre-
scribing, maximising efficacy while minimising antimi-
crobial resistance and cost.
Combination therapy
It is sometimes appropriate to use antimicrobial agents 
in combination:
•	 to increase efficacy (e.g. enterococcal endocarditis, 
where a β-lactam/aminoglycoside combination 
Fig. 6.14  Stages in the selection and refinement of antimicrobial therapy: ‘Start Smart – Then Focus’. 
1  Empiric therapy
    Based on:
    • Predicted susceptibility
      of likely pathogens
    • Local antimicrobial
      policies
2  Targeted therapy
    Based on:
    • Predicted susceptibility
      of infecting organism(s)
    • Local antimicrobial policies
3  Susceptibility-guided therapy
    Based on:
    • Susceptibility testing results
Antimicrobial
susceptibility results
Clinical diagnosis
Information available:
• Organ system involved
• Endogenous or
  exogenous infection
• Likely pathogens
• Infecting organism(s)
• Likely antimicrobial
  susceptibility
Level of
knowledge
of infecting
organism(s)
Antimicrobial
spectrum of
agent(s)
used
• Antimicrobial
  susceptibility
  of infecting
  organism(s)
Laboratory investigations:
microbiological diagnosis
Aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, macrolides, lincosamides 
and streptogramins, oxazolidinones (linezolid)
• Inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis by binding to subunits 
of bacterial ribosomes
Tetracyclines
• Inhibition of protein synthesis by preventing transfer RNA 
binding to ribosomes
Beta-lactams
• Inhibition of cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis by competitive 
inhibition of transpeptidases (‘penicillin-binding proteins’)
Cyclic lipopeptide (daptomycin)
• Insertion of lipophilic tail into plasma membrane causes 
depolarisation and cell death
Glycopeptides
• Inhibition of cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis by forming 
complexes with D-alanine residues on peptidoglycan 
precursors
Nitroimidazoles
• The reduced form of the drug causes strand breaks in DNA
Quinolones
• Inhibition of DNA replication by binding to DNA 
topoisomerases (DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV), 
preventing supercoiling and uncoiling of DNA
Rifamycins
• Inhibition of DNA synthesis by inhibiting DNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase
Sulphonamides and trimethoprim
• Inhibition of folate synthesis by dihydropteroate synthase 
(sulphonamides) and dihydrofolate reductase (trimethoprim) 
inhibition
6.16  Target and mechanism of action of 
common antibacterial agents
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
151
Organism
Antimicrobial options*
Gram-positive organisms
Enterococcus faecalis
Ampicillin, vancomycin/teicoplanin
Enterococcus faecium
Vancomycin/teicoplanin, linezolid
Glycopeptide-resistant enterococci (GRE)
Linezolid, tigecycline, quinupristin–dalfopristin, daptomycin
MRSA
Clindamycin, vancomycin, rifampicin (never used as monotherapy), linezolid, daptomycin, 
tetracyclines, tigecycline, co-trimoxazole
Staph. aureus
Flucloxacillin, clindamycin
Strep. pyogenes
Penicillin, clindamycin, erythromycin
Strep. pneumoniae
Penicillin, macrolides, cephalosporins, levofloxacin, vancomycin
Gram-negative organisms
E. coli, ‘coliforms’ (enteric Gram-negative 
bacilli)
Trimethoprim, cefuroxime, ciprofloxacin, co-amoxiclav
Enterobacter spp., Citrobacter spp.
Ciprofloxacin, meropenem, ertapenem, aminoglycosides
ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae
Ciprofloxacin, meropenem, ertapenem (if sensitive), piperacillin–tazobactam, 
aminoglycosides, tigecycline
Carbapenemase-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae
Ciprofloxacin, aminoglycosides, tigecycline, colistin
Haemophilus influenzae
Amoxicillin, co-amoxiclav, macrolides, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin
Legionella pneumophila
Azithromycin, levofloxacin, doxycycline
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Ceftriaxone/cefixime, spectinomycin
Neisseria meningitidis
Penicillin, cefotaxime/ceftriaxone, chloramphenicol
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Ciprofloxacin, piperacillin–tazobactam, aztreonam, meropenem, aminoglycosides, 
ceftazidime/cefepime
Salmonella typhi
Ceftriaxone, azithromycin (uncomplicated typhoid), chloramphenicol (resistance common)
Strict anaerobes
Bacteroides spp.
Metronidazole, clindamycin, co-amoxiclav, piperacillin–tazobactam, meropenem
Clostridium difficile
Metronidazole, vancomycin (oral), fidaxomicin
Clostridium spp.
Penicillin, metronidazole, clindamycin
Fusobacterium spp.
Penicillin, metronidazole, clindamycin
Other organisms
Chlamydia trachomatis
Azithromycin, doxycycline
Treponema pallidum
Penicillin, doxycycline
*Antibiotic selection depends on multiple factors, including local susceptibility patterns, which vary enormously between geographic areas. There are many 
appropriate alternatives to those listed.
6.17  Antimicrobial options for common infecting bacteria
results in better outcomes than a β-lactam 
alone)
•	 when no single agent’s spectrum covers all potential 
pathogens (e.g. in polymicrobial infection or empiric 
treatment of sepsis)
•	 to reduce antimicrobial resistance, as the organism 
would need to develop resistance to multiple agents 
simultaneously (e.g. antituberculous chemotherapy 
(p. 693), antiretroviral therapy (ART, p. 407) ).
Antimicrobial resistance
Microorganisms have evolved in the presence of natu-
rally occurring antibiotics, and have therefore devel-
oped resistance mechanisms (categorised in Fig. 6.15) to 
all classes of antimicrobial agent (antibiotics and their 
derivatives). Intrinsic resistance is an innate property of 
a microorganism, whereas acquired resistance arises by 
spontaneous mutation or horizontal transfer of genetic 
material from another organism in a phage or plasmid. 
Plasmids often encode resistance to multiple antibiotics. 
For some agents, e.g. penicillins, a degree of resistance 
occurs in vivo when the bacterial load is high and the 
molecular target for the antimicrobial is down-regulated 
(an ‘inoculum effect’).
The mecA gene encodes a low-affinity penicillin-
binding protein, which confers resistance to β-lactam 
antibiotics in staphylococci. Extended spectrum β-
lactamases (ESBL) are encoded on plasmids which are 
transferred relatively easily between bacteria, including 
Enterobacteriaceae. Plasmid-encoded carbapenemases 
have been detected in strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae 
(e.g. New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase 1, NDM-1). Strains 
of MRSA have been described that exhibit intermediate 
resistance to glycopeptides (GISA) through the develop-
ment of a relatively impermeable cell wall.
Factors promoting antimicrobial resistance include 
the inappropriate use of antibiotics (e.g. in viral infec-
tions), inadequate dosage or treatment duration, and use 
Principles of infectious disease 
6
152
Fig. 6.15  Examples of mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance. (CAT = chloramphenicol acetyltransferase; ESBL = extended spectrum 
β-lactamases; GISA = glycopeptide-intermediate Staph. aureus; MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus; NDM-1 = New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase 1). 
Impermeability/reduced permeability
Carbapenem resistance in Pseudomonas spp.
Glycopeptide resistance in Staph. aureus (GISA)
Aminoglycoside resistance in anaerobes
(uptake requires O2-dependent transport
mechanism)
Antimicrobial target
Antimicrobial agent
Active efflux of antimicrobial agent
Tetracycline resistance in Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria
Fluconazole resistance in Candida spp.
Target modification
β-lactam resistance in MRSA – altered
penicillin-binding protein
Glycopeptide resistance in enterococci – altered
peptidoglycan amino acid sequence
Rifampicin resistance in M. tuberculosis – RNA
polymerase mutation
Ciprofloxacin resistance in Enterobacteriaceae – DNA
gyrase mutation
Linezolid resistance in staphylococci and
enterococci – 23S rRNA methylation
Enzymatic degradation of agent
β-lactam resistance in many organisms
(penicillinase in Staph. aureus; ESBL, ampC and
NDM-1 in Enterobacteriaceae)
Chloramphenicol resistance in staphylococci (CAT)
of antimicrobials as growth-promoters in agriculture. 
However, any antimicrobial use exerts a selection pres-
sure that favours the development of resistance. Combi-
nation antimicrobial therapy may reduce the emergence 
of resistance. This is recommended in treatment of 
patients infected with HIV, which is highly prone to 
spontaneous mutation (p. 407). Despite use of combina-
tion therapy for M. tuberculosis, multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis (MDR-TB, resistant to isoniazid and 
rifampicin) and extremely drug-resistant tuberculosis 
(XDR-TB, resistant to isoniazid and rifampicin, any 
fluoroquinolone and at least one injectable antimicrobial 
antituberculous agent) have been reported worldwide 
and are increasing in incidence (p. 693).
The term post-antibiotic era has been coined to 
describe a future in which the acquisition of resistance 
by bacteria will have been so extensive that antibiotic 
therapy is rendered useless. A more realistic scenario, 
which is currently being experienced, is a gradual but 
inexorable progression of resistance, necessitating the 
use of ever more toxic and expensive antimicrobials.
Duration of therapy
Treatment duration reflects the severity of infection and 
accessibility of the infected site to antimicrobial agents. 
For most infections, there is limited evidence available to 
support a specific duration of treatment (Box 6.18). 
Depending on the indication, initial intravenous therapy 
may be switched to oral after fever has settled for approx-
imately 48 hours. In the absence of specific guidance, 
antimicrobial therapy should be stopped when there is 
no longer any clinical evidence of infection.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis
Primary prophylaxis is used when there is a risk of infec-
tion from a procedure or exposure (Box 6.19). It should 
be of short duration with minimal adverse effects, and 
may be combined with passive immunisation (see Box 
6.13). Secondary prophylaxis is used in patients who 
have been treated successfully for an infection but 
remain predisposed to it. It is used in haemato-oncology 
patients in the context of fungal infection and in HIV-
positive individuals with an opportunistic infection who 
do not respond to antiretroviral therapy.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
Pharmacokinetics of antimicrobial agents determine 
whether adequate concentrations are obtained at the 
sites of infection. Septic patients often have poor gastro­
intestinal absorption, so the preferred initial route of 
therapy is intravenous. Knowledge of anticipated anti-
microbial drug concentrations at sites of infection is criti-
cal. For example, achieving a ‘therapeutic’ blood level of 
gentamicin is of little practical use in treating meningitis, 
as CSF penetration of the drug is poor. Knowledge of 
routes of antimicrobial elimination is also critical; for 
instance, urinary tract infection is ideally treated with a 
drug that is excreted unchanged in the urine.
Pharmacodynamics 
describes 
the 
relationship 
between antimicrobial concentration and microbial 
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
153
Infection
Duration of therapy
Viral infections
Herpes simplex encephalitis
2–3 wks
Bacterial infections
Gonorrhoea
Single dose
Infective endocarditis 
(streptococcal, native valve)
4 wks ± gentamicin for 
first 2 wks
Infective endocarditis 
(prosthetic valve)
≥ 6 wks
Osteomyelitis
4–6 wks
Pneumonia (community-
acquired, severe)
10 days (no organism 
identified), 14–21 days  
(Staph. aureus or Legionella 
spp.)
Septic arthritis
2–4 wks
Urinary tract infection (male)
2 wks
Urinary tract infection, upper 
(female)
7 days
Urinary tract infection, lower 
(female)
3 days
Mycobacterial infections
Tuberculosis (meningeal)
12 mths
Tuberculosis (pulmonary)
6 mths
Fungal infections
Invasive pulmonary 
aspergillosis
Until clinical/radiological 
resolution and reversal of 
predisposition
Candidaemia (acute 
disseminated)
2 wks after last positive blood 
culture and resolution of signs 
and symptoms
6.18  Duration of antimicrobial therapy for some 
common infections*
*All recommendations are indicative. Actual duration takes into account 
predisposing factors, specific organisms and antimicrobial susceptibility, 
adjuvant therapies, current guidelines and clinical response.
killing. For many agents, antimicrobial effect can be cat-
egorised as concentration-dependent or time-dependent. 
The concentration of antimicrobial achieved after a 
single dose is illustrated in Figure 6.16. The maximum 
concentration achieved is Cmax and the measure of overall 
exposure is the area under the curve (AUC). The efficacy 
of antimicrobial agents whose killing is concentration-
dependent (e.g. aminoglycosides) increases with the 
amount by which Cmax exceeds the minimum inhibitory 
concentration (Cmax : MIC ratio). For this reason, it has 
become customary to administer aminoglycosides (e.g. 
gentamicin) infrequently at high doses (e.g. 7 mg/kg) 
rather than frequently at low doses. This has the added 
advantage of minimising toxicity by reducing the likeli-
hood of drug accumulation. Conversely, the β-lactam 
antibiotics, macrolides and clindamycin exhibit time-
dependent killing, and their efficacy depends on Cmax 
Infection risk
Recommended antimicrobial
Bacterial
Diphtheria (prevention of 
secondary cases)
Erythromycin
Gas gangrene (after high 
amputation or major trauma)
Penicillin or metronidazole
Lower gastrointestinal tract 
surgery
Cefuroxime + metronidazole, 
gentamicin + metronidazole, or 
co-amoxiclav (single dose only)
Meningococcal disease 
(prevention of secondary 
cases)
Rifampicin or ciprofloxacin
Rheumatic fever (prevention 
of recurrence)
Phenoxymethylpenicillin or 
sulfadiazine
Tuberculosis (prevention of 
secondary cases)
Isoniazid ± rifampicin
Whooping cough (prevention 
of secondary cases)
Erythromycin
Viral
HIV, occupational exposure 
(sharps injury)
Combination tenofovir/
emtricitabine and lopinavir/
ritonavir. Modified if index case’s 
virus known to be resistant
Influenza A (prevention of 
secondary cases in adults 
with chronic respiratory, 
cardiovascular or renal 
disease, immunosuppression 
or diabetes mellitus)
Oseltamivir
Fungal
Aspergillosis (in high-risk 
haematology patients)
Itraconazole, voriconazole or 
posaconazole
Pneumocystis pneumonia 
(prevention in HIV and other 
immunosuppressed states)
Co-trimoxazole, pentamidine or 
dapsone
Protozoal
Malaria (prevention of 
travel-associated disease)
Specific antimalarials depend 
on travel itinerary (p. 357)
*These are based on current UK practice. Recommendations may vary 
locally or nationally. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for infective endocarditis 
during dental procedures is not currently recommended in the UK.
6.19  Recommendations for antimicrobial 
prophylaxis in adults*
Fig. 6.16  Antimicrobial pharmacodynamics. The curve represents 
drug concentrations after a single dose of an antimicrobial agent.  
Factors that determine microbial killing are Cmax : MIC ratio (concentration-
dependent killing), time above MIC (time-dependent killing) and  
AUC : MIC ratio. 
Time after dose
Time above MIC
Peak
concentration
(Cmax)
Minimum
inhibitory
concentration
(MIC)
Area under the
curve (AUC)
Concentration
Principles of infectious disease 
6
154
exceeding the MIC for a certain time (which is different 
for each class of agent). This is reflected in the dosing 
interval of benzylpenicillin, which is usually given every 
4 hours in severe infection (e.g. meningococcal meningi-
tis), and may be administered by continuous infusion. 
For other antimicrobial agents, the pharmacodynamic 
relationships are more complex and often less well 
understood. With some agents, bacterial inhibition per-
sists after antimicrobial exposure (post-antibiotic and 
post-antibiotic sub-MIC effects).
Therapeutic drug monitoring
Therapeutic drug monitoring is used to confirm that 
levels of antimicrobial agents with a low therapeutic 
Contraindicated
• Chloramphenicol: neonatal ‘grey baby’ syndrome – collapse, 
hypotension and cyanosis
• Fluconazole: teratogenic in high doses
• Quinolones: arthropathy in animal studies
• Sulphonamides: neonatal haemolysis and 
methaemoglobinaemia
• Tetracyclines, glycylcyclines: skeletal abnormalities in 
animals in 1st trimester; fetal dental discoloration and 
maternal hepatotoxicity with large parenteral doses in 2nd or 
3rd trimesters
• Trimethoprim: teratogenic in 1st trimester
Relatively contraindicated
• Aminoglycosides: potential damage to fetal auditory and 
vestibular nerves in 2nd and 3rd trimesters
• Metronidazole: avoidance of high dosages is recommended2
Not known to be harmful; use only when necessary
•  Aciclovir
•  Cephalosporins
•  Clarithromycin
•  Clindamycin
•  Erythromycin
•  Glycopeptides
•  Linezolid
•  Meropenem
•  Penicillins
1Data extracted from Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary 
(online). London: BMJ Group and Pharmaceutical Press; 
(www.medicinescomplete.com) [accessed on 16 March 2013].
2Theoretical risk of teratogenicity, not supported by available clinical evidence.
6.20  Antimicrobial agents in pregnancy1
• Clostridium difficile infection: all antibiotics predispose to 
some extent, but second- and third-generation 
cephalosporins and co-amoxiclav especially so.
• Hypersensitivity reactions: rise in incidence due to 
increased previous exposure.
• Renal impairment: may be significant in old age, despite 
‘normal’ creatinine levels (p. 467).
• Nephrotoxicity: more likely, e.g. first-generation 
cephalosporins, aminoglycosides.
• Accumulation of β-lactam antibiotics: may result in 
myoclonus, seizures or coma.
• Reduced gastric acid production: gastric pH is higher, 
which causes increased penicillin absorption.
• Reduced hepatic metabolism: results in a higher risk of 
isoniazid-related hepatotoxicity.
• Quinolones: associated with confusion and may increase the 
risk of seizures.
6.21  Problems with antimicrobial therapy 
in old age
Penicillins
• Natural penicillins: benzylpenicillin, phenoxymethylpenicillin
• Penicillinase-resistant penicillins: meticillin, flucloxacillin, 
nafcillin, oxacillin
• Aminopenicillins: ampicillin, amoxicillin
• Carboxy- and ureido-penicillins: ticarcillin, piperacillin
Cephalosporins
• See Box 6.23
Monobactams
• Aztreonam
Carbapenems
• Imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem, doripenem
6.22  Beta-lactam antibiotics
index (e.g. aminoglycosides) are not excessive, and that 
levels of agents with marked pharmacokinetic variabil-
ity (e.g. vancomycin) are adequate. Specific recommen-
dations for monitoring depend on individual clinical 
circumstances; for instance, different pre- and post-dose 
levels of gentamicin are recommended, depending on 
whether it is being used in traditional divided doses, 
once daily or for synergy in endocarditis (p. 625).
Beta-lactam antibiotics
These antibiotics have a β-lactam ring structure (Fig. 
6.17) and exert a bactericidal action by inhibiting 
enzymes involved in cell wall synthesis (penicillin-
binding proteins, PBP). They are classified in Box 6.22.
Pharmacokinetics
•	 Good drug levels are achieved in lung, kidney, 
bone, muscle and liver, and in pleural, synovial, 
pericardial and peritoneal fluids.
•	 CSF levels are low, except in the presence of 
inflammation.
•	 Activity is not inhibited in abscess (e.g. by low pH 
and PO2, high protein or neutrophils).
•	 Beta-lactams are subject to an ‘inoculum effect’ 
– activity is reduced in the presence of a high 
organism burden (PBP expression is down-
regulated by high organism density).
•	 Generally safe in pregnancy (except imipenem/
cilastatin).
Adverse effects
Generalised allergy to penicillin occurs in 0.7–10% of 
cases and anaphylaxis in 0.004–0.015%. A large propor-
tion of patients with infectious mononucleosis develop 
a rash if given aminopenicillins; this does not imply 
lasting allergy. The relationship between allergy to peni-
cillin and allergy to cephalosporins depends on the spe-
cific cephalosporin used. Although there is significant 
cross-reactivity with first-generation cephalosporins, 
cross-reactivity to second- and third-generation cephalo­
sporins is less common. However, avoidance of cephalo­
sporins is recommended in patients who have a type 
1 penicillin allergy (p. 89). Cross-reactivity between 
penicillin and carbapenems is rare (approximately 1% 
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
155
by skin-prick testing). Although avoidance of carba­
penems is recommended in penicillin-allergic patients, 
these drugs may be administered if there are no suitable 
alternatives and appropriate resuscitation facilities are 
available.
Gastrointestinal upset and diarrhoea are common, 
and a mild reversible hepatitis is recognised with many 
β-lactams. Leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and coagula-
tion deficiencies, and interstitial nephritis and poten­
tiation of aminoglycoside-mediated renal damage are 
also recognised (p. 502). Seizures and encephalopathy 
have been reported, particularly with high doses 
in the presence of renal insufficiency. Thrombo­
phlebitis occurs in up to 5% of patients receiving 
parenteral β-lactams.
Drug interactions
Synergism occurs in combination with aminoglycosides. 
Ampicillin decreases the biological effect of oral contra-
ceptives and the whole class is significantly affected by 
concurrent administration of probenecid, producing a 
2–4-fold increase in the peak serum concentration.
Penicillins
Natural penicillins are primarily effective against Gram-
positive organisms (except staphylococci, most of which 
produce a penicillinase) and anaerobic organisms. Strep. 
pyogenes has remained sensitive to natural penicillins 
worldwide. According to the European Antimicrobial 
Fig. 6.17  Beta-lactam antibiotics. With the exception of aztreonam (monobactam), the β-lactam antibiotics have bicyclic nuclei. This may explain the 
absence of cross-reaction to aztreonam in penicillin-allergic patients. However, aztreonam and ceftazidime have identical side-chains, so patients with a 
specific ceftazidime allergy should not be given aztreonam. 
Benzylpenicillin
Cefuroxime
Aztreonam
Ceftazidime
Meropenem
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
O
O
N
N
N
N
N
O
OH
O
S
S
S
OH
NH
O
S
S
S
NH
N
OH
N
H
HO
HN
HO
HO
CH3
CH3
CH3
NH2
N
+
N
H2N
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H3C
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
S
HN
HO
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
O
HO
CH3
CH3
H3C
H2N
β-lactam ring
Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-Net), the preva-
lence of high-level penicillin resistance in Strep. pneumo-
niae in Europe in 2010 was 2.7%. However, the prevalence 
in individual countries was as high as 33% (Cyprus).
Penicillinase-resistant penicillins are the mainstay of 
treatment for infections with Staph. aureus, other than 
meticillin-resistant strains (MRSA). However, EARS-Net 
data from 2010 indicate that almost 1 : 5 (18.5%) Staph. 
aureus isolates in Europe were MRSA.
Aminopenicillins have the same spectrum of activity 
as the natural penicillins, with additional Gram-negative 
cover against Enterobacteriaceae. Amoxicillin has better 
oral absorption than ampicillin. Unfortunately, resist-
ance to these agents is widespread (54% of E. coli Europe-
wide in 2010, range 34–83%), so they are no longer 
appropriate for first-line use in Gram-negative infec-
tions. In many organisms, resistance is due to β-lactamase 
production, which can be overcome by the addition of 
β-lactamase inhibitors (clavulanic acid or sulbactam).
Carboxypenicillins (e.g. ticarcillin) and ureidopeni­
cillins (e.g. piperacillin) are particularly active against 
Gram-negative organisms, especially Pseudomonas spp. 
which are resistant to the aminopenicillins. Beta-
lactamase inhibitors may be added to extend their spec-
trum of activity (e.g. piperacillin–tazobactam).
Cephalosporins and cephamycins
Cephalosporins are reliable broad-spectrum agents. 
Unfortunately, their use is associated with C. difficile 
Principles of infectious disease 
6
156
infection (p. 343). With the exception of ceftobiprole, the 
group has no activity against Enterococcus spp. Only the 
cephamycins have significant anti-anaerobic activity. All 
cephalosporins are inactivated by ESBL. Cephalosporins 
are arranged in ‘generations’ (Box 6.23).
•	 First-generation compounds have excellent activity 
against Gram-positive organisms and some activity 
against Gram-negatives.
•	 Second-generation drugs retain Gram-positive activity 
but have extended Gram-negative activity. 
Cephamycins (e.g. cefoxitin), included in this group, 
are active against anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli.
•	 Third-generation agents further improve anti-Gram-
negative cover. For some (e.g. ceftazidime), this is 
extended to include Pseudomonas spp. Cefotaxime 
and ceftriaxone have excellent Gram-negative 
activity and retain good activity against  
Strep. pneumoniae and β-haemolytic streptococci. 
Ceftriaxone is administered once daily, and is 
therefore a suitable agent for outpatient 
antimicrobial therapy.
•	 Fourth-generation agents have an extremely broad 
spectrum of activity, including Pseudomonas spp., 
Staph. aureus and streptococci.
•	 ‘Next generation’ agents have a third- or fourth-
generation spectrum enhanced to include MRSA.
Monobactams
Aztreonam is the only available monobactam. It is excel-
lent against Gram-negative, except ESBL-producing, 
organisms, but no useful activity against Gram-positive 
organisms or anaerobes. It is a parenteral-only agent and 
may be used safely in penicillin-allergic patients.
Carbapenems
These intravenous agents have the broadest antibiotic 
activity of the β-lactam antibiotics, covering most clini-
cally significant bacteria, including anaerobes.
Macrolide and lincosamide antibiotics
Macrolides (erythromycin, clarithromycin and azithro-
mycin) and lincosamides (lincomycin and clindamy-
cin) are bacteriostatic agents which have related 
properties. Both classes bind to the same component of 
First generation
•  Cefalexin, cefradine (oral)
•  Cefazolin (IV)
Second generation
•  Cefuroxime (oral/IV)
•  Cefaclor (oral)
•  Cefoxitin (IV)
Third generation
•  Cefixime (oral)
•  Cefotaxime (IV)
•  Ceftriaxone (IV)
•  Ceftazidime (IV)
Fourth generation
•  Cefepime (IV)
‘Next generation’
•  Ceftobiprole (IV)
•  Ceftaroline (IV)
6.23  Cephalosporins
the ribo­some, so they are potentially competitive and 
should not be administered together. Macrolides are 
used for Gram-positive infections in penicillin-allergic 
patients and in Mycoplasma and Chlamydia infections. 
Erythro­mycin is administered 4 times daily and clari-
thromycin twice daily. The long intracellular half-life of 
azithro­mycin allows single-dose/short-course therapy 
for genitourinary Chlamydia/Mycoplasma spp. infections. 
Clarithromycin and azithromycin are also used to treat 
legionellosis.
Pharmacokinetics
Macrolides
•	 Variable bioavailability.
•	 Short half-life (except azithromycin).
•	 High protein binding.
•	 Excellent intracellular accumulation.
Lincosamides (e.g. clindamycin)
•	 Good bioavailability.
•	 Food has no effect on absorption.
•	 Limited CSF penetration.
Adverse effects
•	 Gastrointestinal upset, especially in young adults 
(erythromycin 30%).
•	 Cholestatic jaundice with erythromycin estolate.
•	 Prolongation of QT interval on ECG, potential for 
torsades de pointes.
•	 Clindamycin predisposes to C. difficile infection.
Ketolides
The ketolides were developed in response to the 
emergence of penicillin and macrolide resistance in 
respiratory pathogens. Cross-resistance with macrolides 
is uncommon. Telithromycin is administered orally 
and has useful activity against common bacterial causes 
of respiratory infection, as well as Mycoplasma, Chlamy-
dia and Legionella spp.
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycosides are effective mainly in Gram-negative 
infections. They act synergistically with β-lactam anti­
biotics and are particularly useful where β-lactam or 
quinolone resistance occurs in health care-acquired 
infections. They cause very little local irritation at injec-
tion sites and negligible allergic responses. Oto- and 
nephrotoxicity must be avoided by monitoring of renal 
function and drug levels and by use of short treatment 
regimens. Aminoglycosides are not subject to an inocu-
lum effect (p. 151) and they all exhibit a post-antibiotic 
effect (p. 153).
Pharmacokinetics
•	 Negligible oral absorption.
•	 Hydrophilic, so excellent penetration to extracellular 
fluid in body cavities and serosal fluids.
•	 Very poor intracellular penetration (except hair cells 
in cochlea and renal cortical cells).
•	 Negligible CSF and corneal penetration.
•	 Peak plasma levels 30 minutes after infusion.
•	 Monitoring of therapeutic levels required.
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
157
Gentamicin dosing
•	 Except in certain forms of endocarditis, pregnancy, 
severe burns, end-stage renal disease and paediatric 
patients, gentamicin is administered at 7 mg/kg 
body weight. The appropriate dose interval 
depends on drug clearance, and is determined by 
reference to the Hartford nomogram (Fig. 6.18).
•	 In streptococcal and enterococcal endocarditis, 
gentamicin is used with a cell wall active agent 
(usually a β-lactam), to provide synergy. The usual 
dose is 1 mg/kg/day 3 times daily for enterococcal 
endocarditis and 3 mg/kg once a day for most 
strains of viridans streptococci. Target pre- and 
post-dose levels are < 1 mg/L and 3–5 mg/L 
respectively when gentamicin is dosed 3 times daily.
•	 When not used once daily or for endocarditis, 
gentamicin is administered twice or 3 times daily at 
3–5 mg/kg/day. Target pre- and post-dose levels 
are < 1 mg/L and 5–10 mg/L (7–10 mg/L with less 
sensitive organisms, e.g. Pseudomonas spp.) 
respectively.
•	 For other aminoglycosides, consult local guidance.
Adverse effects
•	 Renal toxicity (usually reversible) accentuated by 
other nephrotoxic agents.
•	 Cochlear toxicity (permanent) more likely in older 
people and those with a predisposing mitochondrial 
gene mutation.
•	 Neuromuscular blockade after rapid intravenous 
infusion (potentiated by calcium channel blockers, 
myasthenia gravis and hypomagnesaemia).
Quinolones and fluoroquinolones
These are effective and generally well-tolerated bacteri-
cidal agents. The quinolones have purely anti-Gram-
negative activity, whereas the fluoroquinolones are 
broad-spectrum agents (Box 6.24). Ciprofloxacin has 
anti-pseudomonal activity but resistance emerges 
rapidly. In 2010, 21% of E. coli isolates were resistant to 
fluoroquinolones in Europe.
Pharmacokinetics
•	 Well absorbed after oral administration but  
delayed by food, antacids, ferrous sulphate and 
multivitamins.
•	 Wide volume of distribution; tissue concentrations 
twice those in serum.
•	 Good intracellular penetration, concentrating in 
phagocytes.
Adverse effects
•	 Gastrointestinal side-effects in 1–5%.
•	 Rare skin reactions (phototoxicity).
•	 Achilles tendon rupture is reported, especially in 
older people.
•	 CNS effects (confusion, tremor, dizziness and 
occasional seizures in 5–12%), especially in older 
people.
•	 Reduces clearance of xanthines and theophyllines, 
potentially inducing insomnia and increased seizure 
potential.
•	 Reports of prolongation of QT interval on ECG with 
newer fluoroquinolones.
•	 Cases of hypo- or hyperglycaemia in association 
with gatifloxacin, so glucose monitoring is needed 
in patients with diabetes or those with severe 
hepatic dysfunction.
•	 Ciprofloxacin use is associated with the acquisition 
of MRSA and emergence of C. difficile ribotype 027 
(p. 343).
Glycopeptides
Glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin) are effec-
tive against Gram-positive organisms only, and are 
used against MRSA and ampicillin-resistant entero-
cocci. Some staphylococci and enterococci demonstrate 
intermediate sensitivity or resistance. Vancomycin use 
Fig. 6.18  Dosing of aminoglycosides using the Hartford 
nomogram. The nomogram is used to determine the dose interval for 
7 mg doses of gentamicin or tobramycin, using measurements of drug 
levels in plasma 6–14 hours after a single dose. 
Dose every
48 hours
Dose every
36 hours
Dose every
24 hours
Hours since administration
Concentration in plasma (µg/mL)
2
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
4
6
8
10
12
14
6.24  Quinolones and fluoroquinolones
Principles of infectious disease 
6
158
should be restricted to limit emergence of resistant 
strains. Teicoplanin is not available in all countries. 
Neither drug is absorbed after oral administration, but 
vancomycin is used orally to treat C. difficile infection.
Pharmacokinetics
Vancomycin
•	 Administered by slow intravenous infusion, good 
tissue distribution and short half-life.
•	 Enters the CSF only in the presence of inflammation.
•	 Therapeutic monitoring of intravenous vancomycin 
is recommended, to maintain pre-dose levels of  
> 10 mg/L (15–20 mg/L in serious staphylococcal 
infections).
Teicoplanin
•	 Long half-life allows once-daily dosing.
Adverse effects
•	 Histamine release due to rapid vancomycin infusion 
produces a ‘red man’ reaction (rare with modern 
preparations).
•	 Nephrotoxicity is rare, but may occur with 
concomitant aminoglycoside use, as may  
ototoxicity.
•	 Teicoplanin can cause rash, bronchospasm, 
eosinophilia and anaphylaxis.
Folate antagonists
These bacteriostatic antibiotics interfere with the bacte-
rial synthesis of folic acid from para-aminobenzoic 
acid. A combination of a sulphonamide and either 
trimethoprim or pyrimethamine is most commonly 
used, which interferes with two consecutive steps in 
the metabolic pathway. Available combinations include 
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (co-trimoxazole) and 
pyrimethamine with either sulfadoxine (used to treat 
malaria) or sulfadiazine (used in toxoplasmosis). Co-­
trimoxazole in high dosage (120 mg/kg daily in 2–4 
divided doses) is the first-line drug for Pneumocystis 
jirovecii (carinii) infection. The clinical use of these agents 
is limited by adverse effects. Folinic acid should be given 
if they are used long-term or unavoidably in early 
pregnancy.
Pharmacokinetics
•	 Well absorbed orally.
•	 Sulphonamides are hydrophilic, distributing well to 
the extracellular fluid.
•	 Trimethoprim is lipophilic with high tissue 
concentrations.
Adverse effects
•	 Trimethoprim is generally well tolerated, with few 
adverse effects.
•	 Sulphonamides and dapsone may cause haemolysis 
in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
(p. 1029).
•	 Sulphonamides and dapsone cause skin and 
mucocutaneous reactions, including Stevens–
Johnson syndrome and ‘dapsone syndrome’ (rash, 
fever and lymphadenopathy).
•	 Dapsone causes methaemoglobinaemia and 
peripheral neuropathy.
Tetracyclines and glycylcyclines
Tetracyclines
Of this mainly bacteriostatic class, the newer drugs 
doxycycline and minocycline show better absorption 
and distribution than older ones. Most streptococci and 
Gram-negative bacteria are now resistant, in part due to 
use in animals (which is banned in Europe). Tetracy-
clines are indicated for Mycoplasma spp., Chlamydia 
spp., Rickettsia spp., Coxiella spp., Bartonella spp., Borrelia 
spp., Helicobacter pylori, Treponema pallidum and atypical 
mycobacterial infections. Minocycline is occasionally 
used in chronic staphylococcal infections.
Pharmacokinetics
•	 Best oral absorption is in the fasting state 
(doxycycline is 100% absorbed unless gastric pH 
rises).
Adverse effects
•	 All tetracyclines except doxycycline are 
contraindicated in renal failure.
•	 Dizziness with minocycline.
•	 Binding to metallic ions in bones and teeth causes 
discoloration (avoid in children and pregnancy) and 
enamel hypoplasia.
•	 Phototoxic skin reactions.
Glycylcyclines (tigecycline)
Chemical modification of tetracycline has produced tige-
cycline, a broad-spectrum, parenteral-only antibiotic 
with activity against resistant Gram-positive and Gram-
negative pathogens, such as MRSA and ESBL (but 
excluding Pseudomonas spp.). Re-analysis of trial data 
has shown that there was excess mortality following 
tigecycline treatment compared with comparator anti­
biotics, so tigecycline should be used only when there 
are no available alternative agents.
Nitroimidazoles
Nitroimidazoles are highly active against strictly anaer-
obic bacteria, especially Bacteroides fragilis, C. difficile and 
other Clostridium spp. They also have significant anti-
protozoal activity against amoebae and Giardia lamblia.
Pharmacokinetics
•	 Almost completely absorbed after oral 
administration (60% after rectal administration).
•	 Well distributed, especially to brain and CSF.
•	 Safe in pregnancy.
Adverse effects
•	 Metallic taste (dose-dependent).
•	 Severe vomiting if taken with alcohol – ‘Antabuse 
effect’.
•	 Peripheral neuropathy with prolonged use.
Other antibacterial agents
Anti-tuberculous agents are discussed in detail on 
page 693.
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
159
inhibitor (MAOI) activity (p. 244), and co-administration 
with other MAOIs or serotonin re-uptake inhibitors 
should be avoided, as this may precipitate a serotonin 
syndrome (neuromuscular effects, autonomic hyper­
activity and altered mental status).
Fidaxomicin
Fidaxomicin is an inhibitor of RNA synthesis, which was 
introduced for the treatment of C. difficile infection (CDI) 
in 2012. In non-severe CDI, it appears to be non-inferior 
to oral vancomycin and is associated with a lower recur-
rence rate. Its effectiveness has not been assessed in 
severe CDI.
Spectinomycin
Chemically similar to the aminoglycosides and given 
intramuscularly, spectinomycin was developed to treat 
strains of N. gonorrhoeae resistant to β-lactam antibiot-
ics. Unfortunately, resistance to spectinomycin is very 
common. Its only indication is the treatment of gono-
coccal urethritis in pregnancy or in patients allergic to 
β-lactam antibiotics.
Streptogramins
Quinupristin/dalfopristin (supplied as a 30 : 70% combi-
nation) is active against MRSA and GRE (Enterococcus 
faecium but not E. faecalis), and its use should be reserved 
for these organisms. It is available in intravenous formu-
lation only and shows good tissue penetration, but does 
not cross the blood–brain barrier or the placenta. Signifi-
cant phlebitis occurs at injection sites and a raised serum 
creatinine and eosinophilia may occur.
Antifungal agents
See Box 6.25.
Azole antifungals
The azoles (imidazoles and triazoles) inhibit synthesis of 
ergosterol, a constituent of the fungal cell membrane. 
Side-effects vary but include gastrointestinal upset, hep-
atitis and rash. Azoles are inhibitors of cytochrome p450 
enzymes, so tend to increase exposure to cytochrome 
p450-metabolised drugs (p. 28).
Imidazoles
Miconazole, econazole, clotrimazole and ketoconazole 
are relatively toxic and therefore mainly administered 
topically. Clotrimazole is used extensively to treat 
superficial fungal infections. Ketoconazole may be given 
orally, but causes severe hepatitis in 1 : 15 000 cases and 
inhibits enzymes involved in steroid hormone biosyn-
thesis. Triazoles are preferred for systemic administra-
tion because of their reduced toxicity.
Triazoles
Fluconazole is effective against yeasts (Candida and 
Cryptococcus spp.). It is well absorbed after oral admin-
istration, and has a long half-life (approximately 
30 hours) and an excellent safety profile. The drug is 
highly water-soluble and distributes widely to all body 
sites and tissues, including CSF.
Itraconazole is lipophilic and distributes extensively, 
including to toenails and fingernails. CSF penetration 
Chloramphenicol
This is a potent and cheap antibiotic, still widely pre-
scribed throughout the world despite its potential toxic-
ity. Its use is increasingly reserved for severe and 
life-threatening infections where other antibiotics are 
either unavailable or impractical. It is bacteriostatic to 
most organisms but apparently bactericidal to H. influ-
enzae, Strep. pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis. It has 
a very broad spectrum of activity against aerobic and 
anaerobic organisms, spirochaetes, Rickettsia, Chlamydia 
and Mycoplasma spp. It also has quite useful activity 
against anaerobes, such as B. fragilis. It competes with 
macrolides and lincosamides for ribosomal binding 
sites, so should not be used in combination with these 
agents. Significant adverse effects are ‘grey baby’ syn-
drome in infants (cyanosis and circulatory collapse due 
to inability to conjugate drug and excrete the active form 
in urine); reversible dose-dependent bone marrow 
depression in adults receiving high cumulative doses; 
and severe aplastic anaemia in 1 in 25 000–40 000 expo-
sures (unrelated to dose, duration of therapy or route of 
administration).
Daptomycin
Daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide with bactericidal 
activity against Gram-positive organisms (including 
MRSA and GRE) but not Gram-negatives. It is not 
absorbed orally, and is used intravenously to treat resist-
ant Gram-positive infections, e.g. soft tissue infections 
and infective endocarditis, if other options are not 
available. Treatment can be associated with increased 
levels of creatine kinase and patients receiving lipid-
lowering statins (p. 453) should discontinue these to 
avoid myopathy.
Fusidic acid
This antibiotic, active against Gram-positive bacteria, is 
available in intravenous, oral or topical formulations. 
It is lipid-soluble and distributes well to tissues. How­
ever, its antibacterial activity is unpredictable. Fusidic 
acid is used in combination, typically with antistaphylo-
coccal penicillins, or for MRSA with clindamycin or 
rifampicin. It interacts with coumarin derivatives and 
oral contraceptives.
Nitrofurantoin
This drug has very rapid renal elimination and is active 
against aerobic Gram-negative and Gram-positive bac-
teria, including enterococci. It is used only for treatment 
of urinary tract infection, being generally safe in preg-
nancy and childhood. However, with prolonged use, it 
can cause eosinophilic lung infiltrates, fever, pulmonary 
fibrosis, peripheral neuropathy, hepatitis and haemo-
lytic anaemia.
Linezolid
Linezolid is the only currently licensed oxazolidinone 
antibiotic. It shows excellent oral absorption with good 
activity against Gram-positive organisms, including 
MRSA and GRE. It is competitively inhibited by 
co-administration of chloramphenicol, vancomycin or 
clindamycin. Common adverse effects include mild 
gastrointestinal upset and tongue discoloration. Myelo-
dysplasia and peripheral neuropathy can occur with 
prolonged use. Linezolid has monoamine oxidase 
Principles of infectious disease 
6
160
cytoplasmic membrane. Its use in resource-rich coun-
tries has been largely supplanted by less toxic agents. It 
is lipophilic, insoluble in water and not absorbed orally. 
Its long half-life enables once-daily administration. CSF 
penetration is poor.
Adverse effects include immediate anaphylaxis, 
other infusion-related reactions and nephrotoxicity. 
Nephrotoxicity may be sufficient to require dialysis, and 
occurs in most patients who are adequately dosed. It 
may be ameliorated by concomitant infusion of normal 
saline. Irreversible nephrotoxicity occurs with large 
cumulative doses of AmB.
Nystatin has a similar spectrum of antifungal activity 
to AmB. Its toxicity limits it to topical use, e.g. in oral 
and vaginal candidiasis.
Lipid formulations of amphotericin B
Lipid formulations of AmB have been developed to 
reduce AmB toxicity. They consist of AmB encapsulated 
in liposomes (liposomal AmB, L-AmB) or complexed 
with phospholipids (AmB lipid complex, ABLC). The 
drug becomes active on dissociating from its lipid com-
ponent. Adverse effects are similar to, but considerably 
less frequent than, those with AmB deoxycholate, and 
efficacy is similar. Lipid formulations of AmB are used 
in invasive fungal disease, as empirical therapy in 
patients with neutropenic fever (p. 1004), and also in 
visceral leishmaniasis (p. 362).
Other antifungal agents
Flucytosine
This drug has particular activity against yeasts. When 
used as monotherapy, resistance develops rapidly, so it 
should be administered in combination with another 
antifungal agent. Oral dosing is effective. Adverse 
effects include myelosuppression, gastrointestinal upset 
and hepatitis.
Griseofulvin
Griseofulvin has been largely superseded by terbinafine 
and itraconazole for treatment of dermatophyte infec-
tions, except in children, for whom these agents remain 
largely unlicensed. It demonstrates excellent oral bio­
availability and is deposited in keratin precursor cells, 
which become resistant to fungal invasion. The duration 
of treatment is 2–4 weeks for tinea corporis/capitis, 
4–8 weeks for tinea pedis, and 4–6 months for ony-
chomycosis (fungal nail infections).
Terbinafine
Terbinafine is well absorbed orally, can be given 
once daily and distributes with high concentration to 
sebum and skin, with a half-life of more than 1 week. 
It is used topically for dermatophyte skin infections 
and orally for onychomycosis. The major adverse reac-
tion is hepatic toxicity (approximately 1 : 50 000 cases). 
Terbinafine is not recommended for breastfeeding 
mothers.
Antiviral agents
Most viral infections in immunocompetent individuals 
resolve without intervention. Antiviral therapy is 
is poor. Oral absorption is erratic and formulation-
dependent, necessitating therapeutic drug monitoring.
Voriconazole is well absorbed (96% oral bioavailabil-
ity) and used mainly in aspergillosis (p. 697).
Posaconazole is the broadest-spectrum antifungal 
azole, and the only one with consistent activity against 
mucoraceous moulds. It is currently available as an oral 
agent only.
Echinocandins
The echinocandins inhibit β-1,3-glucan synthesis in the 
fungal cell wall. They have few significant adverse 
effects. Caspofungin, anidulafungin and micafungin are 
used to treat systemic candidosis, and caspofungin is 
also used in aspergillosis.
Polyenes
Amphotericin B (AmB) deoxycholate causes cell death 
by binding to ergosterol and damaging the fungal 
6.25  Antifungal agents
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
161
Anti-herpesvirus agents
Aciclovir, valaciclovir, penciclovir  
and famciclovir
Aciclovir, valaciclovir, penciclovir and famciclovir are 
acyclic analogues of guanosine, which inhibit viral 
DNA polymerase after being phosphorylated by 
available for a limited number of infections only (Box 
6.26 and p. 407).
Antiretroviral agents
These agents, used predominantly against HIV, are dis-
cussed in Chapter 14.
6.26  Antiviral agents
Principles of infectious disease 
6
162
virus-derived thymidine kinase (TK). Aciclovir is poorly 
absorbed after oral dosing; better levels are achieved 
intravenously or by use of the prodrug valaciclovir. 
Famciclovir is the prodrug of penciclovir. Resistance is 
mediated by viral kinase or polymerase mutations.
Ganciclovir
Chemical modification of the aciclovir molecule allows 
preferential phosphorylation by protein kinases of 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) and other β-herpesviruses (e.g. 
human herpesvirus (HHV) 6/7) and hence greater inhi-
bition of the DNA polymerase, but at the expense of 
increased toxicity. Ganciclovir is administered intra­
venously or as a prodrug (valganciclovir) orally.
Cidofovir
Cidofovir inhibits viral DNA polymerases with potent 
activity against CMV, including most ganciclovir-
resistant CMV. It also has activity against aciclovir-
resistant herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella 
zoster virus (VZV), HHV6 and occasionally adenovirus, 
poxvirus, papillomavirus or polyoma virus, and may be 
used to treat these infections in immunocompromised 
hosts.
Foscarnet
This analogue of inorganic pyrophosphate acts as a non-
competitive inhibitor of HSV, VZV, HHV6/7 or CMV 
DNA polymerase. It does not require significant intra­
cellular phosphorylation and so may be effective when 
HSV or CMV resistance is due to altered drug phospho-
rylation. It has variable CSF penetration.
Anti-influenza agents
Zanamivir and oseltamivir
These agents inhibit influenza A and B neuraminidase, 
which is required for release of virus from infected 
cells (see Fig. 6.2, p. 135). They are used in treatment 
and prophylaxis of influenza. Administration within 
48 hours of disease onset reduces the duration of 
symptoms by approximately 1–1½ days. In the UK, their 
use is limited mainly to adults with chronic respiratory 
or renal disease, significant cardiovascular disease, 
immunosuppression or diabetes mellitus, during known 
outbreaks. Peramivir has a distinct chemical structure, 
which means that it retains activity against some osel-
tamivir and zanamivir-resistant strains. It has poor oral 
bioavailability and is being developed as an intravenous 
or intramuscular formulation. An intravenous formula-
tion of zanamivir is in development for critically ill 
patients.
Amantadine and rimantadine
These drugs reduce replication of influenza A by inhi-
bition of viral M2 protein ion channel function, which 
is required for uncoating (see Fig. 6.2, p. 135). Resist-
ance develops rapidly and is widespread, and amanta-
dine and rimantadine should be used only if the 
prevalence of resistance locally is known to be low. 
They are no longer recommended for treatment or 
prophylaxis in the UK or USA, having been superseded 
by zanamivir and oseltamivir. However, they may still 
be indicated to treat oseltamivir-resistant influenza A 
in patients unable to take zanamivir (e.g. ventilated 
patients).
Agents used against  
hepatitis viruses
Ribavirin
Ribavirin is a guanosine analogue that inhibits nucleic 
acid synthesis in a variety of viruses and is used in par-
ticular in the treatment of hepatitis C virus.
Lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil, tenofovir, 
entecavir and telbivudine
These agents have excellent activity against hepatitis 
B virus DNA polymerase–reverse transcriptase. They 
are well tolerated after oral administration but resist-
ance develops with monotherapy. Resistance seems 
to emerge most rapidly for lamivudine (via the 
tyrosine–methionine–aspartate–aspartate, or YMDD, 
mutation) and most slowly for entecavir (multiple 
mutations required). Organisms resistant to lamivudine 
are usually also resistant to telbivudine, but not to 
adefovir/tenofovir. The role of monotherapy for hepa-
titis B virus is currently a matter for debate, and combi-
nation therapy, as used in HIV treatment, is likely to be 
increasingly employed. Lamivudine and tenofovir are 
also used against HIV (p. 407).
Telaprevir and boceprevir
A number of antiviral inhibitors of the hepatitis C virus 
NS3 serine protease or NS5B polymerase are in develop-
ment. Telaprevir and boceprevir have been licensed for 
use in chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1 disease. 
Addition of these agents to standard interferon–ribavirin 
combination therapy improves sustained virological 
response rates. They are prone to drug–drug interac-
tions, including those involving antiretrovirals. Resist-
ance develops to these agents, so they are administered 
as part of combination treatment.
Interferon-α
The interferons are naturally occurring cytokines that 
are produced as an early response to viral infection 
(p. 74). The addition of a polyethylene glycol (PEG) 
moiety to the molecule significantly enhances pharmaco­
kinetics and efficacy.
Antiparasitic agents
Drugs used against helminths
Benzimidazoles (albendazole, mebendazole)
These agents act by inhibiting both helminth glucose 
uptake, causing depletion of glycogen stores, and fuma-
rate reductase. Albendazole is used for hookworm, 
ascariasis, threadworm, Strongyloides infection, trichinel-
losis, Taenia solium (cysticercosis) and hydatid disease. 
Mebendazole is used for hookworm, ascariasis, thread-
worm and whipworm. The drugs are administered 
orally. Absorption is relatively poor, but increased by a 
fatty meal. Significant adverse effects are uncommon.
Bithionol
Bithionol is used to treat fluke infections with Fasciola 
hepatica. It is well absorbed orally. Adverse effects are 
mild (e.g. nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, rashes) but rela-
tively common (approximately 30%).
Treatment of infectious diseases
6
163
be administered via intramuscular and oral routes. 
Artesunate is water-soluble and is administered intra­
venously or orally. Serious adverse effects are uncom-
mon. Current advice for malaria in pregnancy is that the 
artemisinin derivatives should be used to treat uncom-
plicated falciparum malaria in the second and third tri-
mesters, but should not be prescribed in the first trimester 
until more information becomes available.
Atovaquone
Atovaquone inhibits mitochondrial function. It is an oral 
agent, used for treatment and prophylaxis of malaria, in 
combination with proguanil (see below), without which 
it is ineffective. It is also employed in the treatment of 
mild cases of Pneumocystis jirovecii (carinii) pneumonia, 
where there is intolerance to co-trimoxazole. Significant 
adverse effects are uncommon.
Folate synthesis inhibitors (proguanil, 
pyrimethamine–sulfadoxine)
Proguanil inhibits dihydrofolate reductase and is used 
for malaria prophylaxis. Pyrimethamine–sulfadoxine is 
used in the treatment of malaria (p. 356).
Quinoline-containing compounds
Chloroquine and quinine are believed to act by intra-
parasitic inhibition of haem polymerisation, resulting in 
toxic build-up of intracellular haem. The mechanisms of 
action of other agents in this group (quinidine, amodi-
aquine, mefloquine, primaquine, etc.) may differ. They 
are employed in the treatment and prophylaxis of 
malaria. Primaquine is used for radical cure of malaria 
due to Plasmodium vivax and P. ovale (destruction of 
liver hypnozoites). Chloroquine is also given for extra-
intestinal amoebiasis.
Chloroquine can cause a pruritus sufficient to com-
promise compliance with therapy. If used in long-term, 
high-dose regimens, it causes an irreversible retino­
pathy. Overdosage leads to life-threatening cardio­
toxicity. The side-effect profile of mefloquine includes 
neuropsychiatric effects ranging from mood change, 
nightmares and agitation to hallucinations and psycho-
sis. Quinine may cause hypoglycaemia and cardio­
toxicity, especially when administered parenterally. 
Primaquine causes haemolysis in people with glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (p. 1029), which 
should be excluded before therapy. Chloroquine is con-
sidered safe in pregnancy, but mefloquine should be 
avoided in the first trimester.
Lumefantrine
Lumefantrine is used in combination with artemether 
to treat uncomplicated falciparum malaria, including 
chloroquine-resistant strains. Its mechanism of action is 
unknown. Significant adverse effects are uncommon.
Drugs used in trypanosomiasis
Benznidazole
Benznidazole is an oral agent used to treat South 
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas’ disease, p. 360). 
Significant and common adverse effects include 
dose-related peripheral neuropathy, purpuric rash and 
granulocytopenia.
Diethylcarbamazine
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) is an oral agent used to treat 
filariasis and loiasis. Treatment of filariasis is often fol-
lowed by fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, arthralgia 
and prostration. This is caused by the host response to 
dying microfilariae, rather than the drug, and may be 
reduced by pre-treatment with corticosteroids.
Ivermectin
Ivermectin binds to helminth nerve and muscle cell 
ion channels, causing increased membrane permeabil-
ity. It is an oral agent, used in Strongyloides infection, 
filariasis and onchocerciasis. Significant side-effects are 
uncommon.
Niclosamide
Niclosamide inhibits oxidative phosphorylation, causing 
paralysis of helminths. It is an oral agent, used in Taenia 
saginata and intestinal T. solium infection. Systemic 
absorption is minimal and it has few significant 
side-effects.
Piperazine
Piperazine inhibits neurotransmitter function, causing 
helminth muscle paralysis. It is an oral agent, used in 
ascariasis and threadworm (Enterobius vermicularis) 
infection. Significant adverse effects are uncommon, but 
include neuropsychological reactions such as vertigo, 
confusion and convulsions.
Praziquantel
Praziquantel increases membrane permeability to Ca++, 
causing violent contraction of worm muscle. It is the 
drug of choice for schistosomiasis, and is also used in 
T. saginata, T. solium (cysticercosis) and fluke infections 
(Clonorchis, Paragonimus) and in echinococcosis. It is 
administered orally and is well absorbed. Adverse 
effects are usually mild and transient, and include 
nausea and abdominal pain.
Pyrantel pamoate
This agent causes spastic paralysis of helminth muscle 
through a suxamethonium-like action. It is used orally 
in ascariasis and threadworm infection. Systemic absorp-
tion is poor and adverse effects are uncommon.
Thiabendazole
Thiabendazole inhibits fumarate reductase, which is 
required for energy production in helminths. It is used 
orally in Strongyloides infection and topically to treat 
cutaneous larva migrans. Significant adverse effects are 
uncommon.
Antimalarial agents
Artemisinin (quinghaosu) derivatives
Artemisinin originates from a herb (sweet wormwood, 
Artemisia annua), which was used in Chinese medicine 
to treat fever. Its derivatives, artemether and artesunate, 
were developed for use in malaria in the 1970s. Their 
mechanism of action is unknown. They are used in the 
treatment, but not prophylaxis, of malaria, usually in 
combination with other antimalarials, and are effective 
against strains of Plasmodium spp. that are resistant to 
other antimalarials. Artemether is lipid-soluble and may 
Principles of infectious disease 
6
164
Iodoquinol (di-iodohydroxyquinoline)
Iodoquinol is a quinoline derivative (p. 163) with activ-
ity against Entamoeba histolytica cysts and trophozoites. 
It is used orally to treat asymptomatic cyst excreters 
or, in association with another amoebicide (e.g. metroni-
dazole), to treat extra-intestinal amoebiasis. Long-term 
use of this drug is not recommended, as neurological 
adverse effects include optic neuritis and peripheral 
neuropathy.
Nitazoxanide
Nitazoxanide is an inhibitor of pyruvate–ferredoxin 
oxidoreductase-dependent anaerobic energy metabo-
lism in protozoa. It is a broad-spectrum agent, active 
against various nematodes, tapeworms, flukes and 
intestinal protozoa. Nitazoxanide also has activity 
against some anaerobic bacteria and viruses. It is 
administered orally in giardiasis and cryptosporidiosis. 
Adverse effects are usually mild and involve the 
gastrointestinal tract (e.g. nausea, diarrhoea and abdom-
inal pain).
Paromomycin
Paromomycin is an aminoglycoside (p. 156) that is used 
to treat visceral leishmaniasis and intestinal amoebiasis. 
It is not significantly absorbed when administered 
orally, and is therefore given orally for intestinal amoe-
biasis and by intramuscular injection for leishmaniasis. 
It showed early promise in the treatment of HIV-
associated cryptosporidiosis, but subsequent trials have 
demonstrated that this effect is marginal at best.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
http://ecdc.europa.eu European Centre for Disease Prevention 
and Control. Data on prevalence of antibiotic resistance in 
Europe.
www.cdc.gov Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, USA. 
Provides information on all aspects of communicable disease, 
including prophylaxis against malaria.
www.dh.gov.uk UK Department of Health. The publications 
section provides current UK recommendations for 
immunisation.
www.hpa.org.uk Health Protection Agency. Provides 
information on infectious diseases relating mainly to the UK, 
including community infection control.
www.idsociety.org Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Publishes up-to-date, evidence-based guidelines.
www.who.int World Health Organization. Provides up-to-date 
information on global aspects of infectious disease, including 
outbreak updates.
Figure acknowledgements
Fig. 6.10 Adapted from Samaranayake L. Essential 
microbiology for dentistry. 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2006 (Fig. 1.1); copyright Elsevier.
Fig. 6.12 Based on the ‘How to Handwash’ URL: http://
www.who.int/gpsc/5may/How_To_Handwash_Poster. 
pdf ©World Health Organization 2009. All rights reserved.
Eflornithine
Eflornithine inhibits biosynthesis of polyamines by orni-
thine decarboxylase inhibition, and is used in West 
African trypanosomiasis (T. brucei gambiense infection) of 
the CNS. It is administered as an intravenous infusion 
4 times daily, which may be logistically difficult in the 
geographic areas affected by this disease. Significant 
adverse effects are common, and include convulsions, 
gastrointestinal upset and bone marrow depression. 
Eflornithine is also used (topically) to treat hirsutism 
(p. 763).
Melarsoprol
This is an arsenical agent, used to treat CNS infections 
in East and West African trypanosomiasis (T. brucei 
rhodesiense and gambiense). It is administered intra­
venously. Melarsoprol treatment is associated with 
peripheral neuropathy and reactive arsenical encepha-
lopathy (RAE), which carries a significant mortality.
Nifurtimox
Nifurtimox is administered orally to treat South Ameri-
can trypanosomiasis (Chagas’ disease). Gastrointestinal 
and neurological adverse effects are common.
Pentamidine isetionate
Pentamidine is an inhibitor of DNA replication used in 
West African trypanosomiasis (T. brucei gambiense) and, 
to a lesser extent, in visceral and cutaneous leishmania-
sis. It is also prescribed in Pneumocystis jirovecii (carinii) 
pneumonia. It is administered via intravenous or intra-
muscular routes. It is a relatively toxic drug, commonly 
causing rash, renal impairment, profound hypotension 
(especially on rapid infusion), electrolyte disturbances, 
blood dyscrasias and hypoglycaemia.
Suramin
Suramin is a naphthaline dye derivative, used to treat 
East African trypanosomiasis (T. brucei rhodesiense). 
It is administered intravenously. Adverse effects are 
common, and include rash, gastrointestinal disturbance, 
blood dyscrasias, peripheral neuropathies and renal 
impairment.
Other antiprotozoal agents
Pentavalent antimonials
Sodium stibogluconate and meglumine antimoniate 
inhibit protozoal glycolysis by phosphofructokinase 
inhibition. They are used parenterally (intravenous or 
intramuscular) to treat leishmaniasis. Adverse effects 
include arthralgia, myalgias, raised hepatic transami-
nases, pancreatitis and ECG changes. Severe cardiotoxic-
ity leading to death is not uncommon.
Diloxanide furoate
This oral agent is used to eliminate luminal cysts follow-
ing treatment of intestinal amoebiasis, or in asympto-
matic cyst excreters. The drug is absorbed slowly 
(enabling luminal persistence) and has no effect in 
hepatic amoebiasis. It is a relatively non-toxic drug, the 
most significant adverse effect being flatulence.
165
7 
Comprehensive geriatric assessment 166
Demography 168
Functional anatomy and physiology 168
Biology of ageing 168
Physiological changes of ageing 169
Frailty 170
Investigations 170
Comprehensive geriatric assessment 170
Decisions about investigation 170
Ageing and disease
M.D. Witham
Presenting problems in geriatric  
medicine 171
Falls 172
Dizziness 173
Delirium 173
Urinary incontinence 175
Adverse drug reactions 175
Other problems in old age 176
Rehabilitation 176
Ageing and disease
166
Insets (Wasted hand, kyphosis) From Afzal Mir 2003; (Senile purpura) Forbes and Jackson 2004; (Venous ulceration) Mosti 2012 – see p. 177. 
Pulse
Atrial fibrillation
Hydration
Skin turgor
Oedema
Erect and supine
blood pressure
Postural hypotension
Hearing
Wax
Hearing aid
used
Muscle
Wasting
Strength
8
2
3
4
5
6
Full systems examination
with particular attention
to the above
Per rectum
Faecal impaction
Prostate size/consistency
in men
Anal tone
9
Nutrition
Body mass index
  (Height calculated
  from arm demispan
  or knee height to
  compensate for loss
  of vertebral height)
Recent weight loss, e.g. loose
skin folds
Dentition/oral hygiene
Joints
Deformity
Pain
Swelling
Range of movement
11
Skin
Wounds/ulcers
Infection
Swelling
10
Gait and balance
Get up and go test
(see opposite)
Walking aid used
12
Vision
Visual acuity
Glasses worn/present
Cataract
7
Cognitive function
Mini-mental state examination
(see Ch. 10)
1
Measurement of knee height
(see Ch. 5)
Severe kyphosis
Wasting of small muscles of
hands in rheumatoid arthritis
Cataract
Senile purpura
Venous ulceration
COMPREHENSIVE GERIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
167
History
• Slow down the pace.
• Ensure the patient can hear.
• Establish the speed of onset of 
the illness.
• If the presentation is vague, 
carry out a systematic enquiry.
• Obtain full details of:
all drugs, especially any recent 
prescription changes
past medical history, even from 
many years previously
usual function
1. Can the patient walk normally?
2. Has the patient noticed 
memory problems?
3. Can the patient perform all 
household tasks?
• Obtain a collateral history: 
confirm information with a 
relative or carer and the general 
practitioner, particularly if  
the patient is confused or 
communication is limited by 
deafness or speech disturbance.
Social assessment
Home circumstances
• Living alone, with another or in 
a care home.
Activities of daily living (ADL)
• Tasks for which help is needed:
domestic ADL: shopping, 
cooking, housework
personal ADL: bathing, 
dressing, walking.
• Informal help: relatives, friends, 
neighbours.
• Formal social services: home 
help, meals on wheels.
• Carer stress.
Domains of Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment. 
Disease
  severity
      and
  comorbidity
Mental
health
and
cognition
Support
networks
      and
    needs
   Function and
       ability
12  Get up and go test
To assess gait and balance, ask the patient to stand up from a sitting position, walk 10 m, turn and go back to the chair. A normal 
performance takes less than 12 seconds.
Unsteady on
standing?
Difficulty rising?
Unsteady gait?
Unsteady on
turning?
Unsteady on
sitting down?
Team member
Activity assessed and promoted
Physiotherapist
Mobility, balance and upper limb function
Occupational 
therapist
ADL, e.g. dressing, cooking
Home environment and care needs
Dietitian
Nutrition
Speech and 
language therapist
Communication and swallowing
Social worker
Care needs and discharge planning, including organisation of 
institutional care
Nurse
Motivation and initiation of activities; promotion of self-care
Education
Feeding, continence, skin care
Communication with relatives and other professionals
Assessment of care needs for discharge
Doctor
Diagnosis and management of medical problems
Coordinator of assessment, management and rehabilitation programme
Multidisciplinary team (MDT) roles
Examination
• Thorough to identify all 
comorbidities.
• Tailored to the patient’s 
stamina and ability to cooperate.
• Include functional status:
cognitive function
gait and balance
nutrition
hearing and vision.
Ageing and disease
7 
168
Fig. 7.1  Number of people aged 65 years and over projected in 
the world population. 
Millions
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2010
2025
2050
Year
World
Developing countries
Developed countries
Sweeping demographic change has meant that older 
people now represent the core practice of medicine in 
many countries. A good knowledge of the effects of 
ageing and the clinical problems associated with old 
age is thus essential in most medical specialties. The 
older population is extremely diverse; a substantial 
proportion of 90-year-olds enjoy an active healthy 
life, while some 70-year-olds are severely disabled by 
chronic disease. The terms ‘chronological’ and ‘biologi-
cal’ ageing have been coined to describe this phenom­
enon. Biological rather than chronological age is taken 
into consideration when making clinical decisions about, 
for example, the extent of investigation and intervention 
that is appropriate.
Geriatric medicine is concerned particularly with 
frail older people, in whom physiological capacity is 
so reduced that they are incapacitated by even minor 
illness. They frequently have multiple comorbidities, 
and acute illness may present in non-specific ways, such 
as confusion, falls or loss of mobility and day-to-day 
functioning. These patients are prone to adverse drug 
reactions, partly because of polypharmacy and partly 
because of age-related changes in responses to drugs 
and their elimination (p. 36). Disability is common, but 
patients’ function can often be improved by the inter-
ventions of the multidisciplinary team (p. 167).
Older people have been neglected in research terms 
and, until recently, were rarely included in randomised 
controlled clinical trials. There is thus little evidence on 
which to base practice.
DEMOGRAPHY
The demography of developed countries has changed 
rapidly in recent decades. In the UK, for example, the 
total population grew by 11% over the last 30 years, but 
the number of people aged over 65 years rose by 24%. 
The steepest rise occurred in those aged over 85 – from 
600 000 in 1981 to 1.5 million in 2011 – and this number 
is projected to increase to 2.4 million by 2026, whilst the 
working-age population (20–64 years) is expected to 
grow by only 4% between 2011 and 2026. This will have 
a significant impact on the old-age dependency ratio, i.e. 
the number of people of working age for each person 
over retirement age. Young people support older mem­
bers of the population directly (e.g. through living 
arrangements) and financially (e.g. through taxation and 
pension contributions), so the consequences of a reduced 
ratio are far-reaching. However, many older people 
support the younger population, through care of chil-
dren and other older people.
Life expectancy in the developed world is now pro-
longed, even in old age (Box 7.1); women aged 80 years 
can expect to live for a further 10 years. However, rates 
of disability and chronic illness rise sharply with ageing 
and have a major impact on health and social services. 
In the UK, the reported prevalence of a chronic illness 
or disability sufficient to restrict daily activities is around 
25% in those aged 50–64, but is 66% in men and 75% in 
women aged over 85.
Although the proportion of the population aged over 
65 years is greater in developed countries, two-thirds of 
the world population of people aged over 65 live in 
developing countries at present, and this is projected to 
Males
Females
UK
India
UK
India
At birth
79.1
65.1
83.0
67.2
At 60 years
22.8
16.7
25.5
18.9
At 70 years
15.0
10.9
17.1
12.4
At 80 years
8.7
7.5
9.9
8.0
7.1  Mean life expectancy in years, UK and India
rise to 75% in 2025. The rate of population ageing is 
much faster in developing countries (Fig. 7.1) and so 
they have less time to adjust to its impact.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
Biology of ageing
Ageing can be defined as a progressive accumulation 
through life of random molecular defects that build up 
within tissues and cells. Eventually, despite multiple 
repair and maintenance mechanisms, these result in age-
related functional impairment of tissues and organs.
Many genes probably contribute to ageing, with 
those that determine durability and maintenance of 
somatic cell lines particularly important. However, 
genetic factors only account for around 25% of variance 
in human lifespan; nutritional and environmental factors 
determine the rest.
A major contribution to random molecular damage is 
made by reactive oxygen species produced during the 
metabolism of oxygen to produce cellular energy. These 
cause oxidative damage at a number of sites:
• Nuclear chromosomal DNA, causing mutations and 
deletions which ultimately lead to aberrant gene 
function and potential for malignancy.
• Telomeres, which are the protective end regions of 
chromosomes which shorten with each cell division 
Functional anatomy and physiology 
7 
169
because telomerase (which copies the end of the 3′ 
strand of linear DNA in germ cells) is absent in 
somatic cells. When telomeres are sufficiently 
eroded, cells stop dividing. It has been suggested 
that telomeres represent a ‘biological clock’ which 
prevents uncontrolled cell division and cancer. 
Telomeres are particularly shortened in patients 
with premature ageing due to Werner’s syndrome, 
in which DNA is damaged due to lack of a helicase.
• Mitochondrial DNA and lipid peroxidation, resulting in 
reduced cellular energy production and ultimately 
cell death.
• Proteins – e.g. those increasing formation of 
advanced glycosylation end-products from 
spontaneous reactions between proteins and sugars. 
These damage structure and function of the affected 
protein, which becomes resistant to breakdown.
The rate at which damage occurs is malleable and 
this is where the interplay with environment, particu-
larly nutrition, takes place. There is evidence in some 
organisms that this interplay is mediated by insulin sig-
nalling pathways. Chronic inflammation also plays an 
important role, again in part by driving the production 
of reactive oxygen species.
Physiological changes of ageing
The physiological features of normal ageing have been 
identified by examining disease-free populations of 
older people, to separate the effects of pathology from 
those due to time alone. However, the fraction of older 
people who age without disease ultimately declines to 
very low levels, so that use of the term ‘normal’ becomes 
debatable. There is a marked increase in inter-individual 
variation in function with ageing; many physiological 
processes deteriorate substantially when measured 
across populations, but some individuals show little or 
no change. This heterogeneity is a hallmark of ageing, 
meaning that each person must be assessed individually 
and that one cannot unthinkingly apply the same man-
agement to all people of a certain age.
Although some genetic influences contribute to 
heterogeneity, environmental factors, such as poverty, 
nutrition, exercise, cigarette smoking and alcohol 
misuse, play a large part, and a healthy lifestyle should 
be encouraged even when old age has been reached.
The effects of ageing are usually not enough to inter-
fere with organ function under normal conditions, but 
reserve capacity is significantly reduced. Some changes 
Fig. 7.2  Features and consequences of normal ageing. 
Respiratory system
• Reduced lung elasticity and
 alveolar support
• Increased chest wall rigidity
• Increased V/Q mismatch
• Reduced cough and ciliary action
CNS
• Neuronal loss
• Cochlear degeneration
• Increased lens rigidity
• Lens opacification
• Anterior horn cell loss
• Dorsal column loss
• Slowed reaction times
Cardiovascular system
• Reduced maximum heart rate
• Dilatation of aorta
• Reduced elasticity of conduit/
    capacitance vessels
• Reduced number of pacing
 myocytes in sinoatrial node
Endocrine system
• Deterioration in pancreatic β-cell
    function
Renal system
• Loss of nephrons
• Reduced glomerular filtration rate
• Reduced tubular function
Gastrointestinal system
• Reduced motility
Bones
• Reduced bone mineral density
Respiratory system
• Reduced vital capacity and peak
 expiratory flow
• Increased residual volume
• Reduced inspiratory reserve volume
• Reduced arterial oxygen saturation
• Increased risk of infection
CNS
• Increased risk of delirium
• Presbyacusis/high-tone hearing loss
• Presbyopia/abnormal near vision
• Cataract
• Muscle weakness and wasting
• Reduced position and vibration
 sense
• Increased risk of falls
Cardiovascular system
• Reduced exercise tolerance
• Widened aortic arch on X-ray
• Widened pulse pressure
• Increased risk of postural
 hypotension
• Increased risk of atrial fibrillation
Endocrine system
• Increased risk of impaired
 glucose tolerance
Renal system
• Impaired fluid balance
• Increased risk of
 dehydration/overload
• Impaired drug metabolism
 and excretion
Gastrointestinal system
• Constipation
Bones
• Increased risk of osteoporosis
Clinical consequences
Changes with ageing
•
•
Ageing and disease
7 
170
INVESTIGATIONS
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
Although not strictly an investigation, one of the most 
powerful tools in the management of older people is the 
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment, which identifies 
all the relevant factors contributing to their presentation 
(p. 166). In frail patients with multiple pathology, it may 
be necessary to perform the assessment in stages to 
allow for their reduced stamina. The outcome should be 
a management plan that not only addresses the acute 
presenting problems, but also improves the patient’s 
overall health and function (Box 7.3).
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment is performed 
by a multidisciplinary team (p. 167). Such an approach 
was pioneered by Dr Marjory Warren at the West 
Middlesex Hospital in London in the 1930s; her com­
prehensive assessment and rehabilitation of supposedly 
incurable, long-term bedridden older people revolution-
ised the approach of the medical profession to older, 
frail people and laid the foundations for the modern 
specialty of geriatric medicine.
‘Inpatient comprehensive geriatric assessment reduces 
short-term mortality and increases the chance of patients living 
at home in the long term.’
•	 Ellis G, Langhorne P. Br Med Bull 2005; 71: 45–59.
7.3  Comprehensive geriatric assessment
of ageing, such as depigmentation of the hair, are of no 
clinical significance. Figure 7.2 shows many factors that 
are clinically important.
Frailty
Frailty is defined as the loss of an individual’s ability to 
withstand minor stresses because the reserves in func-
tion of several organ systems are so severely reduced 
that even a trivial illness or adverse drug reaction may 
result in organ failure and death. The same stresses 
would cause little upset in a fit person of the same age.
It is important to understand the difference between 
‘disability’, ‘comorbidity’ and ‘frailty’. Disability indi-
cates established loss of function (e.g. mobility; see 
Box 7.13, p. 176), while frailty indicates increased vulner-
ability to loss of function. Disability may arise from a 
single pathological event (such as a stroke) in an 
otherwise healthy individual. After recovery, function is 
largely stable and the patient may otherwise be in good 
health. When frailty and disability coexist, function dete-
riorates markedly even with minor illness, to the extent 
that the patient can no longer manage independently. 
Similarly, comorbidity (the number of diagnoses present) 
is not equivalent to frailty; it is quite possible to have 
several diagnoses without major impact on homeostatic 
reserve.
Unfortunately, the term ‘frail’ is often used rather 
vaguely, sometimes to justify a lack of adequate inves-
tigation and intervention in older people. However, it 
can be specifically identified by assessing function in a 
number of domains. Two main approaches to evaluating 
frailty exist: measurement of physiological function 
across a number of domains (e.g. the Fried Frailty score, 
Box 7.2), or a score based on the number of deficits or 
problems – for example, the Rockwood score.
Frail older people particularly benefit from a clinical 
approach that addresses both the precipitating acute 
illness and their underlying loss of reserves. It may be 
possible to prevent further loss of function through early 
intervention; for example, a frail woman with myocar-
dial infarction will benefit from specific cardiac investi-
gation and drug treatment, but may benefit even further 
from an exercise programme to improve musculoskele-
tal function, balance and aerobic capacity, with nutri-
tional support to restore lost weight. Establishing a 
patient’s level of frailty also helps inform decisions 
regarding further investigation and management, and 
the need for rehabilitation.
*Varies between populations. Grip cutoff is 30 kg for men, 18 kg for women 
in US adults; 5 m walk time cutoff is 7 seconds in US adults for both sexes.
•	 Handgrip strength in bottom 20% of healthy elderly 
distribution*
•	 Walking speed in bottom 20% of healthy elderly distribution*
•	 Self-reported exhaustion
•	 Physically inactive
•	 At least 6 kg weight loss within 1 year
Patient is defined as frail if 3 or more factors are present.
7.2  How to assess a Fried Frailty score
Decisions about investigation
Accurate diagnosis is important at all ages but frail older 
people may not be able to tolerate lengthy or invasive 
procedures, and diagnoses may be revealed for which 
patients could not withstand intensive or aggressive 
treatment. On the other hand, disability should never be 
dismissed as due to age alone. For example, it would be 
a mistake to supply a patient no longer able to climb 
stairs with a stair lift, when simple tests would have 
revealed osteoarthritis of a hip and vitamin D deficiency, 
for which appropriate treatment would have restored 
his or her strength. So how do doctors decide when and 
how far to investigate?
The patient’s general health
Does this patient have the physical and mental capacity 
to tolerate the proposed investigation? Does he have the 
aerobic capacity to undergo bronchoscopy? Will confu-
sion prevent her from remaining still in the magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) scanner? The more comorbidi-
ties a patient has, the less likely he or she will be able to 
withstand an invasive intervention.
Will the investigation alter management?
Would the patient be fit for, or benefit from, the treat-
ment that would be indicated if investigation proved 
positive? The presence of comorbidity is more important 
than age itself in determining this. When a patient with 
Presenting problems in geriatric medicine 
7 
171
whose mobility is limited by stroke, angina may only 
present when coronary artery disease is advanced, as the 
patient has been unable to exercise sufficiently to cause 
symptoms at an earlier stage.
Atypical presentation
Infection may present with delirium and without clinical 
pointers to the organ system affected. Stroke may 
present with falls rather than symptoms of focal weak-
ness. Myocardial infarction may present as weakness 
and fatigue, without the chest pain or dyspnoea. The 
reasons for these atypical presentations are not always 
easy to establish. Perception of pain is altered in old age, 
which may explain why myocardial infarction presents 
in other ways. The pyretic response is blunted in old age 
so that infection may not be obvious at first. Cognitive 
impairment may limit the patient’s ability to give a 
history of classical symptoms.
Acute illness and changes in function
Atypical presentations in frail elderly patients include 
‘failure to cope’, ‘found on floor’, ‘confusion’ and ‘off 
feet’, but these are not diagnoses. The possibility that an 
acute illness has been the precipitant must always be 
considered. To establish whether the patient’s current 
status is a change from his or her usual level of function, 
it helps to ask a relative or carer (by phone if necessary). 
Investigations aimed at uncovering an acute illness will 
not be fruitful in a patient whose function has been 
deteriorating over several months, but are important if 
function has suddenly changed.
Multiple pathology
Presentations in older patients have a more diverse 
differential diagnosis because multiple pathology is 
so common. There are frequently a number of causes 
for any single problem, and adverse effects from 
medication often contribute. A patient may fall because 
of osteoarthritis of the knees, postural hypotension 
due to diuretic therapy for hypertension, and poor 
vision due to cataracts. All these factors have to be 
addressed to prevent further falls, and this principle 
holds true for most of the common presenting prob-
lems in old age.
Approach to presenting problems 
in old age
For the sake of clarity, the common presenting prob-
lems are described individually, but in real life, older 
patients often present with several at the same time, 
particularly confusion, incontinence and falls. These 
share some underlying causes and may precipitate 
each other.
The approach to most presenting problems in old age 
can be summarised as follows:
• Obtain a collateral history. Find out the patient’s 
usual status (e.g. mobility, cognitive state) from a 
relative or carer. Call these people by phone if they 
are not present.
• Check all medication. Have there been any recent 
changes?
• Search for and treat any acute illness. See Box 7.4.
• Identify and reverse predisposing risk factors. These 
depend on the presenting problem.
severe heart failure and a previous disabling stroke 
presents with a suspicious mass lesion on chest X-ray, 
detailed investigation and staging may not be appropri-
ate if he is not fit for surgery, radical radiotherapy or 
chemotherapy. On the other hand, if the same patient 
presented with dysphagia, investigation of the cause 
would be important, as he would be able to tolerate 
endoscopic treatment (for example, to palliate an 
obstructing oesophageal carcinoma).
The views of the patient and family
Older people may have strong views about the extent of 
investigation and the treatment they wish to receive, and 
these should be sought from the outset. If the patient 
wishes, the views of relatives can be taken into account. 
If the patient is not able to express a view or lacks 
the capacity to make decisions because of cognitive 
impairment or communication difficulties, then rela-
tives’ input becomes particularly helpful. They may be 
able to give information on views previously expressed 
by the patient or on what the patient would have wanted 
under the current circumstances. However, families 
should never be made to feel responsible for difficult 
decisions.
Advance directives
Advance directives or ‘living wills’ are statements made 
by adults at a time when they have the capacity to decide 
about the interventions they would refuse or accept in 
the future, should they no longer be able to make deci-
sions or communicate them. An advance directive 
cannot authorise a doctor to do anything that is illegal 
and doctors are not bound to provide a specific treat-
ment requested if, in their professional opinion, it is not 
clinically appropriate. However, any advance refusal of 
treatment, made when the patient was able to make 
decisions based on adequate information about their 
implications, is legally binding in the UK. It must be 
respected when it clearly applies to the patient’s present 
circumstances and when there is no reason to believe 
that the patient has changed his or her mind.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN  
GERIATRIC MEDICINE
Characteristics of presenting 
problems in old age
Problem-based practice is central to geriatric medicine. 
Most problems are multifactorial and there is rarely a 
single unifying diagnosis. All contributing factors have 
to be taken into account and attention to detail is para-
mount. Two patients who share the same presenting 
problem may have completely disparate diagnoses. A 
wide knowledge of adult medicine is required, as disease 
in any, and often many, of the organ systems has to be 
managed at the same time. There are a number of fea-
tures that are particular to older patients.
Late presentation
Many people (of all ages) accept ill health as a conse-
quence of ageing and may tolerate symptoms for lengthy 
periods before seeking medical advice. Comorbidities 
may also contribute to late presentation; in a patient 
Ageing and disease
7 
172
Gait abnormality
Probable cause
Antalgic
Arthropathy
Waddling
Proximal myopathy
Stamping
Sensory neuropathy
Foot drop
Peripheral neuropathy or radiculopathy
Ataxic
Sensory neuropathy or cerebellar 
disease
Shuffling/festination
Parkinson’s disease
Marche à petits pas
Small-vessel cerebrovascular disease
Hemiplegic
Cerebral hemisphere lesion
Apraxic
Bilateral hemisphere lesions
7.6  Abnormal gaits and probable causes
•	 Muscle weakness
•	 History of falls
•	 Gait or balance abnormality
•	 Use of a walking aid
•	 Visual impairment
•	 Arthritis
•	 Impaired activities of daily 
living
•	 Depression
•	 Cognitive impairment
•	 Age over 80 years
•	 Psychotropic medication
7.5  Risk factors for falls
•	 Full blood count
•	 Urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, calcium and 
glucose
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 Electrocardiogram
•	 C-reactive protein: useful marker for occult infection or 
inflammatory disease
•	 Blood cultures if pyrexial
7.4  Screening investigations for acute illness
important clues to an underlying diagnosis (Box 7.6). 
Common pathologies identified include cerebrovascular 
disease (Ch. 27), Parkinson’s disease (p. 1195) and osteo­
arthritis of weight-bearing joints (p. 1081). Osteoporosis 
risk factors should also be sought and dual energy X-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA) bone density scanning consid-
ered in all older patients who have recurrent falls, 
particularly if they have already sustained a fracture 
(p. 1065).
Prevention of falls and fractures
Falls can be prevented by multiple risk factor inter­
vention (Box 7.7). The most effective intervention is 
balance and strength training by physiotherapists; an 
alternative with good evidence is tai chi training. An 
assessment of the patient’s home environment for 
hazards should be undertaken by an occupational thera-
pist, who may also provide personal alarms so that 
patients can summon help, should they fall again. 
Rationalising psychotropic medication may help to 
reduce sedation, although many older patients are reluc-
tant to stop hypnotics. If postural hypotension is present 
(defined as a drop in blood pressure of > 20 mmHg 
systolic or > 10 mmHg diastolic pressure on standing 
from supine), reducing or stopping hypotensive drugs 
may be helpful. Evidence supporting the efficacy of 
other interventions for postural hypotension is lacking, 
but drugs, including fludrocortisone and midodrine, are 
sometimes used to try to improve dizziness on standing. 
Simple interventions, such as new glasses to correct 
visual acuity, and podiatry, can also have a significant 
impact on function in those who fall.
If osteoporosis is diagnosed, specific drug therapy 
should be commenced (p. 1122). In patients in institu-
tional care, calcium and vitamin D3 administration has 
Falls
Around 30% of those over 65 years of age fall each year, 
this figure rising to more than 40% in those aged over 
80. Although only 10–15% of falls result in serious injury, 
they are the cause of more than 90% of hip fractures in 
this age group, compounded by the rising prevalence of 
osteoporosis. Falls also lead to loss of confidence and 
fear, and are frequently the ‘final straw’ that makes an 
older person decide to move to institutional care. Man-
agement will vary according to the underlying cause.
Acute illness
Falls are one of the classical atypical presentations of 
acute illness in frail people. The reduced reserves in 
older people’s neurological function mean that they are 
less able to maintain their balance when challenged by 
an acute illness. Suspicion should be high when falls 
have suddenly occurred over a period of a few days. 
Common underlying illnesses include infection, stroke, 
metabolic disturbance and heart failure. Thorough 
examination and investigation are required (see Box 7.4). 
It is also important to establish whether any drug which 
precipitates falls, such as a psychotropic or hypotensive 
agent, has been started recently. Once the underlying 
acute illness has been treated, falls may stop.
Blackouts
A proportion of older people who ‘fall’ have, in fact, had 
a syncopal episode. A collateral history from a witness 
is of utmost importance in anyone falling over; people 
who lose consciousness do not always remember having 
done so. If loss of consciousness is suggested by the 
patient or witness, it is important to perform appropriate 
investigations (pp. 554 and 1157).
Mechanical and recurrent falls
Amongst patients who have tripped or are uncertain 
how they fell, those who have fallen more than once 
in the past year and those who are unsteady during a 
‘get up and go’ test (p. 167) require further assessment. 
Patients with recurrent falls are commonly frail, with 
multiple medical problems and chronic disabilities. 
Obviously, such patients may present with a fall result-
ing from an acute illness or syncope, but they will 
remain at risk of further falls even when the acute 
illness has resolved. The risk factors for falls (Box 7.5) 
should be considered. If problems are identified with 
muscle strength, balance, vision or cognitive function, 
the causes of these must be identified by specific inves-
tigation, and treatment commenced if appropriate. 
Careful assessment of the patient’s gait may provide 
Presenting problems in geriatric medicine 
7 
173
been shown to reduce both falls and fracture rates, 
through effects on both bone mineral density and neuro­
muscular function. They are not effective in those with 
osteoporosis living in the community, in whom bisphos-
phonates are first-line therapy.
In the UK, government policy and National Institute 
for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines (www.nice. 
org.uk) for falls prevention have led to the development 
of specific Falls and Fracture Prevention Services in 
many parts of the country.
Dizziness
Dizziness is very common, affecting at least 30% of those 
aged over 65 years in community surveys. Dizziness can 
be disabling in its own right and is also a risk factor for 
falls. Acute dizziness is relatively straightforward and 
common causes include:
• hypotension due to arrhythmia, myocardial 
infarction, gastrointestinal bleed or pulmonary 
embolism
• onset of posterior fossa stroke
• vestibular neuronitis.
Although older people more commonly present with 
recurrent dizzy spells and often find it difficult to 
describe the sensation they experience, the most effec-
tive way of establishing the cause(s) of the problem is 
nevertheless to determine which of the following is pre-
dominant (even if more than one is present):
• lightheadedness, suggestive of reduced cerebral 
perfusion
• vertigo, suggestive of labyrinthine or brainstem 
disease (p. 1167)
• unsteadiness/poor balance, suggestive of joint or 
neurological disease.
In lightheaded patients, structural cardiac disease 
(such as aortic stenosis) and arrhythmia must be consid-
ered, but disorders of autonomic cardiovascular control, 
such as vasovagal syndrome and postural hypotension, 
are the most common causes in old age. Hypotensive 
medication may exacerbate these. Further investigation 
and treatment are described on page 1157.
Vertigo in older patients is most commonly due 
to benign positional vertigo (p. 1158), but if other 
Predisposing factors
•	 Old age
•	 Dementia
•	 Frailty
•	 Sensory impairment
•	 Polypharmacy
•	 Renal impairment
Precipitating factors
•	 Intercurrent illness
•	 Surgery
•	 Change of environment or 
ward
•	 Sensory deprivation (e.g. 
darkness) or overload (e.g. 
noise)
•	 Medications (e.g. opioids, 
psychotropics)
•	 Dehydration
•	 Pain
•	 Constipation
•	 Urinary catheterisation
•	 Acute urinary retention
•	 Hypoxia
•	 Fever
•	 Alcohol withdrawal
7.8  Risk factors for delirium
•	 Individualised or group strength and balance training,  
or tai chi
•	 Rationalisation of medication, especially psychotropic drugs
•	 Correction of visual impairment, particularly cataract 
extraction
•	 Home environmental hazard assessment and safety 
education
•	 Calcium and vitamin D supplementation for those in 
institutional care
•	 Gillespie LD, et al. Interventions for preventing falls in older people living in the 
community. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2012, Art. no. CD007146.
•	 Cameron ID, et al. Interventions for preventing falls in older people in care 
facilities and hospitals. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010, Art.  
no. CD005465.
7.7  Evidence-based interventions to prevent falls 
in older people
brainstem symptoms or signs are present, MRI of the 
brain is required to exclude a cerebello-pontine angle 
lesion.
Delirium
Delirium is a syndrome of transient, reversible cogni-
tive dysfunction. It is very common, affecting up to 
30% of older hospital inpatients, either at admission or 
during their hospital stay. It is associated with high 
rates of mortality, complication and institutionalisa-
tion, and with longer lengths of stay. Risk factors are 
shown in Box 7.8. Its pathophysiology is unclear; it 
may in part be due to the effect of increased cortisol 
release in acute illness, or it may reflect a sensitivity of 
cholinergic neurotransmission to toxic insults. Older 
terms for delirium, e.g. acute confusion or toxic confu-
sional state, lack diagnostic precision and should be 
avoided.
Clinical assessment
Assessment has two main goals: firstly, to establish the 
diagnosis of delirium; and secondly, to identify all 
of the reversible precipitating factors to allow optimal 
treatment.
Delirium may be missed unless routine cognitive 
testing with an Abbreviated Mental Test, CLOX test or 
mini-mental state examination (MMSE; p. 234) is per-
formed. Delirium often occurs in patients with demen-
tia, and a history from a relative or carer about the 
onset and course of confusion is needed to distinguish 
acute from chronic features. The Confusion Assessment 
Method (Box 7.9) is a useful tool to diagnose delirium 
accurately and to differentiate the condition from 
dementia.
More than one of the precipitating causes of delirium 
(Fig. 7.3) is often present. Symptoms suggestive of a 
physical illness, such as an infection or stroke, should be 
elicited. An accurate drug and alcohol history is required, 
especially to ascertain whether any drugs have been 
recently stopped or started.
A full physical examination should be performed, 
noting in particular:
Ageing and disease
7 
174
Fig. 7.3  Common causes and investigation of delirium. All investigations are performed routinely, except those in italics. *Tend to present over 
weeks to months rather than hours to days. The chest X-ray shows consolidation in pneumonia. The CT scan shows a cerebral haemorrhage. (COPD = 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CRP = C-reactlve protein; MI = myocardial infarction; SSRI = selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor; UTI = urinary 
tract infection) 
Infection
Metabolic
disturbance
Toxic insult
Acute
neurological
conditions
Hypoxia
Pneumonia
UTI
Skin: cellulitis, abscess
Gram-negative sepsis
Full blood count, CRP
Chest X-ray
Urinalysis and culture
Others as appropriate: sputum,
blood cultures, wound swabs
Digoxin level if prescribed
Urea and electrolytes
Plasma calcium
Capillary blood and plasma glucose
Liver function tests
Thyroid function tests
B12 and folate
CT brain: only when intracranial
lesion is suspected (focal neurological
signs, recent fall or head injury) or no
other physical cause of delirium is
identified
Lumbar puncture: only if meningitis or
encephalitis is suspected
Pulse oximetry (arterial blood gases 
if low)
Chest X-ray
ECG
Acute renal impairment
Hyponatraemia/hypernatraemia
Hypercalcaemia
Hypoglycaemia
Hepatic encephalopathy
Thiamin deficiency
Hypothyroidism*
B12 deficiency*
Any drug but particularly
• Anticholinergics
• Digoxin
• Opiates
• Psychotropics
• High-dose corticosteroids
Withdrawal of alcohol, opiate, SSRI
or benzodiazepine
Acute stroke
Subdural haematoma
Encephalitis or meningitis
Seizure (post-ictal)
Space-occupying lesion, e.g. tumour
Pulmonary embolism
Pneumonia
Pulmonary oedema
COPD exacerbation
Acute MI
Talk to the patient and assess:
•	 Cognition (e.g. MMSE, p. 234). A normal score makes 
delirium unlikely.
•	 Inattention. Can the patient converse with you? If in doubt, 
give 6–7 digits (between 1 and 9) to remember and repeat 
back to you; failure suggests inattention.
•	 Conscious level. Alert, hyper-alert or drowsy?
•	 Thinking. Is speech rambling? Does it make sense? Is the 
patient hallucinating?
Obtain a collateral history (e.g. from carer, nurse or general 
practitioner):
•	 What is the patient normally like?
•	 Has there been a sudden deterioration, e.g. over a few days?
•	 Does confusion fluctuate through the day?
Consider the diagnosis. Delirium is present if there is:
Acute deterioration in cognition, which fluctuates over time 
AND Evidence of inattention
WITH EITHER Evidence of disorganised thinking
OR Altered level of consciousness (either drowsy/stupor/coma or 
hyper-alert/agitated/irritable)
7.9  How to make a diagnosis of delirium: 
the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)
• pyrexia and any signs of infection in the chest, skin, 
urine or abdomen
• oxygen saturation
• signs of alcohol withdrawal, such as tremor or 
sweating
• any neurological signs.
A range of investigations are needed to identify the 
common causes (see Fig. 7.3).
Management
Specific treatment of all of the underlying causes must 
be commenced as quickly as possible. However, the 
symptoms of delirium also require specific manage-
ment. To minimise ongoing confusion and disorienta-
tion, the environment should be kept well lit and not 
unduly noisy, with the patient’s spectacles and hearing 
aids in place. Good nursing is needed to preserve orien-
tation, prevent pressure sores and falls, and maintain 
hydration, nutrition and continence.
The use of sedatives should be kept to a minimum, 
as they can precipitate delirium. In any case, many con-
fused patients are lethargic and apathetic rather than 
agitated. Sedation is very much a last resort, and is 
appropriate only if patients’ behaviour is endangering 
Presenting problems in geriatric medicine 
7 
175
themselves or others. Small doses of haloperidol (0.5 mg 
twice daily) are tried orally first, and the dose increased 
if the patient fails to respond. Sedation can be given 
intramuscularly only if absolutely necessary. In those 
with alcohol withdrawal or Lewy body dementia 
(p. 252), a reducing course of a benzodiazepine should 
be prescribed. In other cases, benzodiazepines should be 
avoided, as they may prolong delirium.
The resolution of delirium in old age may be slow 
and incomplete. Many patients fail to recover to their 
pre-morbid level of cognition. Delirium may be the first 
presentation of an underlying dementia and is also a risk 
factor for subsequent dementia.
Urinary incontinence
Urinary incontinence is defined as the involuntary loss 
of urine and comes to medical attention when suffi-
ciently severe to cause a social or hygiene problem. It 
occurs in all age groups but becomes more prevalent in 
old age, affecting about 15% of women and 10% of men 
aged over 65. It may lead to skin damage if severe and 
can be socially restricting. While age-dependent changes 
in the lower urinary tract predispose older people to 
incontinence, it is not an inevitable consequence of 
Fig. 7.4  Assessment and management of urinary incontinence 
in old age. See also page 472 and NICE guideline on the Management of 
Incontinence in Women: www.nice.org.uk. (UTI = urinary tract infection) 
Urinary incontinence
Overflow
(i.e. residual
volume > 100 mL)
Surgical relief of
obstruction (e.g.
prostatectomy)
Intermittent
catheterisation
if no obstruction
Stress
Pelvic floor
muscle training
Surgical
intervention if
unsuccessful
If still incontinent:
• Establish the pattern of urinary
  loss (diary is helpful)
• Measure residual urine volume
  (by ultrasound)
• Assess for vaginal prolapse and
  atrophic vaginitis (women)
• Assess prostate by rectal
 examination (men)
Address contributory factors:
• UTI
• Severe constipation
• Drugs, e.g. diuretics
• Hyperglycaemia
• Hypercalcaemia
• Restricted mobility
• Acute confusion
Urge
Bladder
retraining
Antimuscarinic
drugs, e.g.
solifenacin,
tolterodine
ageing and requires investigation and appropriate treat-
ment. Urinary incontinence is frequently precipitated by 
acute illness in old age and is commonly multifactorial 
(Fig. 7.4).
Initial management is to identify and address con-
tributory factors. If incontinence fails to resolve, further 
diagnosis and management should be pursued, as des­
cribed on page 472.
• Urge incontinence is usually due to detrusor 
over-activity and results in urgency and  
frequency.
• Stress incontinence is almost exclusive to women 
and is due to weakness of the pelvic floor muscles, 
which allows leakage of urine when intra-
abdominal pressure rises, e.g. on coughing.  
It may be compounded by atrophic vaginitis, 
associated with oestrogen deficiency in old  
age, which can be treated with oestrogen  
pessaries.
• Overflow incontinence is most commonly seen in 
elderly men with prostatic enlargement, which 
obstructs bladder outflow.
In patients with severe stroke disease or dementia, 
treatment may be ineffective, as frontal cortical inhibi-
tory signals to bladder emptying are lost. A timed/
prompted toileting programme may help. Other than in 
overflow incontinence, urinary catheterisation should 
never be viewed as first-line management, but may be 
required as a final resort if the perineal skin is at risk of 
breakdown or quality of life is affected.
Adverse drug reactions
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and the effects of drug 
interactions are discussed on pages 24–28. They may 
result in symptoms, abnormal physical signs and altered 
laboratory test results (Box 7.10). ADRs are the cause of 
around 5% of all hospital admissions but account for up 
to 20% of admissions in those aged over 65. This is partly 
because older people receive many more prescribed 
drugs than younger people. Polypharmacy has been 
defined as the use of four or more drugs; this should be 
avoided if possible, but is not always inappropriate 
because many conditions, such as hypertension and 
heart failure, necessitate the use of several drugs, and 
older people may have several coexisting medical prob-
lems (Box 7.11). However, the more drugs that are taken, 
the greater the risk of an ADR. This risk is compounded 
by age-related changes in pharmacodynamic and phar-
macokinetic factors (pp. 18–21), and by impaired homeo­
static mechanisms, such as baroreceptor responses, 
plasma volume and electrolyte control. Older people are 
thus especially sensitive to drugs that can cause postural 
hypotension or volume depletion (see Box 7.10). Non-
adherence to drug therapy also rises with the number of 
drugs prescribed.
The clinical presentations of ADRs are diverse, so for 
any presenting problem in old age the possibility that the 
patient’s medication is a contributory factor should 
always be considered. Failure to recognise this may lead 
to the use of a further drug to treat the problem, making 
matters worse, when the better course would be to stop 
or reduce the dose of the offending drug or to find an 
alternative.
Ageing and disease
7 
176
Factor
Intervention required
Health condition
Underlying disease, e.g. stroke, 
osteoarthritis
Medical or surgical 
treatment
Impairment
Symptoms or signs of the  
condition, e.g. hemiparesis,  
visual loss
Medical or surgical 
treatment
Activity limitation
Resultant loss of function, e.g. 
walking, dressing
Rehabilitation, 
assistance, aids
Participation restriction
Resultant loss of social function, 
e.g. cooking, shopping
Adapted accommodation
Social services
7.13  International classification of functioning 
and disability
•  Hypothermia
p. 104
•  Under-nutrition
p. 120
•  Dementia
p. 250
•  Infection
pp. 296 and 306
•  Fluid balance problems
p. 439
•  Heart failure
p. 546
•  Hypertension
p. 606
•  Dizziness and blackouts
pp. 554 and 1157
•  Atrial fibrillation
p. 564
•  Diabetes mellitus
p. 806
•  Peptic ulceration
p. 872
•  Anaemia
p. 1001
•  Painful joints
p. 1069
•  Bone disease and fracture
pp. 1120 and 1071
•  Stroke
p. 1231
7.12  Other presenting problems in old age
•	 Multiple pathology
•	 Poor patient education (see Box 2.20, p. 35)
•	 Lack of routine review of all medications
•	 Patient expectations of prescribing
•	 Over-use of drug interventions by doctors
•	 Attendance at multiple specialist clinics
•	 Poor communication between specialists
7.11  Factors leading to polypharmacy in old age
from that in younger individuals. These are listed on 
page 178.
REHABILITATION
Rehabilitation aims to improve the ability of people of 
all ages to perform day-to-day activities, and to restore 
their physical, mental and social capabilities as far as 
possible. Acute illness in older people is often associ-
ated with loss of their usual ability to walk or care for 
themselves, and common disabling conditions such as 
stroke, fractured neck of femur, arthritis and cardio­
respiratory disease become increasingly prevalent with 
advancing age.
Disability is an interaction between factors intrinsic 
to the individual and the context in which they live, and 
both medical and social interventions are needed to 
address this (Box 7.13). Doctors tend to focus on health 
conditions and impairments, but patients are more con-
cerned with the effect on their activities and ability to 
participate in everyday life.
Regular review of medications is important in prevent-
ing ADRs. The patient or carer should be asked to bring 
all medication for review rather than the doctor relying 
on previous records. Those drugs that are no longer 
needed or are contraindicated can be discontinued.
Other problems in old age
There is a vast range of other presenting problems in 
older people and they present to many medical special-
ties. End-of-life care is an important facet of clinical 
practice in old age and is discussed on page 290. 
Relevant sections in other chapters are referenced in 
Box 7.12.
Within each chapter, ‘In Old Age’ boxes highlight 
the areas in which presentation or management differs 
Drug class
Adverse reaction
NSAIDs
Gastrointestinal bleeding and peptic 
ulceration
Renal impairment
Diuretics
Renal impairment, electrolyte 
disturbance
Gout
Hypotension, postural hypotension
Warfarin
Bleeding
ACE inhibitors
Renal impairment, electrolyte 
disturbance
Hypotension, postural hypotension
β-blockers
Bradycardia, heart block
Hypotension, postural hypotension
Opiates
Constipation, vomiting
Delirium
Urinary retention
Antidepressants
Delirium
Hyponatraemia (SSRIs)
Hypotension, postural hypotension
Falls
Benzodiazepines
Delirium
Falls
Anticholinergics
Delirium
Urinary retention
Constipation
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAID = non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drug; SSRI = selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor)
7.10  Common adverse drug reactions in old age
Further information and acknowledgements
7 
177
• Re-assessment. There is ongoing re-evaluation of the 
patient’s function and progress towards the goals 
by the rehabilitation team, the patient and the carer. 
Interventions may be modified as a result.
Multidisciplinary team working
The core rehabilitation team includes all members of 
the multidisciplinary team (p. 167). Others may be 
involved, e.g. audiometry to correct hearing impair-
ment, podiatry for foot problems, and orthotics where a 
prosthesis or splinting is required. Good communication 
and mutual respect are essential. Regular team meetings 
allow sharing of assessments, agreement of rehabilita-
tion goals and interventions, evaluation of progress and 
planning for the patient’s discharge home. Rehabilita-
tion is not when the doctor orders ‘physio’ or ‘a home 
visit’, and takes no further role.
Rehabilitation outcomes
There is evidence that rehabilitation improves functional 
outcomes in older people following acute illness, 
stroke and hip fracture. It also reduces mortality after 
stroke and hip fracture. These benefits accrue from 
complex multi-component interventions, but occupa-
tional therapy to improve personal ADLs and indivi­
dualised exercise interventions have now been shown 
to be effective in improving functional outcome in 
their own right.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
http://profane.co Prevention of Falls Network Earth: focuses on 
the prevention of falls and improvement of postural stability in 
older people.
www.americangeriatrics.org American Geriatrics Society. 
Education, careers vignettes from geriatricians, advocacy and 
clinical guidelines.
www.bgs.org.uk British Geriatrics Society: useful publications 
on management of common problems in older people and links 
to other relevant websites.
www.eugms.org European Union Geriatric Medicine Society. 
Research, position papers and educational resources.
www.iagg.info International Association of Gerontology and 
Geriatrics. Promoting care of older people and the science of 
gerontology globally; research, policy and educational resources.
www.knowledge.scot.nhs.uk/effectiveolderpeoplecare. 
aspx Collates and summarises the Cochrane evidence for best 
practice in the health care and rehabilitation of frail older 
people.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 166 insets (Wasted hand, kyphosis) Afzal Mir M. Atlas of 
clinical diagnosis. 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Saunders; 2003; 
copyright Elsevier; (Senile purpura) Forbes CD, Jackson 
WF. Clinical medicine. 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Mosby; 2004 
(p. 438, Fig. 10.101); copyright Elsevier; (Venous ulceration) 
Giovanni Mosti, Clinics in Plastic Surgery, 2012, 39(3): 
269–280, Figure 1; copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc.; all 
reproduced with permission.
Mobility
Independent = 3  Needs help = 2  Wheelchair independent = 1 
Immobile = 0
Stairs
Independent = 2  Needs help = 1  Unable = 0
Transfers (e.g. from bed to chair)
Independent = 3  Needs minor help = 2  Needs major help = 1 
Unable = 0
Bladder
Continent = 2  Occasional incontinence = 1  Incontinent = 0
Bowels
Continent = 2  Occasional incontinence = 1  Incontinent = 0
Grooming
Independent = 1  Needs help = 0
Toilet use
Independent = 2  Needs help = 1  Unable = 0
Feeding
Independent = 2  Needs help = 1  Unable = 0
Dressing
Independent = 2  Needs some help = 1 
Completely dependent = 0
Bathing
Independent = 1  Needs help = 0
The total score reflects the degree of dependency; scores  
of 14 and above are usually consistent with living in the 
community; scores below 10 suggest the patient is heavily 
dependent on carers.
7.14  How to assess rehabilitation needs using 
the Modified Barthel Index (20-point version)
The rehabilitation process
Rehabilitation is a problem-solving process focused 
on improving the patient’s physical, psychological and 
social function. It entails:
• Assessment. The nature and extent of the patient’s 
problems can be identified using the framework in 
Box 7.13. Specific assessment scales, such as the 
Elderly Mobility Scale or Barthel Index of Activities 
of Daily Living (Box 7.14), are useful to quantify 
components of disability, but additional assessment 
is needed to determine the underlying causes or the 
interventions required in individual patients.
• Goal-setting. Goals should be specific to the patient’s 
problems, realistic, and agreed between the patient 
and the rehabilitation team.
• Intervention. This includes the active treatments 
needed to achieve the established goals and to 
maintain the patient’s health and quality of life. 
Interventions include hands-on treatment by 
therapists using a functional, task-orientated 
approach to improve day-to-day activities, and also 
psychological support and education. The emphasis 
on the type of intervention will be individualised, 
according to the patient’s disabilities, psychological 
status and progress. The patient and carer(s) must 
be active participants.
Ageing and disease
7 
178
Environmental and nutritional factors in disease
•  Environmental factors in disease
p. 102
•  Thermoregulation
p. 104
•  Energy balance
p. 122
•  Vitamin deficiency
p. 127
Infectious diseases
•  Problems with antimicrobial therapy
p. 154
•  Fever
p. 296
•  Infectious diarrhoea
p. 306
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
•  Hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia
p. 439
•  Management of hyperlipidaemia
p. 458
Kidney and urinary tract disease
•  Incontinence
p. 473
•  Acute kidney injury
p. 483
•  Renal replacement therapy
p. 491
•  Urinary infection
p. 512
Cardiovascular disease
•  Congestive cardiac failure
p. 551
•  Atrial fibrillation
p. 566
•  Angina
p. 595
•  Myocardial infarction
p. 599
•  Atherosclerotic vascular disease
p. 602
•  Hypertension
p. 610
•  Aortic stenosis
p. 622
•  Endocarditis
p. 626
Respiratory disease
•  Respiratory function
p. 648
•  Obstructive pulmonary disease
p. 677
•  Respiratory infection
p. 686
•  Interstitial lung disease
p. 714
•  Thromboembolic disease
p. 724
•  Pleural disease
p. 731
Endocrine disease
•  The thyroid gland
p. 755
•  Gonadal function
p. 766
•  The parathyroid glands
p. 770
•  Glucocorticoids
p. 779
•  Spontaneous hypoglycaemia
p. 784
•  The pituitary and hypothalamus
p. 795
Diabetes mellitus
•  Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
p. 806
•  Diabetes management
p. 828
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
•  Endoscopy
p. 850
•  Acute abdominal pain
p. 863
•  Oral health
p. 864
•  Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
p. 868
•  Peptic ulcer disease
p. 875
•  Malabsorption
p. 883
•  Constipation
p. 918
Liver and biliary tract disease
•  Liver disease
p. 980
•  Gallbladder disease
p. 988
Blood disease
•  Haematological investigations
p. 1001
•  Anaemia
p. 1034
•  Haematological malignancy
p. 1047
•  Haemostasis and thrombosis
p. 1056
Rheumatology and bone disease
•  Use of oral NSAID
p. 1079
•  Osteoarthritis
p. 1085
•  Gout
p. 1090
•  Joint and bone infection
p. 1094
•  Osteoporosis
p. 1124
Neurological disease
•  Neurological examination
p. 1139
•  Dizziness
p. 1158
•  Epilepsy
p. 1185
Other
•  Prescribing
p. 36
•  Genetic disease and counselling
p. 64
•  Immune senescence
p. 82
•  The critically ill older patient
p. 204
•  Poisoning
p. 208
•  Medical psychiatry
p. 238
•  Cancer
p. 271
•  HIV infection
p. 410
•  Skin changes
p. 1254
7.15  Index of ‘In Old Age’ boxes
179
8 
Clinical examination of the critically ill 
patient 180
Physiology of critical illness 182
Oxygen transport 182
Cardiovascular component of oxygen delivery: 
flow 182
Oxygenation component of oxygen delivery: 
content 183
Oxygen consumption 184
Relationship between oxygen consumption and 
delivery 184
Pathophysiology of the inflammatory  
response 184
Monitoring 185
Monitoring the circulation 185
Monitoring respiratory function 187
Recognition of critical illness 188
Assessment and initial resuscitation of the 
critically ill patient 188
Clinical decision-making and referral to critical 
care 189
Critical illness
General principles of critical care 
management 201
Daily clinical management in the ICU 202
Sedation and analgesia 202
Discharge from intensive care 203
Withdrawal of intensive support 203
Brainstem death 203
Outcome of intensive care 204
Scoring systems 204
G.R. Nimmo
T. Walsh
Presenting problems/Management of major 
organ failure 190
Circulatory failure: ‘shock’ 190
Circulatory support 190
Respiratory failure and acute respiratory 
distress syndrome 191
Respiratory support 193
Acute kidney injury 197
Renal support 197
Gastrointestinal and hepatic disturbance 198
Gastrointestinal and hepatic support 198
Neurological failure (coma) 198
Neurological support 199
Neurological complications in intensive  
care 199
Sepsis 200
Management 201
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 201
Critical illness
180
RECOGNISING THE CRITICALLY ILL PATIENT
1
2
3
Initial assessment and resuscitation 
Referral
Respiratory signs
•  Respiratory arrest
•  Threatened or obstructed airway
•  Stridor, intercostal recession,
   paradoxical breathing (seesaw
   pattern)
•  Respiratory rate < 8 or > 35/min
•  Respiratory distress: use of
   accessory muscles; unable to
   speak in complete sentences
•  SpO2 < 90% on high-concentration
 oxygen
•  Rising PaCO2 > 7 kPa
   (52.5 mmHg) or > 2 kPa
   (> 15 mmHg) above ‘normal’
   with acidosis
Cardiovascular signs
•  Cardiac arrest
•  Pulse rate < 40 or > 140 bpm
•  Systolic blood pressure < 100 mmHg
•  Poor peripheral perfusion
•  Evidence of inadequate oxygen
   delivery
   Metabolic acidosis
   Hyperlactataemia
•  Poor response to volume
   resuscitation
•  Oliguria < 0.5 mL/kg/hr (check urea,
   creatinine, K+)
Neurological signs
•  Threatened or obstructed airway
•  Absent gag or cough reflex
•  Failure to maintain normal PaO2
   and PaCO2
•  Failure to obey commands
•  GCS < 10
•  Sudden fall in level of consciousness
   (GCS by > 2 points)
•  Repeated or prolonged seizures
Re-assessment and further management
ADVANCED RESPONDER/INTENSIVIST
FIRST RESPONDER
A Airway clear
No: head tilt, chin lift
Yes: take presenting history
A Airway compromised
Consider intubation and ventilation
Give more oxygen
B Breathing
Oxygenation failure: give more oxygen;
continuous positive airways pressure
(CPAP)
Respiratory failure: non-invasive
ventilation (NIV); intubation and
ventilation
C Shock
Large-bore IV access
Volume resuscitation
Arterial line insertion
Central line insertion
Monitoring
Vasoactive drugs
D Reduced GCS
A + B + C and
Is CT scan required?
E Extricate
To ICU or HDU as appropriate
Plan safe transport
F Further investigations and full
examination
FBC, acute biochemistry, coagulation,
cultures, targeted specialist
investigations
Breathing
Distressed? Yes: oxygen
Respiratory rate: oxygen if tachypnoeic
Auscultation: nebulised salbutamol
if wheeze
Monitor SpO2
Obtain arterial blood gases and
chest X-ray
Circulation
Pulse rate, rhythm and volume
Blood pressure
ECG monitor
Check peripheral perfusion
Establish IV access and ?give fluid
Obtain immediate bloods* and
12-lead ECG
Disability
Establish Glasgow Coma Score (GCS):
if reduced, exclude hypoglycaemia
Check pupils and limbs for focal signs
B
C
D
Evidence
Look for information to assess severity
and establish diagnosis
Examination: target initially to systems likely
to give most information, e.g. chest and
heart if presentation is with breathlessness
*ABG, potassium, glucose, haemoglobin, lactate
E
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRITICALLY ILL PATIENT
Clinical examination of the critically ill patient
181
Standard Early Warning System (SEWS) chart. (UO = urine output) 
SEWS KEY
RESP.
RATE
SpO2
TEMP
BLOOD
PRESSURE
HEART
RATE
NEURO
RESPONSE
PAIN
SEWS SCORE
DATE:
NAME:
TIME:
0
1
2
3
Inspired O2%
Humidifier temp
SEWS SCORE
uses Systolic BP
36+
31–35
21–30
90–92
85–89
9–20
<93+
<85
39º
38º
37º
36º
35º
34º
210
200
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
190
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
100
30
Alert
Verbal
Pain
Unresp
Blood glucose
9–10
Severe
Moderate
Mild
None
Nausea score (0–3)
Bowels
Weight
6–8
4–5
1–3
0
%
≤8
UO < 30 mL/hr (3 hrs+)
(with all obs)
JOHN BROWN
20/6
06ºc
12
22
24
96
AIR AIR AIR
97
10ºc
20/6 20/6
14ºc
36º
37º
37º
105
90
75
0
0
0
0
1
4
+
70Kg
90
• Record standard observations:
Respiratory rate
SpO2
Temperature
Blood pressure (BP)
Heart rate
Neurological response
• Note whether the observation falls in a shaded ‘at-risk zone’ 
(see SEWS key)
• Add the points scored and record total SEWS score on chart
• Do not add ‘Pain’ score to SEWS score
If SEWS score ≥ 4, a doctor should assess the patient 
within 20 mins.
If SEWS score ≥ 6, a senior doctor should assess the patient 
within 10 mins.
Recognition of critical illness: early warning 
scores
Low-flow shock, e.g. hypovolaemia, cardiogenic shock
• Rapid, shallow respiration
• Cold, clammy skin
• Tachycardia (> 100/min)
• Hypotension (systolic BP < 100 mmHg)
• Drowsiness, confusion, irritability (usually occurs late)
• Oliguria
• Multi-organ failure
Vasodilated shock, e.g. sepsis, anaphylaxis
• Rapid, shallow respiration (very early)
• Warm peripheries*
• Tachycardia (> 100/min)
• Hypotension (systolic BP < 100 mmHg and disproportionately 
low diastolic BP – early)
• Drowsiness, confusion, irritability (can occur early)
• Oliguria
• Multi-organ failure
Clinical features of shock
*Peripheries may be cool in sepsis with hypovolaemia, or if myocardial 
depression is present.
Critical illness
8 
182
(Hb) × arterial oxygen saturation of haemoglobin (SaO2) 
× 1.34. By increasing cardiac output, arterial oxygen 
saturation or haemoglobin concentration, DO2 will be 
increased.
The regional distribution of oxygen delivery is impor-
tant. If skin and muscle receive high blood flows but the 
splanchnic bed does not, the gut will become hypoxic 
even if overall DO2 is high.
The movement of oxygen from tissue capillary to cell 
occurs by diffusion and depends on the gradient of 
oxygen partial pressures, diffusion distance and the 
ability of the target cell to take up and use oxygen. 
Microcirculatory, tissue diffusion and cellular factors 
thus also influence the oxygen status of the cell.
Cardiovascular component of oxygen 
delivery: flow
A key determinant of DO2 is cardiac output, which is 
determined by the ventricular ‘preload’ and ‘afterload’, 
myocardial contractility and heart rate.
Preload
The atrial filling pressures, or preload, determine the 
end-diastolic ventricular volume, which, according to 
Starling’s Law and depending on myocardial contractil-
ity, defines the force of cardiac contraction and the 
stroke volume (see Fig. 18.22, p. 547). The principal 
determinant of preload is venous return, determined 
by the intravascular volume, venous ‘tone’ and intra­
thoracic pressure. This can be measured as the central 
venous pressure (CVP), as described on page 185  
(Box 8.1).
When volume is lost (e.g. in major haemorrhage), 
venous ‘tone’ increases and this helps to offset the con-
sequent fall in atrial filling pressure and stroke volume. 
If the equivalent volume is restored gradually by intra-
venous fluid administration, the right atrial pressure 
will return to normal as the intravascular volume is nor-
malised and the reflex increase in venous tone abates. 
However, if fluid is infused too rapidly, there is insuf-
ficient time for the venous and arteriolar tone to fall 
and pulmonary oedema may occur, even though the 
intravascular volume has only been restored to the pre-
morbid level.
If the preload is low, volume loading with intra­
venous fluids is the priority and is the most appropriate 
means of improving cardiac output and tissue perfusion. 
The choice of fluid for volume loading is controversial, 
but as there is no clear advantage of colloid over crystal-
loid, sodium chloride is used. Fluid challenges of 200–
250 mL should be administered rapidly over a couple of 
minutes, and titrated against heart rate, blood pressure 
(BP), peripheral circulation, and measurements of CVP 
(Fig. 8.2). Red cells have traditionally been transfused to 
Fig. 8.1  The oxygen cascade in the transport of oxygen from 
inspired gas to the cell. Gas containing oxygen is entrained into the 
lungs by inspiratory flow. The partial pressure of O2 falls as it moves from 
lungs to blood and then to the tissues. The partial pressure gradient 
between capillary blood and the intracellular environment is pivotal to 
oxygen reaching the mitochondria. (PO2 = oxygen partial pressure (kPa) 
1 kPa = 7.5 mmHg). 
Air
0
5
10
15
20
Atmosphere
Mitochondria
PO2
(kPa)
Gas
in alveoli
Pulmonary
capillary
Artery
Tissues
•  Normal
0–5 mmHg
•  Target (usual) of volume resuscitation
6–10 mmHg
•  Normal if ventilated
5–10 mmHg
•  Target of volume resuscitation if ventilated
10–15 mmHg
8.1  Central venous pressure measurements
A critically ill patient is at imminent risk of death. Rec-
ognition, assessment and management of critical illness 
are thus fundamental to clinical care in any area of 
medicine. The principle underpinning intensive care 
is the simultaneous assessment of illness severity and 
stabilisation of life-threatening physiological abnor­
malities. The goal is to prevent deterioration and effect 
improvements as the diagnosis is established, and treat-
ment of the underlying definitive disease process(es) 
is initiated. Blinkered attention to either resuscitation 
or diagnosis in isolation results in worse outcomes 
and increased mortality; the two processes are inex­
tricably interlinked. Appropriate physiological monitor-
ing is required to allow continuing assessment and 
re-assessment of response to therapy, wherever the clini-
cal environment.
PHYSIOLOGY OF CRITICAL ILLNESS
Oxygen transport
The principal function of the heart, lungs and circulation 
is the provision of oxygen (and other nutrients) to the 
various organs and tissues of the body. During this 
process, carbon dioxide and other metabolic waste pro­
ducts are removed. The rate of supply and removal 
should match the specific metabolic requirements of the 
individual tissues. This requires adequate oxygen uptake 
in the lungs, global matching of delivery and consump-
tion, and regional control of the circulation. Failure to 
supply sufficient oxygen to meet the metabolic require-
ments of the tissues is the cardinal feature of circulatory 
failure or ‘shock’, and optimisation of tissue oxygen 
delivery and consumption is the goal of resuscitation.
Atmospheric oxygen moves down a partial pressure 
gradient from air, through the respiratory tract, from 
alveoli to arterial blood and then to the capillary beds 
and cells, diffusing into the mitochondria, where it is 
utilised at cytochrome a3 (Fig. 8.1). The movement of 
oxygen from the left ventricle to the systemic tissue 
capillaries is known as oxygen delivery (DO2), and is 
the product of cardiac output (flow) × arterial oxygen 
content (CaO2) The latter is the product of haemoglobin 
Physiology of critical illness
8 
183
achieve and maintain a haemoglobin concentration of 
100 g/L, but in the absence of significant heart disease, 
the target is 70–90 g/L (p. 184).
When the preload is high due to excessive intra­
vascular volume or impaired myocardial contractility, 
removing volume from the circulation by using diuretics 
or haemofiltration, or increasing the capacity of the vas-
cular bed by using venodilator therapy (glyceryl trini-
trate, morphine) often improves stroke volume.
Afterload
Afterload is the tension in the ventricular myocardium 
during systole, and is determined by the resistance to 
ventricular outflow, which is a function of the peripheral 
arteriolar resistance.
Understanding the reciprocal relationship between 
pressure, flow and resistance is crucial for appropriate 
circulatory management. High resistances produce 
lower flows at higher pressures for a given amount of 
ventricular work. Therefore, a systemic vasodilator (see 
below) will allow the same cardiac output to be main-
tained for less ventricular work but with a reduced 
arterial BP. In hyperdynamic sepsis, the peripheral 
arteriolar tone and BP are low but the cardiac output 
is often high; therefore the vasoconstrictor noradrena-
line (norepi­nephrine) is appropriate to restore BP, 
usually at the price of some reduction in cardiac 
output.
Myocardial contractility
This determines the stroke volume that the ventricle 
can generate against a given afterload for a particular 
preload. The ventricular stroke work is the external 
work performed by the ventricle with each beat. The 
relationship between stroke work and filling pressure is 
shown in Figure 18.22 (p. 547). Myocardial contractility 
is frequently reduced in critically ill patients due to pre-
existing cardiac disease (usually ischaemic), drugs (e.g. 
β-blockers, verapamil) or to the disease process itself 
(particularly sepsis, as the associated low diastolic BP 
may compromise coronary arterial perfusion). It is thus 
important to maintain satisfactory perfusion and oxygen 
delivery to all organs at maximum cardiac efficiency, to 
minimise myocardial ischaemia.
Fig. 8.2  Responses observed in central venous pressure (CVP) 
after a fluid challenge of 250 mL, depending on the intravascular 
volume status of the patient. 
Hypervolaemia
Normovolaemia
Hypovolaemia
CVP
0
30
15
Time (min)
Fig. 8.3  Oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve: the relationship 
between oxygen tension (PO2) and percentage saturation of 
haemoglobin with oxygen (SO2). The dotted line illustrates the 
rightward shift of the curve (i.e. P50 increases) caused by increases in 
temperature, PaCO2, metabolic acidosis and 2,3 diphosphoglycerate (DPG). 
Haemoglobin saturation SO2 (%)
kPa
mmHg
100
80
60
40
20
0
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
100
80
60
40
20
0
PO2 (mmHg or kPa)
P50
Temperature
H+
PaCO2
2,3 DPG
Oxygenation component of oxygen 
delivery: content
The major determinants of the oxygen content of arterial 
blood (CaO2) are the arterial oxygen saturation of haemo­
globin (SaO2) and the haemoglobin concentration. 
Over 95% of oxygen carried in the blood is bound to 
haemoglobin.
The oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve (Fig. 8.3) 
describes the relationship between the saturation of 
haemo­globin (SO2) and the partial pressure (PO2) of 
oxygen in the blood. A shift in the curve will influence 
the uptake and release of oxygen by the haemoglobin 
molecule. If the curve moves to the right, the haemo-
globin saturation will be lower for any given oxygen 
tension: less oxygen will be taken up in the lungs but 
more will be released to the tissues. As capillary PCO2 
rises, the curve moves to the right, increasing the unload-
ing of oxygen in the tissues – a phenomenon known as 
the Bohr effect. Thus a shift to the right increases capil-
lary PO2 and hence cellular oxygen supply.
Due to the shape of the curve, a small drop in arterial 
PO2 (PaO2) below 8 kPa (60 mmHg) will cause a marked 
fall in SaO2.. Its position and the effect of various physico­
chemical factors are defined by the PO2 at which 50% of 
the haemoglobin is saturated (P50), which is normally 
3.5 kPa (26 mmHg). The shape of the curve also means 
that increases in PaO2 beyond the level that ensures SaO2 
is greater than 90% produce relatively small additional 
increases in CaO2 (Fig. 8.3). Thus, in a patient who is both 
anaemic (Hb 60 g/L or 6 g/dL) and hypoxaemic (SaO2 
75%) when breathing air (fractional inspired oxygen 
concentration (FiO2) 20%), supplementary oxygen at 
FiO2 40% will increase SaO2 to 93% and CaO2 by 24%. 
However, further increases in FiO2, while raising PaO2, 
cannot produce any further useful increases in SaO2 
or CaO2. However, increasing haemoglobin to 90 g/L 
Critical illness
8 
184
In practice, if there is a metabolic acidosis, hyper­
lactataemia and/or oliguria that could be due to inade-
quate oxygen delivery, a therapeutic trial of increased 
oxygen delivery (while maintaining an adequate BP) 
may be helpful clinically. If oxygen consumption rises, 
it can indicate an oxygen debt that is being repaid.
Pathophysiology of the  
inflammatory response
The mediators and clinical manifestations of the inflam-
matory response are described on page 82. In critically ill 
patients, these have important consequences (Box 8.2).
Fever, tachycardia with warm peripheries, tachy­
pnoea and a raised white cell count prompt a diagnosis 
of sepsis, with the presentation caused by invading 
microorganisms and their breakdown products. Other 
conditions, such as pancreatitis, trauma, malignancy, 
tissue necrosis (e.g. burns), aspiration syndromes, liver 
failure, blood transfusion and drug reactions, can also 
present in this way in the absence of infection.
Local inflammation
The body’s initial response to a noxious local insult is to 
produce a local inflammatory response, with sequestration 
and activation of white blood cells and the release of a 
(9 g/dL) by blood transfusion will result in a further 
50% increase in CaO2.
Traditionally, the optimum haemoglobin concentra-
tion for critically ill patients was considered to be 
approximately 100 g/L (10 g/dL), representing a balance 
between maximising the oxygen content of the blood and 
avoiding regional microcirculatory problems due to 
increased viscosity. However, improved outcomes have 
been demonstrated when the haemoglobin is maintained 
between 70 and 90 g/L (7–9 g/dL). A target haemo-
globin of 100 g/L remains appropriate in the elderly and 
in patients with coronary artery disease, cardiogenic 
shock, significant aortic stenosis or acute brain trauma.
Oxygen consumption
The sum of the oxygen consumed by the various organs 
represents the global oxygen consumption (VO2), and is 
approximately 250 mL/min for an adult of 70 kg under-
taking normal daily activities.
The oxygen saturation in the pulmonary artery, or 
‘mixed venous oxygen saturation’ (SvO2), is a measure 
of the oxygen not consumed by the tissues (DO2 − VO2). 
The saturation of venous blood from different organs 
varies considerably; the hepatic venous saturation 
usually does not exceed 60% but the renal venous satu-
ration may reach 90%, reflecting the difference in the 
metabolic requirements of these organs, and the oxygen 
content of the blood delivered to them. The SvO2 is a 
flow-weighted average measured in the mixed effluent 
blood from all perfused tissues, and is influenced by 
changes in both oxygen delivery (DO2) and consump-
tion (VO2). Provided the microcirculation and the mech-
anisms for cellular oxygen uptake are intact, it can be 
used to monitor whether global oxygen delivery is ade-
quate to meet overall demand, so its measurement is 
particularly useful in low-flow situations such as cardio-
genic shock. Central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2) 
is used in the same way, but as it does not reflect hepato­
splanchnic oxygen consumption, it may be less helpful 
than SvO2.
The re-oxygenation of the blood that returns to the 
lungs and the resulting arterial saturation (SaO2) will 
depend on how closely pulmonary ventilation and per-
fusion are matched. If part of the pulmonary blood 
flow perfuses non-ventilated parts of the lung (‘shunt-
ing’), the blood entering the left atrium will be desatu-
rated in proportion to the size of the shunt and the level 
of SvO2.
Relationship between oxygen 
consumption and delivery
The tissue oxygen extraction ratio (OER) is 20–25% in a 
normal individual at rest, but rises as consumption 
increases or supply diminishes. The maximum OER is 
approximately 60% for most tissues; at this point, no 
further increase in extraction can occur and any further 
increase in oxygen consumption or decline in oxygen 
delivery will cause tissue hypoxia, anaerobic metabo-
lism and increased lactic acid production. This ulti-
mately results in multiple organ failure and an  increased 
risk of death.
Infection
• Invasion of normally sterile tissue by microorganisms
Bacteraemia
• Viable bacteria in the blood
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
• Defined by the presence of two or more of
Respiratory rate > 20/min
Heart rate > 90/min
White blood count > 12 × 109/L or < 4 × 109/L
Temperature > 38.0°C or < 36.0°C
PaCO2 < 4.3 kPa (< 32 mmHg) or ventilated
• A wide pulse pressure, e.g. 115/42 mmHg, may be an early 
pointer to systemic sepsis
• Cause may be infection or a non-infective condition, e.g. 
pancreatitis, trauma, cardiopulmonary bypass, vasculitis etc.
• Hypothermia and septic neutropenia indicate more severe 
infection
Sepsis
• Systemic inflammatory response caused by documented infection
Severe sepsis/SIRS
• Sepsis/SIRS with evidence of early organ dysfunction or 
hypotension
Septic/SIRS shock
• Sepsis associated with organ failure and hypotension 
(systolic BP < 90 mmHg or > 40 mmHg fall from baseline) 
unresponsive to fluid resuscitation
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS)
• Development of impaired organ function in a patient with SIRS
• Multiple organ failure (MOF) ensues unless there is prompt 
treatment of the underlying cause and appropriate organ support
8.2  Terminology in the inflammatory state
Monitoring
8 
185
haemodynamic monitoring should be referenced to the 
mid-axillary line as ‘zero’. Clinical monitoring of physi-
cal signs, such as respiratory rate, the appearance of the 
patient, restlessness, conscious level and indices of 
peripheral perfusion (pale, cold skin; delayed capillary 
refill in the nailbed), is just as important as a set of blood 
gases or monitor readings.
Monitoring the circulation
Electrocardiogram
Standard monitors display a single-lead ECG, record 
heart rate and identify rhythm changes. More sophisti-
cated machines can print out rhythm strips and monitor 
ST segment shift, which is useful in patients with ischae-
mic heart disease.
Blood pressure
In critically ill patients, continuous intra-arterial moni-
toring is necessary using a line placed in the radial artery 
(or the femoral in vasoconstricted patients or where 
access is difficult). The brachial artery should be avoided, 
as it is an end artery of relatively small calibre and occlu-
sion leads to ischaemia of the hand. When there is sys-
temic vasoconstriction, the mean arterial pressure (MAP) 
may be normal or even high, although the cardiac output 
is low. Conversely, if there is peripheral vasodilatation, 
as in sepsis, the MAP may be low, although the cardiac 
output is high.
Central venous pressure
CVP or right atrial pressure (RAP) is monitored using a 
catheter inserted via either the internal jugular or the 
subclavian vein, with the distal end sited in the upper 
right atrium. The CVP may help in assessing the need 
for intravascular fluid replacement and the rate at 
which this should be given (see Box 8.1, p. 182). If the 
CVP is low in the presence of a low MAP or cardiac 
output, fluid resuscitation is necessary. However, a 
raised level does not necessarily mean that the patient is 
adequately volume-resuscitated. Right heart function, 
pulmonary artery pressure, intrathoracic pressure and 
venous ‘tone’ also influence CVP, and may lead to a 
raised CVP even when the patient is hypovolaemic (Box 
8.3). In addition, positive pressure ventilation raises 
intrathoracic pressure and causes marked swings in 
atrial pressures and systemic BP in time with respira-
tion. Pressure measurements should be recorded at 
end-expiration.
In severe hypovolaemia, the RAP may be sustained 
by peripheral venoconstriction, and transfusion may 
initially produce little or no change in the CVP (see 
Fig. 8.3, p. 183).
Pulmonary artery catheterisation and 
pulmonary artery ‘wedge’ pressure
The CVP is usually an adequate guide to the filling 
pressures of both sides of the heart. However, certain 
conditions, such as pulmonary hypertension or right 
ventricular dysfunction, may lead to raised CVP levels 
even in the presence of hypovolaemia. In these circum-
stances, it may be appropriate to insert a pulmonary 
artery flotation catheter (Fig. 8.4) so that pulmonary 
artery pressure and pulmonary artery ‘wedge’ pressure 
variety of mediators to overcome the primary ‘insult’ 
and prevent further damage locally or in distant organs.
Normally, a delicate balance is achieved between 
pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators. However, if the 
response is excessive, a large array of pro-inflammatory 
mediators may be released into the circulation (p. 74). 
The inflammatory and coagulation cascades are inti-
mately linked, as the latter cause not only platelet acti­
vation and fibrin deposition, but also activation of 
leucocytes and endothelial cells. Conversely, leucocyte 
activation induces tissue factor expression and initiates 
coagulation pathways. The natural anticoagulants, 
antithrombin (AT III), activated protein C (APC) and 
tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), inhibit pro-
inflammatory cytokines. Deficiency of AT III and APC 
(features of disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC), p. 1056) facilitates thrombin generation and pro-
motes further endothelial cell dysfunction.
Systemic inflammation
In a severe inflammatory response, systemic release of 
cytokines and other mediators triggers widespread 
interaction between the coagulation pathways, platelets, 
endothelial cells and monocytes, tissue macrophages, 
and neutrophils. Activated neutrophils express adhe-
sion factors, which make them adhere to and initially 
roll along the endothelium, before adhering firmly and 
migrating through the damaged and disrupted endothe-
lium into the extravascular interstitial space (together 
with fluid and proteins), resulting in tissue oedema and 
inflammation. A vicious circle of endothelial in­jury, 
intravascular coagulation, microvascular occlusion, tis-
sue damage and further release of inflammatory media-
tors ensues. This can occur in all organs, manifesting in 
the lungs as acute lung injury and in the kidneys as acute 
tubular necrosis (ATN). Similar processes probably 
account for damage to other organs, including the heart.
The endothelium itself produces mediators that 
control local blood vessel tone. The profound vasodila­
tation that characterises septic shock and some other 
acute systemic inflammatory states, such as pancreati-
tis, results from excessive production of nitric oxide 
(NO, p. 82), due to activation of inducible NO synthase 
enzymes.
Systemic inflammatory processes also have impor-
tant effects on mitochondrial function, resulting in 
impaired oxidative phosphorylation and aerobic energy 
generation. This block to oxygen utilisation by cells is 
sometimes called cytopathic hypoxia. Patients typically 
have a reduced arteriovenous oxygen difference, a low 
oxygen extraction ratio, a raised plasma lactate and a 
paradoxically high mixed venous oxygen saturation 
(SvO2), despite normal or supranormal oxygen delivery. 
This is associated with the development of multiple 
organ failure (MOF) and reduced survival.
MONITORING
Monitoring in intensive care includes a combination of 
clinical and automated recordings. Electrocardiogram 
(ECG), SpO2 (oxygen saturation), BP and usually CVP 
recordings are taken at least hourly, using either a 
24-hour chart or a computerised system. Urine output 
measurement requires early catheterisation. All invasive 
Critical illness
8 
186
(PAWP), which approximates to left atrial pressure, can 
be measured.
The mean PAWP normally lies between 6 and 
12 mmHg (measured from the mid-axillary line) but in 
left heart failure it may be grossly elevated, exceeding 
30 mmHg. Provided the pulmonary capillary mem-
branes are intact, the optimum PAWP when managing 
acute circulatory failure in the critically ill patient is 
generally 12–15 mmHg, because this will ensure good 
left ventricular filling without risking hydrostatic pul-
monary oedema.
Pulmonary artery catheters also allow measurement 
of cardiac output and sampling of blood from the pul-
monary artery (‘mixed venous’ samples), permitting 
continuous monitoring of the mixed venous oxygen 
saturation (SvO2) by oximetry. Measurement of SvO2 
gives an indication of the adequacy of cardiac output 
(and hence DO2) in relation to the body’s metabolic 
requirements. It is especially useful in low cardiac 
output states.
Cardiac output
Measurement of cardiac output is important, particu-
larly when large doses of a vasopressor are being admin-
istered, when there is underlying cardiac disease (acute 
or chronic), and when volume resuscitation and vaso­
active drug therapy are not achieving resolution of lactic 
acidosis or oliguria. It is most accurately measured by 
indicator dilution methods. Most PA catheters incorpo-
rate a heating element, which raises blood temperature 
at frequent intervals, and the resultant temperature 
change is detected by a thermistor at the tip of the 
catheter.
Fig. 8.4  A pulmonary artery catheter. A  There is a small balloon at the tip of the catheter and pressure can be measured through the central 
lumen. The catheter is inserted via an internal jugular, subclavian or femoral vein and advanced through the right heart until the tip lies in the pulmonary 
artery. When the balloon is deflated, the pulmonary artery pressure can be recorded. B  Advancing the catheter with the balloon inflated will ‘wedge’ the 
catheter in the pulmonary artery. Blood cannot then flow past the balloon, so the tip of the catheter will now record the pressure transmitted from the 
pulmonary veins and left atrium (known as the pulmonary artery wedge pressure), which provides an indirect measure of the left atrial pressure. (LA = left 
atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle). 
30
20
10
0
mmHg
Right
ventricular
pressure
Wedge
(left atrial)
pressure
Balloon
inflated
RV
RA
LA
LV
Aorta
Balloon
Pulmonary
artery
Right atrial
pressure
Pulmonary
artery
pressure
A
B
Physiological
• Cardiac function
• Blood volume
• Venoconstriction
• Intrathoracic  
pressure
Pathological
All increase CVP:
• Superior vena cava occlusion
• Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD)/
cor pulmonale
• Pulmonary embolism
• Cardiac tamponade
Interventions
Increase CVP:
• Positive pressure 
ventilation and positive 
end-expiratory  
pressure (PEEP)
Reduce CVP:
• Venodilators
• Fluid resuscitation
• Vasopressors
Artefacts caused by technical problems
• Line malpositioning: tip in right ventricle, internal jugular  
line in axillary vein, or subclavian line in internal jugular  
vein
• Transducer not in alignment with phlebostatic axis 
(mid-axillary line)
• Inaccurate calibration of transducer system
• Infusion attached to monitoring line
• Clot/occlusion in line
8.3  Factors affecting central venous pressure
Monitoring
8 
187
Peripheral skin temperature
In general, resuscitation is not complete until the 
patient’s feet are warm and well perfused.
Blood lactate, hydrogen ion and base 
excess/deficit
Acid–base balance is discussed on page 443. Base excess 
or deficit is calculated as the difference between the 
patient’s bicarbonate and the normal bicarbonate after 
the PCO2 has been maintained in a blood gas machine 
at 5.33 kPa (40 mmHg). This is particularly useful, as 
it describes patients’ underlying metabolic status inde-
pendently of their current respiratory status. A meta-
bolic acidosis with base deficit of more than 5 mmol/L 
requires investigation (p. 445). It often indicates increased 
lactic acid production in poorly perfused, hypoxic 
tissues, and impaired lactate metabolism and clearance 
due to poor hepatic perfusion. Serial lactate measure-
ments may therefore be helpful in monitoring tissue 
perfusion and response to treatment. Other conditions, 
such as acute renal failure, ketoacidosis and poisoning, 
may be the cause, and infusions of large volumes of 
fluids containing sodium chloride may lead to a hyper-
chloraemic acidosis.
Monitoring respiratory function
Oxygen saturation
Oxygen saturation (SpO2) is measured by a probe 
attached to a finger or earlobe. Spectrophotometric analy­
sis determines the relative proportions of saturated and 
desaturated haemoglobin. It is unreliable if peripheral 
perfusion is poor, in the presence of nail polish, exces-
sive movement or high ambient light. It is not useful 
in carbon monoxide poisoning, as it does not detect 
carboxy-haemoglobin. If this is suspected, PO2 must be 
measured in an arterial blood gas sample. In general, 
arterial oxygenation is safe if SpO2 is above 90%. Box 8.4 
lists the causes of sudden falls in SpO2.
Arterial blood gases
Arterial blood gases (ABGs) are measured several times 
a day in a ventilated patient so that inspired oxygen 
(FiO2) and minute volume can be adjusted to achieve the 
Oesophageal Doppler ultrasonography provides a 
rapid and useful assessment of volume status and 
cardiac performance to guide early fluid and vasoactive 
therapy. A 6 mm probe is inserted into the distal oeso­
phagus, allowing continuous monitoring of the aortic 
flow signal from the descending aorta (Fig. 8.5). Using 
the stroke distance (area under the velocity/time wave-
form) and a correction factor that incorporates the 
patient’s age, height and weight, an estimate of left ven-
tricular stroke volume and hence cardiac output can be 
made. Peak velocity is an indicator of left ventricular 
performance, while flow time is an indicator of left ven-
tricular filling and peripheral resistance.
Analysis of arterial pressure waveform is another 
means of continuously estimating cardiac output, and 
can be calibrated either by transpulmonary thermodilu-
tion (PiCCO) or lithium dilution methods (LidCO). The 
Vigileo/Flotrac system derives cardiac output from 
arterial pressure waveform analysis with no external 
calibration.
Echocardiography
In many centres, echocardiography is increasingly being 
used for rapid assessment of myocardial function and 
volume status at the bedside. Continuous transoesopha-
geal echocardiography allows direct assessment of 
cardiac filling status and ventricular function in real 
time.
Urine output
This is a sensitive measure of renal perfusion, provided 
that the kidneys are not damaged (e.g. in ATN) or 
affected by drugs such as diuretics or dopamine. Output 
is measured hourly and a lower limit of normal of 
0.5 mL/hr/kg body weight is widely used. It reflects 
renal perfusion over the hours preceding measurement 
rather than in real time.
Fig. 8.5  Oesophageal Doppler ultrasonography. 
Oesophageal
Doppler probe
Stroke
distance
Peak
velocity
Flow
time
Patient factors
• Bronchospasm
• Lung collapse due to thick secretions blocking the proximal 
bronchial tree
• Pneumothorax
• Impaired peripheral perfusion
Equipment factors
• Displacement of the endotracheal tube (extubation, 
endobronchial intubation)
• Blockage of the endotracheal tube
• Disconnection from the ventilator
• Oxygen supply failure
• Detached probe
8.4  Causes of sudden changes in 
oxygen saturation
Critical illness
8 
188
RECOGNITION OF CRITICAL ILLNESS
The immediate appearance of the patient yields a wealth 
of information. Introducing yourself, shaking hands and 
asking ‘How are you?’ allow assessment of:
•	 the airway (for patency and noises, e.g. stridor, 
snoring, gurgling, none)
•	 breathing (rate, symmetry, work of breathing, 
including accessory muscle use, paradoxical chest/
abdominal movement or see-saw pattern)
•	 peripheral circulation (temperature of the extremities)
•	 conscious level (the response of the patient).
Tachypnoea is often the earliest abnormality to 
appear and the most sensitive sign of a worsening clini-
cal state, but it is the least well documented. In the UK, 
the use of early warning scores, such as the Standard 
Early Warning System chart (SEWS, p. 181), has been 
adopted to improve the recognition of critical illness. 
These alert staff to severely ill patients, complement 
clinical judgement and facilitate the prioritisation of 
clinical care. A patient with a SEWS score of 4 or more 
requires urgent review and appropriate interventions. 
An elevated score correlates with increased mortality.
Assessment and initial resuscitation of 
the critically ill patient
Airway and breathing
If the patient is talking, the airway is clear and breathing 
is adequate. A rapid history should be obtained whilst 
initial assessment is undertaken.
Assess breathing as described above. Supplemental 
oxygen should be administered to patients who are 
breathless, tachypnoeic or bleeding, or who have chest 
pain or reduced conscious level. The clinical status of the 
patient determines how much oxygen to give, but the 
critically ill should receive at least 60% oxygen initially. 
High-concentration oxygen is best given using a mask 
with a reservoir bag, which, at 15 L/min, can provide 
nearly 90% oxygen. ABGs should be checked early to 
assess oxygenation, ventilation (PaCO2) and metabolic 
state (pH or H+, HCO3 and base deficit). Oxygen therapy 
should be adjusted in light of the ABGs, remembering 
desired PaO2 and PaCO2 respectively. ABG results are 
also used to monitor disturbances of acid–base balance.
Lung function
In ventilated patients, lung function is monitored by:
•	 arterial PO2 taken in relation to the fractional 
inspired oxygen concentration (PO2/FiO2 ratio) and 
level of end-expiratory pressure
•	 arterial and end-tidal CO2, reflecting alveolar 
ventilation
•	 airway pressures and tidal volumes, reflecting lung 
compliance and airways resistance.
Capnography
The CO2 concentration in inspired gas is zero, but during 
expiration, after clearing the physiological dead space, 
it rises progressively to reach a plateau that represents 
the alveolar or end-tidal CO2 concentration. This cyclical 
change in CO2 concentration, or capnogram, is meas-
ured using an infrared sensor inserted between the ven-
tilator tubing and the endotracheal tube (Fig. 8.6). In 
normal lungs, the end-tidal CO2 closely mirrors PaCO2, 
and can be used to assess the adequacy of alveolar ven-
tilation. However, its use is limited as there may be 
marked discrepancies in the presence of lung disease or 
impaired pulmonary perfusion (e.g. due to hypovolae-
mia). In combination with the gas flow and respiratory 
cycle data from the ventilator, CO2 production and 
hence metabolic rate may be calculated. In clinical prac-
tice, end-tidal CO2 is used to confirm correct placement 
of an endotracheal tube, in the management of head 
injury, and during the transport of ventilated patients. 
Continuous measurement of end-tidal CO2 is important 
in the minute-to-minute monitoring of any patient ven-
tilated through an endotracheal tube or tracheostomy in 
the acute setting.
Transcutaneous PCO2
Monitors that measure transcutaneous PCO2 are now 
available with an earlobe probe that incorporates a pulse 
oximeter and CO2 electrode. The transcutaneous PCO2 
closely approximates to PaCO2 and gives continuous 
monitoring. This is useful in patients with no arterial 
cannula but who require close monitoring: for example, 
during ventilatory weaning (see below).
Fig. 8.6  Capnography traces for normal 
and pathological states. A  The normal 
capnogram represents the varying CO2 level 
throughout the breath cycle. A–B = baseline, 
B–C = expiratory upstroke, C–D = expiratory 
plateau, D = end-tidal concentration, 
D–E = inspiration. B  Loss of the capnograph 
can occur with loss of cardiac output, as well as 
airway displacement. (1 kPa = 7.5 mmHg) 
A
B
0
35
40
C
D
E
CO2 partial pressure
(mmHg)
Time
A
0
35
40
Time
B
Recognition of critical illness
8 
189
that oxygen requirements may subsequently increase or 
decrease. Early application of pulse oximeter monitoring 
is ideal, although this may not be reliable if the patient 
is peripherally shut down. Intubation, while often essen-
tial, may be hazardous in a patient with cardiorespira-
tory failure, and full monitoring and resuscitation 
facilities must be available.
Circulation
The carotid pulse should be sought in the collapsed or 
unconscious patient, but peripheral pulses checked in 
the conscious. The radial, brachial, foot and femoral 
pulses may disappear as shock progresses, and this indi-
cates the severity of circulatory compromise.
Venous access for the administration of drugs and/
or fluids is vital but often difficult in sick patients. The 
gauge of cannula needed is dictated by its purpose. 
Wide-bore cannulae are required for rapid fluid admin-
istration. Ideally, two 16G or larger cannulae should be 
inserted, one in each arm, in the severely hypovolaemic 
patient. If the two cannulae are of different sizes, the 
pulse oximeter should be placed on the same side as 
the larger one, and the BP cuff on the same side as the 
smaller one. This facilitates unimpeded volume resusci-
tation and uninterrupted oxygen saturation monitoring. 
Pressure infusors and blood warmers should be utilised 
for rapid, high-volume fluid resuscitation, particularly 
of blood products. An 18G cannula is adequate for drug 
administration.
Machine-derived cuff BP measurement is inaccurate 
at extremes of BP and in tachycardia, especially atrial 
fibrillation. Manual sphygmomanometer BP readings 
tend to be more accurate in hypotension. If severe hypo-
tension is not readily corrected with fluid, early consid-
eration should be given to arterial line insertion and 
vasoactive drug therapy.
Disability
Conscious level should be assessed using the Glasgow 
Coma Scale (GCS; see Box 26.15, p. 1160). Best eye, 
verbal and motor responses should be assessed and 
documented. Appropriate painful stimuli include supra-
orbital pressure and trapezius pinch. A score of 8 or less 
denotes coma with associated airway compromise and 
loss of airway protection, which necessitates interven-
tion. Focal neurological signs may indicate unilateral 
cerebral pathology. Abnormal pupil size, symmetry or 
reaction to light may indicate primary cerebral disease 
or global cerebral insults induced by drugs (e.g. opioids), 
hypoxia or hypoglycaemia.
Exposure, evidence and 
examination
‘Exposure’ indicates the need for targeted clinical exami-
nation, and ‘evidence’ may be gathered from any recent 
investigations, prescription or monitoring charts.
Clinical decision-making and referral  
to critical care
During the initial assessment and resuscitation, several 
decisions must be made (Box 8.5), but particularly 
whether referral to the critical care service is necessary. 
• How ill is the patient?
• How much help is needed and how quickly?
• Where would the patient be best managed?
• When should the patient be moved?
All critically ill patients require an appropriately trained 
escort during transfer
• What is required before transporting the patient?
ABCDE resuscitation ± endotracheal intubation and 
ventilation
Monitoring, including invasive arterial ± CVP
Volume resuscitation and vasoactive support
Imaging/diagnostic processes
• Is specialist involvement required?
E.g. transfer to specialist liver, burns, neurosurgical or 
cardiac surgical units or for specialised investigations
The urgency of specialist treatment needs balanced 
against the patient’s condition; it may be necessary to 
stabilise the patient in the ICU first
8.5  Clinical decisions in the critically ill
ICU
• Patients requiring/likely to require endotracheal intubation 
and invasive mechanical ventilatory support
• Patients requiring support of two or more organ systems (e.g. 
inotropes and haemofiltration)
• Patients with chronic impairment of one or more organ 
systems (e.g. COPD or severe ischaemic heart disease) who 
require support for acute reversible failure of another organ
HDU
• Patients requiring detailed observation or monitoring that 
cannot be provided at ward level
Direct arterial BP monitoring
CVP monitoring
Fluid balance
Neurological observations, regular GCS recording
• Patients requiring support for a single failing organ system, 
excluding invasive ventilatory support:
CPAP or NIV – see p. 193
Moderate inotropic or vasopressor support
Renal replacement therapy in an otherwise stable patient
• Step down from intensive care
(BP = blood pressure; CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; 
COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CVP = central venous 
pressure; GCS = Glasgow Coma Scale; NIV = non-invasive (mask) 
ventilation)
8.6  Admission criteria for intensive care (ICU) 
and high-dependency units (HDU)
This requires local knowledge about the clinical areas 
providing enhanced care, whether intermediate high-
dependency or advanced intensive care, and the mecha-
nism of referral.
•	 Intensive care units allow management of the sickest 
patients who require invasive ventilation, 
multimodal monitoring and multiple organ system 
support (Box 8.6).
•	 High-dependency care allows a greater degree of 
monitoring, physiological support and nursing/
medical input than the standard ward, for patients 
following major surgery, or for the septic patient 
requiring invasive haemodynamic monitoring and 
Critical illness
8 
190
•	 Anaphylactic: inappropriate vasodilatation triggered 
by an allergen (e.g. bee sting), often associated with 
endothelial disruption and capillary leak.
•	 Neurogenic: caused by major brain or spinal injury, 
which disrupts brainstem and neurogenic 
vasomotor control. High cervical cord trauma may 
result in disruption of the sympathetic outflow 
tracts, leading to inappropriate bradycardia due  
to a combination of loss of noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine)-mediated vasoconstriction and 
adrenaline (epinephrine)-mediated chronotropy. 
Guillain–Barré syndrome (p. 1224) involves the 
autonomic as well as the sensorimotor systems, 
which may result in periods of severe hypo- or 
hypertension.
Clinical assessment and complications
Clinical features depend on the primary pathophysiol-
ogy (p. 180). Hypovolaemic, cardiogenic and obstructive 
causes of circulatory failure produce the ‘classical’ image 
of shock with cold peripheries, reduced or absent 
peripheral pulses, weak central pulses and evidence 
of a low cardiac output. In early haemorrhagic shock, a 
narrowed pulse pressure, i.e. a raised diastolic (DBP) 
and reduced systolic (SBP) blood pressure, such as 
105/95 mmHg, indicates the combination of hypovolae-
mia (reduced stroke volume, hence SBP) and activation 
of the sympathetic nervous system, with noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine) inducing vasoconstriction and so 
raising the DBP.
In contrast, sepsis/SIRS and anaphylactic shock are 
usually associated with warm peripheries, bounding 
pulses and features of a high cardiac output. The BP 
pattern is again distinctive (e.g. 115/42 mmHg), with a 
low DBP in the early stages due to peripheral vasodilata-
tion, but a normal systolic BP, as the left ventricular 
afterload is reduced and stroke volume thus maintained, 
These patients are usually warm peripherally, but in 
more advanced septic or anaphylactic shock, SBP falls 
and the peripheries become cool. This is usually due to 
the hypovolaemia associated with capillary leak and 
will respond to fluid resuscitation. If there is no improve-
ment with this, myocardial depression may be present.
Neurogenic shock often results in vasodilated hypo-
tension with a paradoxically slow heart rate.
All forms of shock require early identification and 
treatment because, if inadequate regional tissue per-
fusion and cellular dysoxia persist, MOF will develop. 
Early institution of invasive haemodynamic monitoring 
is required.
Circulatory support
The primary goals (Box 8.7) are to:
•	 Restore global oxygen delivery (DO2) by ensuring 
adequate cardiac output.
•	 Maintain an MAP that ensures adequate perfusion 
of vital organs. The target pressure will be patient-
specific, depending on pre-morbid factors (e.g. 
hypertension or coronary artery disease), and may 
range from 60 to 90 mmHg.
The first objective is to ensure that an ‘appropriate’ 
ventricular preload is restored, initially by adequate 
volume resuscitation. Vasoactive drugs may then have 
to be considered.
circulatory support alone, or for the patient with 
respiratory failure manageable with non-invasive 
ventilation (NIV) or continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP).
The mechanism of referral to critical care varies 
between hospitals, and all clinical staff must be aware of 
the local system and how to access it. Many hospitals 
have medical emergency or outreach teams that facili-
tate this. A clear understanding of what is available in 
critical care and what is achievable allows early referral 
of appropriate patients, which will improve their sur-
vival and reduce length of stay. It prevents referral of 
patients who have no realistic prospect of meaningful 
survival, due to either the overwhelming nature of their 
acute condition or the lack of definitive therapy for the 
underlying disease process.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS/MANAGEMENT 
OF MAJOR ORGAN FAILURE
As the diagnosis and management of presenting prob-
lems take place simultaneously in critical care, these are 
described together.
Circulatory failure: ‘shock’
The defining feature of ‘shock’ is a level of oxygen deliv-
ery (DO2) that fails to meet the metabolic requirements 
of the tissues. ‘Shock’ is not synonymous with hypoten-
sion, which is often a late manifestation. The cardiac 
output and oxygen delivery may be critically low, even 
though the BP remains normal, and the underlying 
problem should be identified and treated before the BP 
falls. Objective markers of inadequate tissue oxygen 
delivery, such as increasing base deficit, elevated blood 
lactate and reduced urine output, can aid earlier identi-
fication of shock.
The causes of circulatory failure or ‘shock’ may be 
categorised as either low flow or stroke volume, or low 
peripheral arteriolar resistance (vasodilatation).
Low stroke volume
•	 Hypovolaemic: any condition provoking a major 
reduction in blood volume, e.g. internal or external 
haemorrhage, severe burns, salt and water 
depletion.
•	 Cardiogenic: severe cardiac impairment, e.g. 
myocardial infarction, acute mitral regurgitation. 
Subarachnoid haemorrhage may cause 
catecholamine-mediated myocardial stunning that 
can result in pulmonary oedema or cardiogenic 
shock.
•	 Obstructive: obstruction to blood flow around the 
circulation, e.g. major pulmonary embolism, cardiac 
tamponade, tension pneumothorax.
Vasodilatation
•	 Sepsis/SIRS: infection or other causes of a systemic 
inflammatory response that produce widespread 
endothelial damage with vasodilatation, 
arteriovenous shunting, microvascular occlusion, 
capillary leak and tissue oedema.
Presenting problems/Management of major organ failure
8 
191
•	 Control heart rate and rhythm. The optimum heart 
rate is usually between 90 and 110 beats per minute. 
Correction of low serum potassium and magnesium 
concentrations should be the first step in treating 
tachyarrhythmias in the critically ill. Atrial 
fibrillation is particularly common; intravenous 
amiodarone (300 mg over 30–60 minutes, followed 
by 900 mg over 24 hours) can be successful in 
controlling ventricular rate and in restoring and 
maintaining sinus rhythm. Other anti-arrhythmic 
agents are described on page 573.
The management of cardiac tamponade and pulmo-
nary embolism is described on pages 545 and 723, 
respectively. Circulatory support in the context of sepsis 
is described below.
Prognosis
If the precipitating cause and accompanying circulatory 
failure are dealt with promptly, before significant organ 
failure occurs (‘early’ shock), the prognosis is good. If 
not, there is progressive deterioration in organ function 
and MOF ensues (‘late’ shock). The mortality of MOF is 
high and increases with the number of organs that have 
failed, the duration of organ failure and the patient’s 
age. Failure of four or more organs is associated with a 
mortality of more than 80%.
Respiratory failure and acute 
respiratory distress syndrome
Respiratory failure may be the primary problem or 
could constitute a secondary complication (Box 8.9). The 
pattern of respiratory failure is classified using ABG 
analysis:
•	 type 1: hypoxaemia (PaO2 < 8 kPa (< 60 mmHg) 
when breathing air) without hypercapnia
•	 type 2: hypoxaemia with hypercapnia (PaCO2 
> 6.5 kPa (> 49 mmHg) ) due to alveolar 
hypoventilation.
Acute hypoxaemia results from an increase in 
ventilation–perfusion mismatch within the lung and this 
can be caused by almost any pulmonary disease. The 
most extreme form of mismatch is pulmonary shunting, 
which occurs when an area of lung is not ventilated at 
all – for example, due to collapse or consolidation.
Therapeutic options to optimise  
cardiac function
If the cardiac output is inadequate and myocardial 
contractility is poor, the available treatment options 
are to:
•	 Reduce afterload. Reduction can be achieved by using 
an arteriolar dilator (e.g. nitrates), but this may be 
limited by the consequent fall in systemic pressure. 
A counterpulsation intra-aortic balloon pump offers 
the ideal physiological treatment because it reduces 
left ventricular afterload while increasing cardiac 
output, diastolic pressure and coronary perfusion.  
It is particularly valuable in treating myocardial 
ischaemia.
•	 Increase preload. If there is significant impairment of 
myocardial contractility, giving fluids to increase 
filling pressures will only produce a small increase 
in stroke volume and cardiac output, and risks 
precipitating pulmonary oedema.
•	 Improve myocardial contractility. An inotrope may be 
required to ensure adequate cardiac output and 
peripheral blood flow sufficient to secure adequate 
oxygen delivery. Box 8.8 lists some characteristics of 
the commonly used vasoactive agents.
Correct hypoxaemia
• Oxygen therapy
• Consider ventilation
Intractable hypoxaemia
Hypercapnia: PaCO2 > 6.7 kPa (50 mmHg)
Respiratory distress
Impaired conscious level
Assess circulation
• Heart rate
• BP: direct arterial pressure
• CVP
• Peripheral perfusion
Optimise volume status
• Fluid challenge(s):
CVP < 6 mmHg: 250 mL 0.9% saline or colloid
CVP > 6 mmHg or poor ventricular function suspected: 
100 mL boluses and consider measuring cardiac output by 
PA catheter or oesophageal Doppler
Optimise haemoglobin concentration
• Transfuse red cells to maintain Hb at 70–90 g/L (or 100 g/L 
if ischaemic heart disease)
• Septic patients can become profoundly anaemic with 
crystalloid/colloid resuscitation due to haemodilution
Achieve target BP
• Use vasopressor/inotrope once hypovolaemia is  
corrected
Achieve adequate CO and DO2
• Inotropic agent if fluid alone is inadequate
Other measures
• Establish monitoring, including invasive measures, at once
• Trends in haemodynamics, ABG, H+, base deficit and lactate 
guide further treatment
8.7  Immediate management of 
circulatory collapse
Drug
Action
Vasoconstrictor
Inotrope
Chronotrope
Adrenaline 
(epinephrine)
++
++
+
Noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine)
++++
+
(+)
Dobutamine
*
++++
++
*In most patients dobutamine acts as a vasodilator but in some it causes 
vasoconstriction.
8.8  Actions of commonly used vasoactive agents
Critical illness
8 
192
Acute or chronic hypercapnia usually results from 
alveolar hypoventilation. Causes include:
•	 central depression of respiratory drive
•	 impaired nerve transmission between the central 
nervous system and muscle (especially the 
diaphragm)
•	 reduced chest wall movements (including 
diaphragmatic movements)
•	 reduced alveolar ventilation due to pathology 
within the lungs.
The primary respiratory conditions causing acute res-
piratory failure are detailed in Chapter 19. Critically ill 
patients may have both type 1 and 2 respiratory failure 
at some point, and the pattern and severity can change 
rapidly. Close monitoring and review are thus essential 
in order to decide which form of respiratory support is 
required, as this may change rapidly as the patient dete-
riorates and/or improves. Both the disease causing the 
illness and its effect on the patient’s physiology over time 
must be taken into consideration. A combination of clini-
cal examination and investigation helps to determine 
the most appropriate interventions (Box 8.10). The best 
method for assessing hypoxaemia is the ratio of the PaO2 
(measured by blood gas) to the fractional inspired 
oxygen delivered (PaO2/FiO2). This ‘PF’ ratio is lower, 
the more severe the disease. For example, a patient 
receiving 60% oxygen with a PaO2 of 10.0 kPa 
(75.2 mmHg) on blood gas has a PF ratio of 10.0/0.6 = 
16.7 kPa (125.6 mmHg).
Acute lung injury and the acute 
respiratory distress syndrome
A range of conditions (Box 8.11) can result in a diffuse 
acute inflammatory process in the lungs called acute 
lung injury (ALI); when severe (as defined by hypox­
aemia), this is termed the acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS; Box 8.12). Inflammation occurs 
throughout the lungs, affecting both endothelial and 
epithelial surfaces. Activated neutrophils are seques-
tered into the lungs and capillary permeability is 
increased, with damage to type I and II alveolar cells. 
Inhalation (direct)
• Aspiration of gastric 
contents
• Toxic gases/burn injury
• Pneumonia
• Blunt chest trauma
• Near-drowning
Blood-borne (indirect)
• Sepsis
• Necrotic tissue (particularly 
bowel)
• Multiple trauma
• Pancreatitis
• Cardiopulmonary bypass
• Drugs (heroin, barbiturates, 
thiazides)
• Severe burns
• Major transfusion reaction
• Anaphylaxis
• Fat embolism
• Carcinomatosis
• Obstetric crises (amniotic 
fluid embolus, eclampsia)
8.11  Conditions predisposing to ARDS
Respiratory pattern
• Inspiratory stridor: typically caused by partial airway 
obstruction
• Tachypnoea: often the first indicator of critical illness
• Rapid shallow breathing: indicates more severe respiratory 
failure
• Prolonged expiratory efforts: indicates severe bronchospasm
Conscious level
• Worsening drowsiness or agitation: indicates more severe 
respiratory failure as a result of hypoxaemia and/or 
hypercapnia
Pulse oximetry
• Oxygen saturations < 94%: indicate arterial hypoxaemia
• Failure to respond to supplemental oxygen therapy, 
especially FiO2 > 60%: indicates severe ventilation–perfusion 
mismatch and/or shunt
Arterial blood gases
• Calculate the PF ratio (see text): lower values indicate more 
severe disease
Imaging
• Chest X-ray, CT scan or chest ultrasound: information about 
the underlying pathology and treatable conditions, e.g. 
pleural effusion
8.10  How to assess respiratory failure
Type 1 respiratory failure
• Pneumonia
• Pulmonary oedema*
• Pulmonary embolism
• Pulmonary fibrosis
• ARDS*
• Aspiration
• Lung collapse*, e.g. retained 
secretions
• Asthma
• Pneumothorax
• Pulmonary contusion (blunt 
chest trauma)
Type 2 respiratory failure
• Reduced respiratory 
drive*, e.g. drug 
overdose, head injury
• Upper airway obstruction 
(oedema, infection, 
foreign body)
• Late severe acute asthma
• COPD
• Peripheral neuromuscular 
disease*, e.g. Guillain–Barré 
syndrome, myasthenia gravis
• Flail chest injury
• Exhaustion* (includes all type 
1 causes)
*Secondary complications of other conditions.
8.9  Common causes of respiratory failure in 
critically ill patients
(ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; COPD = chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease)
This results in exudation and accumulation of protein-
rich cellular fluid within alveoli and the formation 
of characteristic ‘hyaline membranes’. Local release of 
cytokines and chemokines by activated macrophages 
and neutrophils results in progressive recruitment of 
inflammatory cells. Secondary effects include loss of sur-
factant and impaired surfactant production.
The net effect is alveolar collapse and reduced lung 
compliance, which are most marked in dependent 
regions of the lung, where airspaces become fluid-filled 
(Fig. 8.7). The combination of loss of surfactant and fluid 
accumulation makes these areas difficult to ventilate, 
which results in hypoxaemia due to ventilation–
perfusion mismatch and increased pulmonary shunt. 
ALI and ARDS can be difficult to distinguish from fluid 
overload or cardiac failure.
Presenting problems/Management of major organ failure
8 
193
takes precedence. More detail on oxygen therapy is 
given on page 664.
Non-invasive respiratory support
Non-invasive respiratory support includes techniques 
that do not require sedation or an endotracheal or tra-
cheostomy tube. This helps preserve the patient’s respi-
ratory muscle activity and reduces complications such 
as nosocomial infection. It can be used to support 
selected patients with type 1 or 2 respiratory failure, but 
the patient’s conscious level must be adequate to ensure 
airway protection from aspiration. Non-invasive respi-
ratory support is classified as continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) alone or CPAP plus additional support, 
in the form of pressure applied to the breathing circuit 
during inspiration (non-invasive ventilation, or NIV).
CPAP therapy
CPAP therapy involves the application of a continuous 
positive airway pressure throughout the patient’s 
breathing cycle, typically between 5 and 10 cmH2O. 
CPAP recruits collapsed alveoli and can enhance clear-
ance of alveolar fluid. It is particularly effective for treat-
ing pulmonary atelectasis (which may be post-operative) 
and pulmonary oedema, and helps correct hypoxaemia 
in some patients with pneumonia, especially the immuno­
compromised. CPAP therapy is most effective in correct-
ing hypoxaemia in type 1 respiratory failure, but if 
it improves pulmonary compliance (by clearing fluid 
or improving lung volume), it can reduce the work of 
breathing and improve hypercapnia in type 2. However, 
many patients with the latter require NIV or invasive 
ventilation. CPAP therapy can be delivered using tight-
fitting facial masks, high-flow nasal cannulae, and hoods 
(Fig. 8.8). Usually, a CPAP mask is tried first, but differ-
ent systems can be trialled until the most comfortable 
for the patient is found. Patients must be cooperative, 
Respiratory support
The aims of respiratory support are to maintain the 
patency of the airway, correct hypoxaemia and hyper-
capnia, and reduce the work of breathing.
Oxygen therapy
Oxygen is given to ensure adequate arterial oxygenation 
(SpO2 > 90%), initially by facemask or nasal cannulae. 
The inspired oxygen concentration (FiO2) is adjusted, 
depending on pulse oximetry and ABG analysis. If this 
results in unacceptable hypercapnia, the patient requires 
some form of mechanical respiratory support. The risk 
of progressive hypercapnia in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who are depend-
ent on hypoxic drive has been overstated. Hypoxic cer-
ebral damage is irreversible, so the theoretical risks of 
oxygen toxicity are not relevant if the patient is acutely 
hypoxaemic, as the maintenance of cerebral oxygenation 
Fig. 8.7  Chest X-ray in acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS). Note bilateral lung infiltrates, pneumomediastinum, 
pneumothoraces with bilateral chest drains, surgical emphysema, and 
fractures of the ribs, right clavicle and left scapula. 
• Onset within 1 week of a known clinical insult, or new or 
worsening respiratory symptoms
• Bilateral opacities on chest X-ray, not fully explained by 
effusions, lobar/lung collapse or nodules
• Respiratory failure not fully explained by cardiac failure or 
fluid overload. Objective assessment (e.g. by 
echocardiography) must exclude hydrostatic oedema if no 
risk factor is present
• Impaired oxygenation:
Mild: 26.6 kPa (200 mmHg) < PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 39.9 kPa 
(300 mmHg) with PEEP or CPAP ≤ 5 cmH2O
Moderate: 13.3 kPa (100 mmHg) < PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 26.6 kPa 
(200 mmHg) with PEEP ≤ 5 cmH2O
Severe: PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 13.3 kPa (100 mmHg) with PEEP 
≤ 5 cmH2O
(CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; PEEP = positive end 
expiratory pressure – see text for explanation)
8.12  Berlin definition of ARDS
Fig. 8.8  CPAP delivery with a Castar hood. 
Critical illness
8 
194
able to protect their airway, and have the strength to 
breathe spontaneously and cough effectively. Failure to 
improve over 24–48 hours, or a further deterioration in 
conscious level or blood gases, indicates that invasive 
ventilation should be considered.
Non-invasive ventilation
Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) is ventilatory support by 
nasal or full facemask. It can be delivered by a simple 
bi-level (BiPAP) turbine ventilator, which delivers a 
higher pressure (approximately 15–25 cmH2O) for inspi-
ration and a lower pressure (4–10 cmH2O) to allow expi-
ration. If hypoxaemia is severe, a complex ICU ventilator 
is employed that allows higher oxygen concentrations to 
be administered. A simple breathing circuit with a leak 
rather than an expiratory valve is generally used, and 
ventilation can be spontaneous (triggered by the patient’s 
breaths) or timed (occurring at set intervals and/or fre-
quency). Systems that synchronise with the patient’s 
efforts are better tolerated and more effective. NIV is the 
first-line therapy in patients with type 2 respiratory 
failure secondary to acute exacerbation of COPD because 
it reduces the work of breathing and offloads the dia-
phragm, allowing it to recover strength. It should be 
initiated early, especially when severe respiratory acido-
sis and/or decreased consciousness secondary to hyper-
capnia are present. Unless there is an improvement in 
acidosis within 4–6 hours, invasive ventilation is indi-
cated. NIV can also be used to support selected patients 
with hypercapnia secondary to pulmonary oedema or 
pneumonia, or during weaning from invasive ventila-
tion, but its effectiveness in these conditions is less 
certain. As with mask CPAP, NIV requires the patient 
to be conscious and cooperative.
Emergency endotracheal intubation and 
mechanical ventilation
Many patients admitted to ICU require endotracheal 
intubation and mechanical ventilation, mostly for respi-
ratory failure (Boxes 8.13 and 8.14). The final decision to 
undertake these is based on clinical judgement rather 
than the results of ABGs in isolation. If possible, the 
patient’s relatives should be given the chance to visit 
prior to anaesthesia and intubation, as this may be the 
last opportunity they have to speak together.
In the conscious patient, intubation requires induc-
tion of anaesthesia and muscle relaxation, while in more 
• Protection of airway
• Respiratory arrest or rate < 8 breaths/min
• Tachypnoea > 35 beats/min
• Inability to tolerate oxygen mask/CPAP/NIV, e.g. agitation, 
confusion
• Removal of secretions
• Hypoxaemia (PaO2 < 8 kPa (< 60 mmHg); SpO2 < 90%) 
despite CPAP with FiO2 > 0.6
• Hypercapnia if conscious level is impaired or risk of raised 
intracranial pressure
• Worsening respiratory acidosis
• Vital capacity falling below 1.2 L in patients with 
neuromuscular disease
• Removing the work of breathing in exhausted patients
8.13  Indications for tracheal intubation and 
mechanical ventilation
obtunded patients, sedation alone may be adequate. 
Intubation can be hazardous in the critically ill patient, 
particularly if there is associated cardiovascular failure. 
Patients should be pre-oxygenated and cricoid pressure 
applied, with continuous monitoring of heart rate, 
ECG and BP (preferably invasively), together with cap-
nography (and subsequently a chest X-ray) to confirm 
correct endotracheal tube placement. Complications are 
common, and intubation is ideally performed in a criti-
cal care environment, or with expert assistance, resusci-
tation facilities and appropriate medication immediately 
available. Hypotension may follow sedation or anaes-
thesia due to the direct cardiovascular effects of the 
anaesthetic agent and loss of sympathetic drive. Positive 
pressure ventilation may compound this by increasing 
intrathoracic pressure, thereby reducing venous return 
and thus cardiac output.
Tracheostomy is usually performed electively when 
endotracheal intubation is likely to be required for more 
than 7–10 days (Box 8.15). The timing is determined by 
individual patient factors and clinical judgement. Tra-
cheostomy is usually carried out percutaneously in the 
ICU, to avoid transfer to an operating theatre. The 
passage of a smaller (4.5 mm internal diameter) ‘mini-
tracheostomy’ tube through the cricothyroid membrane 
is a useful technique for clearing airway secretions in 
spontaneously breathing patients with a poor cough 
effort, particularly in the HDU and in post-operative 
patients.
General considerations in the management 
of the ventilated/intubated patient
Modern ventilators allow enormous flexibility in the 
way ventilator support is provided. The terminology 
used to describe ventilation modes can be confusing, 
Post-operative
• After major abdominal or cardiac surgery
Respiratory failure
• ARDS
• Pneumonia
• COPD
• Acute severe asthma
• Aspiration
• Smoke inhalation, burns
Circulatory failure
• Low cardiac output: 
cardiogenic shock
• Pulmonary oedema
• Post-cardiac arrest
Neurological disease
• Coma of any cause
• Status epilepticus
• Drug overdose
• Respiratory muscle 
failure (see Box 8.9,  
p. 192)
• Head injury: to avoid 
hypoxaemia and hypercapnia, 
and reduce intracranial pressure
• Bulbar abnormalities causing 
risk of aspiration (e.g. stroke, 
myasthenia gravis)
Multiple trauma
8.14  Conditions requiring mechanical ventilation*
*Additional considerations:
Metabolic rate: ventilatory requirements rise as metabolic rate increases.
Nutritional reserve: low potassium or phosphate reduces respiratory muscle 
power.
Abdominal distension due to surgery or tense ascites: causes discomfort 
and splinting of the diaphragm, compromising spontaneous respiratory 
effort and promoting bilateral basal lung collapse.
Presenting problems/Management of major organ failure
8 
195
because of subtle differences between modes, and the 
use of different names by different manufacturers. 
Figure 8.9 gives a classification of the different types of 
invasive ventilation support, and Box 8.16 outlines the 
terminology used and the parameters that are set on any 
ventilator. The inspired gas should always be humidi-
fied and warmed, usually achieved with a heat and 
moisture exchanger, but occasionally with hot water 
humidification systems.
Initial settings
Following intubation, the ventilator is set to deliver a 
safe mandatory mode of ventilation that will achieve 
oxygenation and carbon dioxide clearance in the major-
ity of patients. Regular re-assessment of the patient’s 
parameters will show if modification is required. Hyper-
oxia is avoided, as it is associated with adverse 
outcomes.
Fig. 8.9  Types of invasive and non-invasive ventilatory 
support. (BiPAP = bi-level positive airway pressure; CMV = controlled 
mandatory ventilation; ET = endotracheal; IPPV = intermittent positive 
pressure ventilation; NIV = non-invasive ventilation; PSV = pressure 
support ventilation; SIMV = synchronised intermittent mandatory ventilation) 
Mechanical ventilation 
Non-invasive
IPPV
–ve pressure
Partial
support
Full
support
NIV
‘BiPAP’
Cuirass
Tank: 'iron lung'
Rocking bed
SIMV
PSV
CMV
Volume
control
Pressure
control
(BiPAP)
Invasive
(via ET or
tracheostomy tube)
+ve pressure
(via face or
nasal mask)
Advantages
• Patient comfort
• Improved oral hygiene
• Access for tracheal toilet
• Enables speech with cuff 
deflated and a speaking 
valve attached
• Earlier weaning and ICU 
discharge
• Reduced sedation 
requirement
• Reduces vocal cord 
damage
Disadvantages
• Immediate complications: 
hypoxia, haemorrhage
• Tracheostomy site infection
• Tracheal damage; late 
stenosis
8.15  Advantages and disadvantages of 
tracheostomy
Parameter
Setting
FiO2
Initially set to achieve SpO2 > 92% based on 
pulse oximetry
Subsequently adjusted to achieve PaO2 of 
8–12 kPa (60.2–90.2 mmHg) on ABGs
Positive 
end 
expiratory 
pressure 
(PEEP)
The pressure maintained by the ventilator at the 
end of expiration: important for recruiting and 
maintaining alveoli for gas exchange
Initially set at ~5 cmH2O, except in patients with 
severe gas trapping (e.g. acute asthma), but 
increased in patients with severe hypoxaemia
Tidal 
volume
Set low in ARDS to minimise pulmonary 
barotrauma and volutrauma
In patients with normal lungs, higher volumes 
are safe
Respiratory 
rate
Typically set at 12–15 breaths/min
Adjusted according to PaCO2 on ABGs to achieve 
adequate CO2 clearance
Mode of 
ventilation
The safest initial mode is SIMV (see text): 
synchronises breaths with efforts made by 
patient, but ventilates at the set rate and tidal 
volume in the absence of respiratory effort
Breath 
trigger
Initiates a breath in response to patient’s efforts, 
triggered by flow towards the patient on 
attempts to breathe
Set at the appropriate sensitivity for the patient
Inspired to 
expired 
time ratio 
(I–E ratio)
In most patients, the I–E ratio should be  
1 : 2 to 1 : 3
Sometimes altered in expiratory airway 
obstruction (e.g. lengthened in asthma) or 
difficult oxygenation (e.g. shortened or reversed 
in ARDS)
Alarms
Disconnection
Low or high tidal volumes
Low FiO2
Excessively high or low airway pressures
A range of other parameters can also be 
selected
Adjust default settings to optimise safety for the 
individual patient
8.16  Ventilator parameter settings on initiating 
mechanical ventilation
Mandatory modes of ventilation
Volume-controlled modes.  These are set to deliver a 
preset tidal volume at a set frequency to guarantee a 
specified minute ventilation. Synchronised intermittent 
mandatory ventilation (SIMV) is the most widely used, 
which also synchronises breaths with any efforts made 
by the patient. Volume-controlled modes will deliver the 
set volume, but the pressures generated in the patient’s 
lungs can be excessively high if the pulmonary compli-
ance is low – for example, in ARDS – thus precipitating 
lung barotrauma or volutrauma, which could cause 
pneumothorax.
Pressure-controlled modes.  These deliver a set pressure 
for a specified duration. Pressure-controlled ventilation 
(PCV) and bi-level positive airway pressure ventilation 
(BiPAP) are examples. The tidal and minute volumes 
achieved are determined by the pulmonary compliance; 
in patients with stiff lungs, only small tidal volumes may 
Critical illness
8 
196
Prone ventilation.  Oxygenation will often improve in 
patients turned on their front, as a result of improved 
lung recruitment and better ventilation–perfusion 
matching. Prone ventilation has not reduced mortality 
in controlled trials, but is a useful ‘rescue therapy’ in 
cases where oxygenation is difficult.
High-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV).  This 
uses a specialised ventilator to provide gas exchange 
with high-frequency oscillating gas movements (> 150/
min). Conventional breaths and tidal volumes are not 
set, but effective oxygenation and CO2 clearance are 
achieved by adjusting the frequency and power of the 
oscillations, and the mean airway pressure.
Nitric oxide.  Nitric oxide is a very short-acting pulmo-
nary vasodilator. When delivered to the airway, it 
improves blood flow to ventilated alveoli, thus improv-
ing ventilation–perfusion matching. Oxygenation can 
be improved markedly in some patients but there 
is evidence that this lasts for only 48 hours, and 
rebound effects can occur when it is withdrawn. No 
improvement in mortality has been shown in controlled 
trials. Its role is limited to rescue therapy when other 
interventions have failed, and it may be useful in patients 
with severe pulmonary hypertension.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy (ECMO). 
ECMO involves connecting the patient to an external 
bypass circuit. Oxygenation and CO2 clearance are 
achieved using a membrane oxygenator. The patient’s 
lungs are usually ‘rested’ and ventilation reduced to 
low levels. Advances in technology have dramatically 
improved the safety of these devices, although their use 
is restricted to specialised centres. Controlled trials indi-
cate improved survival in appropriately selected cases, 
and patients with severe ARDS should be considered for 
treatment.
Corticosteroids.  There is conflicting evidence regarding 
the use of steroids as anti-inflammatory agents in acute 
lung injury. Uncertainty remains about patient selection 
and the timing of therapy, and use of corticosteroids 
may be complicated by secondary infection and muscle 
weakness. However, they are often tried after 7–10 days 
of ARDS, if the patient remains severely unwell.
Weaning from respiratory support
Patients usually require most mechanical ventilation in 
the period following intubation when they are most 
unwell, following which support is gradually reduced 
as the underlying condition resolves and the patient is 
able to breathe with less assistance. This is the process 
of ‘weaning’ from ventilation. Sufficient support is pro-
vided to correct hypoxaemia and hypercapnia, but the 
level is decreased as quickly as possible to reduce the 
chance of secondary complications, such as infection and 
muscle weakness. Rapid weaning, often with reduction 
in sedation levels (see below), shortens length of ICU 
stay and improves patient outcomes. Patients who have 
required long-term ventilatory support for severe lung 
disease such as ARDS may be unable to sustain even a 
modest degree of respiratory work initially because of 
poor lung compliance, high work of breathing and res-
piratory muscle weakness. They require more prolonged 
weaning, until respiratory muscle strength improves.
Several criteria can be used to assess whether a 
patient is ready to start reducing respiratory support 
(Box 8.18). Approaches include:
be achieved, whereas in patients with normal compli-
ance, excessive volumes may result. An advantage of 
these modes is that airway pressures are controlled, but 
the effect on blood gases needs to be regularly assessed 
to identify changes in pulmonary compliance. Tidal 
volume is a useful safety alarm as it falls with increased 
resistance, such as with bronchospasm. In difficult-to-
ventilate cases, several modes can be attempted sequen-
tially to identify which is most effective.
Weaning or spontaneously breathing modes.  Most 
modern ventilators can detect whether a patient is 
making breathing efforts, and use a flow trigger to 
augment each breath. Assisting breathing with addi-
tional pressure is more comfortable than fixed tidal 
volumes and allows sedation to be reduced. The most 
common mode applies additional pressure during inspi-
ration, assisting the work of breathing and increasing 
tidal volume. The pressure is removed when the ventila-
tor detects an expiratory effort. These modes are usually 
called pressure support ventilation (PSV) or assisted 
spontaneous breathing (ASB).
Mixed modes.  Different modes can be applied simulta-
neously, tailored to meet individual requirements. For 
example, it is possible to specify a frequency of SIMV or 
PCV breaths, but also provide PSV for any additional 
efforts the patient makes.
Advanced ventilation strategies
In patients with severe acute lung disease, especially 
those resulting in reduced lung compliance such as 
ARDS, the ventilator can worsen lung injury as a result 
of overstretch and shearing forces in parts of the lung 
that continually open and collapse. The aim of advanced 
ventilation is to minimise further damage due to pres-
sure (barotrauma), volume stretch (volutrauma), and the 
additional inflammatory mediators released into the 
body from ongoing lung injury (biotrauma) (Box 8.17). 
Tidal volumes and airway pressures are kept as low 
as possible while achieving adequate oxygenation. 
In many cases, it is best to accept hypercapnia rather 
than apply higher pressure to clear CO2. Often, higher 
levels of positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) are 
required to achieve adequate alveolar recruitment and 
oxygenation.
Several other strategies can be used.
• Low tidal volumes (4–6 mL/kg ideal body weight) reduce 
mortality from ARDS.1
• High levels of PEEP should be avoided in patients with less 
severe ARDS, in whom it may be harmful. In severe ARDS, 
high level of PEEP to recruit the lungs and improve 
oxygenation may decrease mortality.2
• Early use of neuromuscular relaxing drugs to facilitate 
mechanical ventilation reduces mortality in severe ARDS.3
• Minimised fluid administration and accumulation reduce the 
duration of mechanical ventilation in ARDS.4
• 1ARDS Clinical Trials Network. N Engl J Med 2000; 342:1301–1308.
• 2Briel M, et al. JAMA 2010; 303:865–873.
• 3Papazian L, et al. N Engl J Med 2010; 363:1107–1116.
• 4ARDS Clinical Trials Network. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:2564–2575.
(PEEP = positive end-expiratory pressure)
8.17  Mechanical ventilation in ARDS
Presenting problems/Management of major organ failure
8 
197
illness. It requires investigation and early intervention 
to correct hypoxaemia, hypovolaemia, hypotension 
and renal hypoperfusion. Successful resuscitation is 
associated with restoration of good urine output, an 
improving acid–base balance and correction of plasma 
potassium, urea and creatinine.
Oliguria is an integral part of the normal stress 
response to major surgery, and care should be taken not 
to overfill the post-operative patient who has oliguria 
but is otherwise well from a cardiovascular and bio-
chemical point of view.
Renal support
Sepsis is frequently implicated in the development of 
AKI, and the source must be promptly identified and 
adequately treated. Obstruction of the renal tract (includ-
ing catheter blockage) should always be excluded and 
is most easily identified with abdominal ultrasound. 
It must be relieved at once. Acute glomerulonephritis 
and vasculitis must also be considered, and appropriate 
specialist referral, with investigations such as urine 
microscopy and immunopathological tests (p. 480), 
carried out early.
The mainstay of management is aggressive haemo­
dynamic resuscitation to achieve normovolaemia, normo­
tension and an appropriate cardiac output. There is little 
evidence that specific treatments aimed at inducing a 
diuresis, such as low-dose dopamine, furosemide or 
mannitol, have any renoprotective action or other benefit 
in restoring renal function.
If renal function cannot be restored following resus-
citation, renal replacement therapy (p. 488) is indicated 
(Box 8.20). The preferred renal replacement therapy in 
ICU patients is pumped venovenous haemofiltration. 
This is associated with fewer osmotic fluid shifts and 
hence greater haemodynamic stability than haemodialy-
sis. It is carried out using a double-lumen central venous 
catheter placed percutaneously. Haemofiltration should 
Spontaneous breathing trials (SBTs).  These involve 
removing all respiratory support, typically on a daily 
basis, and observing how long the patient is able to 
breathe unassisted. This is particularly effective when 
linked to sedation breaks. Signs of failure include rapid 
shallow breathing, hypoxaemia, rising PaCO2, sweating 
and agitation. Patients who pass an SBT are assessed for 
extubation.
Progressive reduction in pressure support ventilation.  
Progressive reduction in the PSV is applied for each 
breath over a period of hours or days, according to 
patient response. When patients are strong enough to 
achieve stable ABGs without distress while receiving 
minimal or no support, they are likely to be ready for 
extubation. This can take from several hours to many 
weeks, according to the severity of illness.
Weaning protocols.  The process of weaning is best 
undertaken as a continuous process. Protocols that 
empower nursing staff to initiate and progress weaning 
within agreed guidelines reduce ventilation times. 
Patients requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation 
typically require individualised weaning plans, with 
regular periods of training followed by rest, to enable 
respiratory muscles to regain strength.
The timing of extubation relies on clinical judgement. 
Patients must have stable ABGs with resolution of 
hypoxaemia and hypercapnia despite withdrawal of 
ventilator support. Conscious level must be adequate to 
protect the airway, comply with physiotherapy, and 
cough. The need for re-intubation following extubation 
is associated with poorer outcomes.
Acute kidney injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is defined as an abrupt and 
sustained decrease in kidney function (Box 8.19). AKI in 
the critically ill patient is often due to pre-renal problems 
such as hypovolaemia, hypotension and ischaemia 
resulting in reduced renal DO2. However, it may also be 
due to acute tubular necrosis (ATN, p. 479), which may 
result from ischaemia, or nephrotoxicity caused by 
chemical or bacterial toxins, or a combination of these. 
Potentially nephrotoxic drugs include non-steroidal anti- 
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor 
antagonists, radiological contrast media and some 
antibiotics.
Oliguria (< 0.5 mL/kg/hr for several hours) is an 
important early sign of systemic problems in critical 
• Has the original indication for mechanical ventilation 
resolved?
• Is the patient conscious and able to cough and protect his/
her airway?
• Is the circulation stable, without signs of cardiac failure or 
excessive fluid overload?
• Is gas exchange satisfactory (PaO2 > 10 kPa (> 75 mmHg) 
on FiO2 < 0.5; PaCO2 < 6 kPa (< 45 mmHg) )?
• Is analgesia adequate?
• Are any metabolic problems well controlled?
8.18  Factors to consider in deciding to wean and 
extubate a ventilated patient
An abrupt (within 48 hrs) decline in kidney function defined as:
• An absolute increase in serum creatinine of ≥ 26.4 µmol/L 
(0.3 mg/dL)
• A percentage increase in serum creatinine of ≥ 50% 
(1.5-fold from baseline)
• A reduction in urine output (documented oliguria of  
< 0.5 mL/kg for > 6 consecutive hrs)
*Mehta R, et al. http://ccforum.eom/content/11/2/R31.
8.19  Diagnostic criteria for acute kidney injury*
• Hyperkalaemia: potassium > 6 mmol/L despite medical 
treatment
• Fluid overload: pulmonary oedema
• Metabolic acidosis: H+ > 56 nmol/L (pH < 7.25)
• Uraemia:
Urea > 30–35 mmol/L (180–210 mg/dL)
Creatinine > 600 µmol/L (> 6.78 mg/dL)
• Drug removal in overdose
• Sepsis: tentative evidence for mediator removal
8.20  Indications for renal replacement therapy
Critical illness
8 
198
particularly high doses of vasoconstrictor agents, 
should be avoided.
•	 Transaminitis is most commonly due to drug 
toxicity: for example, antibiotics.
Gastrointestinal and  
hepatic support
Early institution of enteral nutrition is the most effective 
strategy for protecting the gut mucosa and providing 
nutritional support. The optimum use of enteral nutri-
tion involves simple protocols that initiate nutrition as 
early as possible, and progressively increase feeding 
volumes until nutritional targets are met. Current evi-
dence supports early enteral nutrition using standard 
feeds, with the addition of prokinetic agents such as 
metoclopramide or low-dose erythromycin when gastric 
aspirates are high. The evidence for early supplementa-
tion with total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is weak, and 
it is not routinely indicated until enteral feeding attempts 
have been unsuccessful for approximately 7 days. Nutri-
tional support is further considered on page 122.
Hyperglycaemia is common during critical illness 
and is associated with poor outcomes. Tight glycaemic 
control, using insulin infusions, has been studied in 
several controlled trials in the critically ill. The benefit 
was greatest in surgical patients at low risk of death, 
but the risk-to-benefit profile in the mixed critically ill 
population is uncertain. Inadvertent hypoglycaemia 
is associated with adverse patient outcomes. In most 
ICUs, the current target is for modestly elevated blood 
glucose concentrations: for example, 5.5–8 mmol/L 
(100–144 mg/dL).
Stress ulcer prophylaxis is best achieved with H2-
receptor antagonists (e.g. ranitidine), which are both safe 
and effective. Although stress ulcer bleeding is rare with 
modern resuscitation, evidence supports routine use in 
mechanically ventilated patients and those with renal 
failure or coagulopathy. H2-receptor antagonists are 
associated with an increased incidence of nosocomial 
pneumonia, and treatment should be stopped following 
extubation in the absence of other indications. With-
drawal can also be considered when full enteral nutri-
tion has been established, unless the patient has a history 
of peptic ulcer disease. Proton pump inhibitors are only 
required in upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to ulcer-
ation, and they should also be continued when the 
patient has been taking them long-term.
The management of liver failure is discussed on 
page 934.
Neurological failure (coma)
Impaired consciousness or coma is often an early feature 
of severe systemic illness (Box 8.21). Prompt assessment 
of consciousness level and management of airway, 
breathing and circulation are essential to prevent further 
brain injury, to allow diagnosis and to permit definitive 
treatment to be instituted. Any patient with confusion 
or reduced conscious level should have blood sugar 
measured and hypoglycaemia corrected.
Impairment of conscious level is graded using the 
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS, p. 1160), which is also used 
to monitor progress. A targeted neurological examina-
tion is very important. Pupil size and reaction to light, 
be continuous in the early phase of treatment. Intermit-
tent treatment may be used when the patient is recover-
ing from the primary insult and return of normal renal 
function is expected. Provided the precipitating cause 
can be successfully treated, renal failure due to ATN 
usually recovers between 5 days and several weeks later.
Survival rates from MOF, including AKI, have been 
around 50% for many years, but modern haemofiltra-
tion techniques are being shown to produce better 
outcomes.
Gastrointestinal and  
hepatic disturbance
Gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting 
and large nasogastric aspirates, may be the earliest signs 
of regional circulatory failure, and when associated with 
a tender, distended, silent abdomen, indicate that this is 
the probable site of the primary pathology. The gut has 
a rapid cell turnover rate and fasting alone can produce 
marked changes in mucosal structure and function. In 
hypovolaemia and frank shock states, splanchnic vaso-
constriction produces gut mucosal ischaemia, damaging 
the mucosal barrier and allowing toxins to enter the 
portal circulation and lymphatics. Splanchnic ischaemia 
may contribute to the progression of MOF, possibly 
as a source of bacteraemia or systemic inflammation. 
Manifestations of MOF within the gastrointestinal 
tract include loss of gastric acid production, erosive 
gastritis, stress ulceration, bleeding, ischaemia, pancrea-
titis and acalculous cholecystitis. These occur less fre-
quently when adequate circulatory resuscitation occurs 
early. Ischaemic bowel is difficult to diagnose in the 
critically ill patient, but in the context of otherwise 
unexplained lactic acidosis, hyperkalaemia and coagu-
lopathy, abdominal imaging by contrast-enhanced com-
puted tomography (CT) and laparotomy should be 
considered.
Three distinctive hepatic dysfunction syndromes can 
occur in the critically ill:
•	 Shock liver or ischaemic hepatitis results from extreme 
hepatic tissue hypoxia and is characterised by 
centrilobular hepatocellular necrosis. Transaminase 
levels are often massively raised (> 1000–5000 U/L) 
at an early stage, followed by moderate 
hyperbilirubinaemia (< 100 µmol/L or < 5.8 mg/
dL). There is often associated hypoglycaemia, 
coagulopathy and lactic acidosis. Following 
successful resuscitation, hepatic function generally 
returns to normal.
•	 Hyperbilirubinaemia (‘ICU jaundice’) frequently 
develops following trauma or sepsis, particularly  
if there is inadequate control of the inflammatory 
process. There is a marked rise in bilirubin 
(predominantly conjugated), but only mild 
elevation of transaminase and alkaline phosphatase. 
This results from failure of bilirubin transport 
within the liver and produces the histological 
appearance of intrahepatic cholestasis. Extrahepatic 
cholestasis must be excluded by abdominal 
ultrasound and potentially hepatotoxic drugs 
should be stopped. Treatment is non-specific and 
should include early institution of enteral feeding. 
Therapy that compromises splanchnic blood flow, 
Presenting problems/Management of major organ failure
8 
199
insults to the brain, such as hypoxaemia and hypoten-
sion, improves outcome. ICP rises in acute brain injury 
as a result of haematoma, contusions, oedema or ischae-
mic swelling. Raised ICP causes direct damage to the 
cerebral cortex and, as a result of downward pressure 
on the brainstem, indirect damage by reducing cerebral 
perfusion pressure, thereby threatening cerebral blood 
flow and oxygen delivery:
Cerebral perfusion pressure CPP
mean BP
ICP
(
)
=
-
ICP is measured by pressure transducers that are 
inserted directly into the brain tissue. The normal upper 
limit for ICP is 15 mmHg and management should be 
directed at keeping it below 20 mmHg (Box 8.22). Sus-
tained pressures of more than 30 mmHg are associated 
with a poor prognosis.
CPP should be maintained above 60 mmHg by 
ensuring adequate fluid replacement and, if necessary, 
by treating hypotension with a vasopressor such as 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine).
Complex neurological monitoring must be combined 
with frequent clinical assessment of GCS, pupil response 
to light, and focal neurological signs. The motor response 
to pain is an important prognostic sign. No response or 
extension of the upper limbs is associated with severe 
injury, and unless there is improvement within a few 
days, prognosis is very poor. A flexor response is 
encouraging and indicates that a good outcome is still 
possible.
Neurological complications in 
intensive care
Neurological complications may occur as a result of sys-
temic critical illness. Sepsis may be associated both with 
an encephalopathy characterised by delirium, and with 
cerebral oedema and loss of vasoregulation. Hypoten-
sion and coagulopathy may provoke cerebral infarction 
or haemorrhage. Neurological examination is very 
presence or absence of neck stiffness, focal neurological 
signs and evidence of other organ impairment should be 
noted. After cardiorespiratory stability is achieved, the 
cause of the coma must be sought from the history 
(family, witness, general practitioner), examination and 
investigation, particularly CT of brain. The possibility of 
drug overdose should always be considered.
Neurological support
A diverse range of neurological conditions require man-
agement in the ICU. These include not only the various 
causes of coma, but also spinal cord injury, peripheral 
neuromuscular disease and prolonged seizures. The 
goals are to:
•	 protect the airway, if necessary by endotracheal 
intubation
•	 provide respiratory support to correct hypoxaemia 
and hypercapnia
•	 treat circulatory problems, e.g. neurogenic 
pulmonary oedema in subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
autonomic disturbances in Guillain–Barré 
syndrome, and spinal shock following high spinal 
cord injuries
•	 manage acute brain injury with control of raised 
intracranial pressure (ICP)
•	 manage status epilepticus using anaesthetic agents 
such as thiopental or propofol.
The aim of management in acute brain injury is to 
optimise cerebral oxygen delivery by maintaining a 
normal arterial oxygen content and a cerebral perfusion 
pressure of more than 60 mmHg. Avoiding secondary 
Systemic causes
Cerebral hypoxia or hypercapnia
• Respiratory failure
Cerebral ischaemia
• Cardiac arrest
• Hypotension
Metabolic disturbance
• Diabetes mellitus
Hypoglycaemia
Ketoacidosis
Hyperosmolar coma
• Hyponatraemia
• Myxoedema coma
• Uraemia
• Hepatic failure
• Hypothermia
• Drugs
• Sepsis
Primary neurological causes
Trauma
• Cerebral contusion
• Extradural haematoma
• Subdural haematoma
Infection
• Cerebral abscess
• Encephalitis
• Meningitis
Cerebrovascular disease
• Intracerebral haemorrhage
• Brainstem infarction
• Subarachnoid haemorrhage
• Cerebral venous sinus 
thrombosis
Cerebral tumour
Epilepsy
Hydrocephalus
8.21  Causes of coma
• Prevent coughing with sedation, analgesia and occasionally 
paralysis
• Nurse with 30° head-up tilt and avoid excessive flexion of 
the head or pressure around the neck that may impair 
cerebral venous drainage
• Control epileptiform activity with appropriate anticonvulsant 
therapy: an electroencephalogram (EEG) may be necessary to 
ensure that this is achieved
• Maintain blood glucose between 5.5 and 8 mmol/L 
(99–144 mg/dL)
• Aim for a core body temperature of between 36 and 37°C
• Maintain sodium > 140 mmol/L using IV 0.9% saline
• Avoid volume depletion or overload
• Ventilate aiming to reduce the PaCO2 to 4–4.5 kPa 
(~30–34 mmHg) for the first 24 hrs
• Osmotic diuretic: mannitol 20% 100–200 mL (0.25–0.5 g/
kg), coupled with volume replacement
• Hypnotic infusion: thiopental, titrated to ‘burst suppression’ 
on EEG
• Surgery: drainage of haematoma or ventricles; lobectomy, 
decompressive craniectomy
8.22  Strategies to control intracranial pressure
Critical illness
8 
200
exaggerate the severity of the process. However, sepsis 
can affect healthy people at any age.
Box 8.24 gives the common sites of infection in criti-
cally ill patients and appropriate investigations to con-
sider. Any pathogen, including aerobic Gram-positive 
and negative bacteria, anaerobes and fungi, may cause 
sepsis but in nearly 45% of cases microbiological confir-
mation of the organism is lacking.
Any or all of the features of SIRS (see Box 8.2, p. 184) 
may be present, together with an obvious focus of infec-
tion, such as purulent sputum with chest X-ray shadow-
ing, or erythema around an intravenous line. However, 
severe sepsis may present with unexplained hypoten-
sion (i.e. septic shock), and the speed of onset may 
mimic a major pulmonary embolus or myocardial 
infarction.
Nosocomial infections are an increasing problem in 
critical care units. Risk factors are similar to those in Box 
8.23, but also include prolonged ICU stay, invasive ven-
tilation and stress ulcer prophylaxis with H2 antagonists. 
Cross-infection is a major concern, particularly with 
MRSA, multidrug-resistant Gram-negative organisms 
and Clostridium difficile. If cross-infection occurs fre-
quently, it should prompt a review of the unit’s infection 
difficult if patients are sedated or paralysed, and it is 
important to stop sedation regularly to re-assess their 
underlying level of consciousness. If there is evidence of 
a focal neurological deficit or a markedly declining level 
of consciousness, CT of brain should be performed.
Critical illness polyneuropathy is another potential 
complication in patients with sepsis and MOF. It is due 
to peripheral nerve axonal loss and can result in 
areflexia, gross muscle wasting and failure to wean from 
the ventilator, thus prolonging the duration of intensive 
care. Recovery can take many weeks.
Sepsis
Sepsis can occur in many clinical situations. It may be 
due to a primary infection (e.g. pneumonia) or it may be 
the result of clinical interventions for other conditions 
(e.g. immunosuppressive drugs, chemotherapy, inva-
sive lines). Patients who are in hospital are at increased 
risk of certain specific infections, such as meticillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Sepsis usually 
originates from a localised infection that progresses to 
an uncontrolled systemic response. It can rapidly lead 
to acute physiological deterioration with the risk of MOF 
and death. Early identification of sepsis and appropriate 
intervention with oxygen, fluids, antibiotics, and more 
advanced resuscitation where indicated, has been shown 
to improve survival.
The incidence of sepsis is thought to be increasing, 
possibly as a result of a growing elderly population, 
increased use of invasive surgery, higher bacterial resist-
ance, and greater numbers of immunocompromised 
patients. Important comorbidities and risk factors for 
sepsis are shown in Box 8.23. These conditions not only 
increase risk of development of sepsis but also can 
Sites of infection
Investigations and comments
Major
Intravenous lines (particularly 
central)
If the patient develops sepsis, replace any lines that have not been changed for > 4 days
Lungs
High risk of nosocomial pneumonia in intubated patients. After ICU stay > 3–4 days, particularly if 
antibiotics are given, the nasopharynx becomes colonised with Gram-negative bacteria, which 
migrate to the lower respiratory tract. Prophylaxis with parenteral and enteral antibiotics (selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract) reduces the incidence of nosocomial pneumonia
Abdomen
Consider intra-abdominal abscess or necrotic gut in patients who have had abdominal surgery
Pancreatitis, acute cholecystitis or perforated peptic ulcer may develop as a complication of critical 
illness. Ultrasound, CT, aspiration of collections of fluid/pus and laparotomy may be required
Urinary tract
Urine culture (but this is a relatively unusual source in unexplained sepsis)
Other
Heart valves
Transthoracic or transoesophageal echocardiogram
Meninges
Lumbar puncture after checking coagulation and platelet count
Joints and bones
X-ray, gallium or technetium white cell scan
Nasal sinuses, ears, 
retropharyngeal space
Clinical examination, plain X-ray, CT
Genitourinary tract (particularly 
post-partum)
PV examination, ultrasound
Gastrointestinal tract
PR examination, stool culture, Clostridium difficile toxin, sigmoidoscopy
8.24  Sites of infection in critically ill patients
• Diabetes mellitus
• Immunodeficiency
• Trauma
• Burns
• Alcohol and substance abuse
• Chronic disease (heart, 
lungs, kidneys, liver)
• Haematological disorders
• Recent surgery/invasive 
procedure
• Invasive lines: intravenous 
or arterial, urinary 
catheters, nasogastric 
tubes
8.23  Risk factors for sepsis
General principles of critical care management
8 
201
control policies (p. 145). Limiting antibiotic use helps to 
prevent the emergence of multidrug-resistant bacteria.
Management
Prompt resuscitation, with early cultures, administra-
tion of appropriate antibiotics and eradication of the 
source of infection (if necessary by surgical drainage), is 
required (Box 8.25). Antibiotics should have a spectrum 
wide enough to cover probable causative organisms, 
based on the likely site of infection, whether community-
acquired or nosocomial, previous antibiotic therapy and 
known local resistance patterns.
Other investigations required include:
•	 cultures of sputum, intravascular lines, urine and 
any wound discharge
•	 ABGs and coagulation profile
•	 urinalysis and chest X-ray.
Only 10% of ICU patients with a clinical diagnosis of 
‘septic’ shock will have positive blood cultures, due to 
prior antibiotic treatment and the fact that an inflamma-
tory state is not always due to infection. More specific 
investigations are driven by the history and examination 
(see Box 8.24).
The haemodynamic changes in septic shock are very 
variable and not specific for the Gram status of the 
infecting organism. The first feature is often tachypnoea 
and the early stages are frequently dominated by hypo-
tension with relative volume depletion due to vasodila-
tation. Sufficient intravenous fluid should be given to 
ensure that the intravascular volume is not the limiting 
factor in determining global oxygen delivery. The type 
of fluid that should be administered and what consti-
tutes ‘adequate’ volume resuscitation remain controver-
sial. The response to therapy is crucial when deciding 
this and is frequently unpredictable, so rigid protocols 
cannot be used. Depending on haemoglobin concentra-
tion, blood or synthetic colloid should be given as 
100–200 mL boluses to assess BP response to volume 
(see Fig. 8.2, p. 183).
Although ventricular function is frequently impaired, 
the characteristically low systemic vascular resistance 
(SVR) usually ensures a high cardiac output (once the 
patient is adequately volume-resuscitated), albeit with 
low BP.
The choice of the most appropriate vasoactive drug 
to use should be based on a full assessment of the circu-
lation and the different inotropic, dilating or constricting 
properties of these drugs (see Box 8.8, p. 191). In most 
cases, a vasoconstrictor such as noradrenaline (nor­
epinephrine) is necessary to increase SVR and BP, while 
an inotrope (dobutamine) may be necessary to maintain 
cardiac output. In the later stages of severe sepsis, the 
fundamental problem is at the microcirculatory level. 
Oxygen uptake and utilisation are impaired due to 
• Give high-concentration 
oxygen
• Take blood cultures
• Give intravenous antibiotics 
(appropriate to likely 
organism)
• Volume-resuscitate
• Measure Hb and lactate
• Measure urine output
• Control source of infection
8.25  Immediate management of severe sepsis
• Fever
• Sepsis
• Trauma
• Burns
• Sympathetic activation due 
to pain, shivering or agitation
• Surgery
• Drugs, e.g. β-blockers, 
amphetamines, tricyclics
• Nursing procedures, 
visitors or physiotherapy
8.26  Factors increasing the metabolic rate in 
critical illness
failure of the regional distribution of flow and direct 
cellular toxicity despite adequate global oxygen deliv-
ery. Tissue oxygenation may be improved and aerobic 
metabolism sustained by reducing demand, i.e. meta-
bolic rate (Box 8.26). This can be achieved with sedatives 
and muscle relaxants (see below).
Corticosteroids
Assessment of the pituitary–adrenal axis is difficult in 
the critically ill but in some series up to 30% of patients 
have adrenal insufficiency, as assessed by a short Syn-
acthen test (p. 778). Corticosteroid replacement therapy 
is controversial. Recent evidence suggests that, although 
it is associated with earlier resolution of shock, it has no 
effect on survival.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Also known as consumptive coagulopathy, dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an acquired 
disorder of haemostasis (p. 1055); it is common in criti-
cally ill patients and often heralds the onset of MOF. It 
is characterised by an increase in prothrombin time, 
partial thromboplastin time and fibrin degradation 
products, and a fall in platelets and fibrinogen. The clini-
cally dominant feature may be widespread bleeding 
from vascular access points, gastrointestinal tract, bron-
chial tree and surgical wound sites, or widespread 
microvascular and even macrovascular thrombosis. 
Management is supportive with infusions of fresh frozen 
plasma and platelets, while the underlying cause is 
treated.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CRITICAL 
CARE MANAGEMENT
Essential aspects of the management of critically ill 
patients on admission to the ICU are shown in Box 8.27.
• Handover from transferring team to ICU staff
• Full clinical assessment
• Ongoing resuscitation/stabilisation
• Establishment of monitoring
• Review of medical and social history
• Communication with and explanation to relatives
• Investigations to establish or confirm the definitive diagnosis
• Formulation and implementation of a management plan
8.27  Management of patients on admission 
to ICU
Critical illness
8 
202
damage. Excessive sedation is common in ICU patients, 
and is associated with longer ICU stays, a higher preva-
lence of delirium, prolonged requirement for mechani-
cal ventilation, and more ICU-acquired infections. The 
optimally sedated patient is comfortable and tolerates 
treatments, but is awake and lucid.
Sedation and analgesia are usually provided via con-
tinuous infusions of sedative and/or analgesic drugs. As 
many critically ill patients have impaired liver and renal 
function, the potential for drugs to accumulate is high 
and the patient’s sedation must be regularly monitored. 
The sedative agents used ideally have predictable short 
half-lives that are not affected by liver or renal impair-
ment. Short-acting intravenous agents, such as propofol, 
are usually employed. Analgesia can be provided using 
morphine infusions, but in patients with MOF, espe-
cially renal failure, active metabolites can accumulate. 
Opiates such as fentanyl or alfentanil, which are not 
renally metabolised or excreted, are commonly chosen.
Sedation is monitored via clinical sedation scales (Box 
8.28) that record responses to voice and physical stimu-
lation. Regular use of these to adjust sedation is associ-
ated with a shorter ICU stay. Many ICUs also have a 
daily ‘sedation break’, when all sedation is stopped in 
appropriate cases for a period, in order to re-assess the 
patient. This approach reduces the chance of over-
sedation and shortens ICU stay.
Muscle relaxants
Muscle relaxants are avoided whenever possible in ICU 
patients. Their use is associated with a higher prevalence 
of critical illness neuropathy and myopathy, resulting in 
muscle weakness. Sedation use also tends to be higher 
when muscle relaxants are employed. They are required 
to facilitate endotracheal intubation and to facilitate ven-
tilation in patients with critical oxygenation and/or poor 
Daily clinical management in the ICU
Regular clinical examination is essential to identify 
any changes in a patient’s condition. Detailed clinical 
examination is performed at least daily, with additional 
focused and systematic assessment on ward rounds at 
least twice daily. Ward rounds are also an opportunity 
to ensure the reliable application of evidence-based 
measures to reduce complications; the mnemonic FAST 
HUG provides a useful checklist of feeding, analgesia, 
sedation, thromboprophylaxis, head of bed elevation, 
ulcer prophylaxis, glucose control.
Patient review should include:
•	 Review of progress reports from nursing and 
medical staff, and any specialist opinions.
•	 Review of 24-hour charts.
•	 Examination: general (including skin, line sites, 
wounds etc.).
•	 System reviews:
Cardiovascular: haemodynamics, fluids and 
inotropes
Respiratory: ventilator settings and ABGs
Gastrointestinal: nutrition (calorie, protein intake, 
route), nasogastric aspirate and bowel function
Renal: urine output, overall fluid balance, urea 
and electrolytes, and renal replacement therapy
Neurological: sedation level, GCS and pupil 
responses.
•	 Laboratory results: haematology, coagulation and 
biochemistry.
•	 Microbiology: temperature, white blood count, line 
sites and other possible sources of infection, results 
of cultures, antibiotic therapy.
•	 Drug therapy: review with pharmacist, consider 
adverse effects and interactions, and identify drugs 
that can be discontinued. Medicines required for 
long-term conditions should be continued in the 
context of the acute illness. An accurate record of 
the patient’s usual medicines must be obtained.
•	 Imaging: review X-rays and other specialist 
investigations with radiologists.
•	 Monitoring: are all measures still required? In 
particular, remove central venous catheters, arterial 
lines and peripheral venous catheters as soon as no 
longer needed, in order to avoid infection.
•	 Management plan: formulate an integrated plan, 
with specific goals for each organ system and goals 
for the patient, e.g. mobilising out of bed. Involve 
the family in the patient’s care.
Sedation and analgesia
Intensive care is an extremely stressful experience for 
the patient, with pain, discomfort and anxiety related to 
endotracheal intubation, invasive monitoring and other 
procedures.
Most patients require sedation and analgesia to 
ensure comfort, relieve anxiety, and allow tolerance of 
an endotracheal tube, mechanical ventilation and inva-
sive procedures. Some conditions, especially severe 
neurological conditions that cause brain swelling and 
raised ICP, require deep sedation to reduce tissue 
oxygen requirements and protect organs from ischaemic 
Score
Term
Description
+4
Combative
Overtly combative, or violent or 
immediate danger to staff
+3
Very agitated
Pulls on/removes tubes or catheters, 
or aggressive to staff
+2
Agitated
Frequent non-purposeful movement 
or patient–ventilator dyssynchrony
+1
Restless
Anxious or apprehensive but no 
aggressive or vigorous movements
0
Alert and calm
−1
Drowsy
Not fully alert but sustained 
awakening (>10 secs) with eye 
opening/contact to voice
−2
Light sedation
Brief awakening (< 10 secs) with 
eye contact to voice
−3
Moderate 
sedation
Movement but no eye contact to 
voice
−4
Deep sedation
Movement to physical stimulation 
but no response to voice
−5
Unrousable
No response to voice or physical 
stimulation
8.28  Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS)
Discharge from intensive care
8 
203
or of surviving with a quality of life that he or she would 
value. In these situations, intensive care will only 
prolong the dying process and is therefore futile. When 
intensive support is withdrawn, management remains 
active and is aimed at allowing the patient to die with 
dignity and as free from distress as possible (p. 290). 
Patients’ views are paramount and increasing use is 
being made of advance directives or ‘living wills’. Com-
munication with the patient, if possible, and with the 
family, the referring clinicians, and between members of 
the critical care team is crucial (p. 165). Failure in this 
area causes stress and unrealistic expectations, damages 
working relations and leads to subsequent unhappiness, 
anger and litigation.
Brainstem death
Recent advances in the resuscitation and intensive care 
management of brain-injured patients have inevitably 
increased the survival of patients who remain ventilated 
on ICU, in whom progression of brain injury results in 
brainstem death. The preconditions for considering 
brainstem death and the criteria for establishing the 
diagnosis are listed on page 1160.
When the formal criteria for brainstem death are met, 
it is clearly inappropriate to continue supporting life 
with mechanical ventilation, and the possibility of organ 
donation should be considered. All intensive care clini-
cians have a responsibility to approach relatives to seek 
consent for organ donation, provided there is no contra­
indication to their use. This can be very difficult, but is 
easier if the patient carried an organ donor card or was 
registered with an organisation such as the UK Organ 
Donor Register. In the UK, each region has a team of 
specialist nurses in organ donation who provide help 
with the process and with care of the potential organ 
donor.
lung compliance. Patients with critically increased ICP 
often receive intravenous infusions of muscle relaxant 
drugs such as atracurium, to help control it and to 
prevent coughing and high intrathoracic pressures, 
which increase ICP.
Delirium
Delirium is extremely common in critically ill patients. 
It often becomes apparent as sedation is reduced and 
stopped. About 60–80% of patients have hypoactive 
delirium, which is often missed unless formal testing is 
undertaken. Between 5 and 10% of patients have agi-
tated delirium, and 10–20% a mixed pattern. Delirium 
of any type is associated with poorer outcome. Manage-
ment is focused on reducing or avoiding precipitating 
factors, such as benzodiazepines and metabolic dis­
turbances. Patients with agitated delirium should be 
managed with haloperidol in 2.5 mg increments, rather 
than additional sedatives. Some sedative drugs are asso-
ciated with a lower incidence of delirium, such as 
α2-adrenergic agonists (clonidine and dexmedetomi-
dine). These have a central sedative action and can be 
useful in difficult cases. There is no evidence that 
pharmacological interventions are useful as prophy­
laxis or in hypoactive delirium. Additional information 
about diagnosis and management of delirium is given 
on page 1161.
DISCHARGE FROM INTENSIVE CARE
Discharge is appropriate when the original indication 
for admission has resolved and the patient has suffi-
cient physiological reserve to continue recovery without 
the facilities of intensive care. Many ICUs and HDUs 
function as combined units, which allows stepdown to 
HDU care without a change of clinical team. Critically 
ill patients often have complex medical histories, multi-
ple ongoing medical problems, and family and social 
issues. Many also have the emotional problems associ-
ated with survival from a life-threatening event or 
illness. Discharge from the ICU is stressful for patients 
and families, and communication with the clinical team 
accepting responsibility is vital. A key issue is that 
nursing care changes from one-to-one or one-to-two to 
much lower staffing levels. Discharges from ICU/HDU 
to standard wards should take place within normal 
working hours to ensure adequate medical and nursing 
support and detailed handover, as discharge outside 
normal working hours (and early discharge) are associ-
ated with higher ICU re-admission rates and increased 
mortality.
The receiving team should be provided with a written 
summary, including relevant recent investigations, and 
the critical care team should remain available for advice. 
Many ICU teams provide an outreach service to furnish 
advice and ensure continuity. Irrespective of the reason 
for admission to the ICU, many patients suffer problems 
(Box 8.29). These can last from weeks to many months 
and require ongoing support and rehabilitation.
Withdrawal of intensive support
Withdrawal of support must be considered when it is 
clear that the patient has no realistic prospect of recovery 
Physical
• Fatigue: almost universal and can last for many weeks
• Breathlessness
• Muscle weakness: a combination of muscle wasting  
from inadequate nutritional intake, muscle breakdown 
associated with inflammation/infection, and damage to 
nerves and muscle associated with severe systemic  
illness (critical illness polyneuropathy and polymyopathy  
– p. 1230)
• Altered taste and poor appetite: can result in weight loss
• Joint stiffness
• Itch
• Hair loss
Psychological
• Anxiety
• Depression
• Traumatic memories: including delusional memories  
(often unpleasant), dreams, flashbacks and hyper- 
arousal. Worse in more severe and prolonged illness,  
more prolonged deep sedation and after delirium. Recovery 
occurs over weeks/months, but can persist and affect  
quality of life
8.29  Common problems after ICU discharge
Critical illness
8 
204
of ICUs. These allow a particular unit to evaluate its 
performance compared to the reference ICUs by calcu-
lating standardised mortality ratios (SMRs) for each 
diagnostic group, by dividing observed mortality by 
predicted mortality.
A value of unity indicates the same performance as 
the reference ICUs, while a value less than 1 indicates a 
better than predicted outcome. If a unit has a high SMR 
in a certain diagnostic category, it should prompt inves-
tigation into the management of patients with that diag-
nosis, in order to identify aspects of care that could be 
improved.
Further information
Websites
www.adqi.net Evidence-based appraisal and consensus 
recommendations for diagnosis, treatment and research in acute 
kidney injury.
www.esicm.org European Society of Intensive Care Medicine: 
guidelines, recommendations, consensus conference reports.
www.ics.ac.uk Intensive Care Society: clinical guidelines and 
standards for intensive care.
www.icudelirium.org Information on delirium and sedation in 
intensive care patients.
www.scottishintensivecare.org.uk/education/index.htm 
On-line tutorials, educational materials for learners and 
teaching support materials for educators.
www.sicsebm.org.uk Intensive care evidence-based medicine 
website. Reviews and critical appraisal of topics.
www.survivingsepsis.org Surviving Sepsis website.
• ICU demography: increasing numbers of critically ill older 
patients are admitted to the ICU; more than 50% of patients 
in many general ICUs are over 65 years old.
• Outcome: affected to some extent by age, as reflected in 
APACHE II, but age should not be used as the sole criterion 
for withholding or withdrawing ICU support.
• Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR): successful hospital 
discharge following in-hospital CPR is rare in patients  
over 70 years old in the presence of significant chronic 
disease.
• Functional independence: tends to be lost during an ICU 
stay and prolonged rehabilitation may subsequently be 
necessary.
• Specific problems:
Skin fragility and ulceration
Poor muscle strength: difficulty in weaning from ventilator 
and in mobilising
Delirium: compounded by sedatives and analgesics
High prevalence of underlying nutritional deficiency.
8.32  The critically ill older patient
• Comparison of the performance of different units
• Assessment of new therapies
• Assessment of changes in unit policies and management 
guidelines
• Measurement of the cost-effectiveness of care
8.31  Uses of critical care scoring systems
• Older age
• Significant pre-existing comorbidities, especially liver 
disease, severe cardiorespiratory disease, malignancy, 
immunosuppression and chronic renal failure
• Poor pre-existing nutritional state and/or general physical 
condition
• Higher illness severity at ICU admission, measured with the 
APACHE or SAPS score (see text)
• Worse or multiple acute organ failures during ICU (especially 
shock, respiratory failure and acute renal failure)
8.30  Factors associated with higher mortality 
from critical illness
OUTCOME OF INTENSIVE CARE
The measure used most widely to assess outcome from 
intensive care is mortality. Mortality is strongly influ-
enced by the case mix of an ICU (the type of patients 
and their illness severity at admission). Typically, about 
20% of ICU patients will die during their ICU stay 
despite treatment, and about 30% will die before leaving 
hospital. Some factors associated with higher mortality 
are shown in Box 8.30. Mortality in patients requiring 
HDU care is much lower. Many patients have pre-
existing illnesses prior to ICU admission, which, com-
bined with the effect of the illness that resulted in ICU 
admission and the subsequent complications, means 
that many who survive the ICU admission have reduced 
life expectancy compared to those of similar age in the 
general population. The long-term physical and psycho-
logical effects of critical illness can mean that surviving 
patients have a reduced quality of life for many months 
or years. Families often carry a heavy burden of care 
after critical illness. Many patients do not regain pre-
illness health and may be unable to work, resulting in 
economic and social hardship.
Scoring systems
Admission and discharge criteria vary between ICUs, so 
it is important to define the characteristics of the patients 
admitted (case mix) in order to assess the effects of the 
care provided on the outcome achieved. Two systems 
are widely used to measure severity of illness:
•	 ‘APACHE’ II: Acute Physiology Assessment and 
Chronic Health Evaluation
•	 ‘SAPS’ 2: Simplified Acute Physiology Score.
These scores include assessment of certain admission 
characteristics (e.g. age and pre-existing organ dys­
function) and a variety of routine physiological meas-
urements (e.g. temperature, BP, GCS) that reflect the 
response of the patient to his or her illness (Box 8.31). 
Patient age is included in many scoring systems (Box 
8.32). When combined with the admission diagnosis, 
scoring systems have been shown to correlate well with 
the risk of hospital death. Such outcome predictions can 
never be 100% accurate and should be viewed as only 
one of many factors to be considered when deciding 
whether or not further intervention is appropriate.
Predicted mortality figures by diagnosis have been 
calculated from large databases generated from a range 
205
9 
Comprehensive evaluation of the poisoned 
patient 206
Evaluation of the envenomed patient 207
General approach to the poisoned  
patient 208
Triage and resuscitation 208
Clinical assessment and  
investigations 209
Psychiatric assessment 210
General management 210
Poisoning by specific pharmaceutical  
agents 212
Analgesics 212
Antidepressants 213
Cardiovascular medications 214
Antimalarials 215
Iron 216
Antipsychotic drugs 216
Antidiabetic agents 216
Poisoning
Environmental poisoning and illness 223
Arsenism 223
Fluorosis 223
Substances less commonly taken in 
overdose 224
Envenoming 224
Venom 225
Venomous animals 225
Clinical effects 226
Management 226
S.H.L. Thomas
J. White
Drugs of misuse 216
Cannabis 216
Benzodiazepines 217
Stimulants and entactogens 217
Gammahydroxybutyrate and gamma 
butyrolactone 218
d-Lysergic acid diethylamide 218
Opioids 219
Body packers and body stuffers 219
Chemicals and pesticides 219
Carbon monoxide 219
Organophosphorus insecticides and nerve 
agents 220
Carbamate insecticides 222
Methanol and ethylene glycol 222
Aluminium and zinc phosphide 223
Poisoning
206
COMPREHENSIVE EVALUATION OF THE POISONED PATIENT
Movement and muscles
Tone, fasciculations,
myoclonus, tremor,
paralysis, ataxia
Chest
Evidence of aspiration,
bronchoconstriction
10
Reflexes
Tendon reflexes, plantar
responses
Eyes
Miosis or mydriasis
Diplopia or strabismus
Lacrimation
5
6
Skin
Temperature
Cyanosis
Flushing, sweating
Blisters, pressure areas,
piloerection, needle tracks,
evidence of self-harm
Chemical burns
8
Abdomen
Hepatic or epigastric
tenderness, ileus,
palpable bladder
7
4
Level of consciousness
Presence of seizures,
confusion, agitation
or psychosis
3
2
Psychiatric evaluation
Features of psychiatric
illness
Mental capacity
Mouth
Dry mouth, excessive
salivation
Airway, breathing,
circulation
Respiration rate,
oxygen saturation,
pulse, BP,
dysrhythmias
1
9
Self-cutting
Needle tracks
Chemical burn
Pinpoint pupil
Injected
conjunctiva
Insets (Self-cutting) From Douglas, et al. 2005; (Burn) www.firewiki.net; (Needle tracks) www.deep6inc.com; (Pupil) drugrecognition.com; (Conjunctiva) knol.
google.com – see p. 230. 
Taking a history  
in poisoning
• What toxin(s) have been taken 
and how much?
• What time were they taken and 
by what route?
• Has alcohol or any drug of 
misuse been taken as well?
• Obtain details from witnesses  
of the circumstances of the 
overdose (e.g. family, friends 
ambulance personnel)
• Ask the general practitioner for 
background and details of 
prescribed medication
• Assess suicide risk (full 
psychiatric evaluation  
when patient has physically 
recovered)
• Assess capacity to make 
decisions about accepting or 
refusing treatment
• Establish past medical history, 
drug history and allergies, social 
and family history
• Record all information carefully
Evaluation of the envenomed patient
207
Clinical signs of poisoning by pharmaceutical agents and drugs of misuse. 
Body temperature
Blood pressure
Cerebellar signs
Some anticonvulsants, alcohol
Phenothiazines, haloperidol,
metoclopramide
Extrapyramidal signs
Any CNS depressant drug or agent
(N.B. consider methaemoglobinaemia
caused by dapsone, amyl nitrite)
Cyanosis
Tachycardia or tachyarrhythmias: 
tricyclic antidepressants, theophylline,
digoxin, antihistamines
Bradycardia or bradyarrhythmias: 
digoxin, β-blockers, calcium channel
blockers, opioids
Heart rate
Needle tracks
Drugs of misuse: opioids etc.
Hyperthermia and sweating:
ecstasy, serotonin re-uptake inhibitors,
salicylates
Hypothermia: any CNS depressant
drug, opioids, chlorpromazine
Small: opioids, clonidine,
organophosphorus compounds
Large: tricyclic antidepressants,
amphetamines, cocaine
Reduced: opioids, benzodiazepines
Increased: salicylates
Paracetamol hepatotoxicity,
renal toxicity
Right upper quadrant /renal angle
tenderness
Epigastric tenderness
NSAIDs, salicylates
Rhabdomyolysis
 Amphetamines, caffeine
Hypotension: tricyclic
antidepressants, haloperidol
Hypertension: cocaine,
α-adrenoceptor agonists
Respiratory rate
Pupil size
EVALUATION OF THE ENVENOMED PATIENT
Taking a history  
in envenoming
• When was the patient exposed 
to a bite/sting?
• Was the organism causing it 
seen and what did it look like 
(size, colour)?
• What were the circumstances  
(on land, in water etc.)?
• Was there more than one bite/
sting?
• What first aid was used, when 
and for how long?
• What symptoms has the patient 
had (local and systemic)?
• Are there symptoms suggesting 
systemic envenoming (paralysis, 
myolysis, coagulopathy etc.)?
• Past medical history and 
medications?
• Past exposure to antivenom/
venom and allergies?
Bites showing puncture marks, blistering, 
bruising and bleeding.
 
Neurotoxic paralysis
• ‘Sleepy’ or drooping eyelids
• Difficulty swallowing, dysarthria and 
drooling
• Limb weakness
• Respiratory distress
Excitatory neurotoxicity
• Sweating, salivation, piloerection
• Tingling around mouth or tongue, 
muscle twitching
• Dyspnoea (pulmonary oedema)
Myolysis
• Muscle pain or weakness
Coagulopathy
• Blood oozing from bite site and/or 
gums
• Bruising
• Melaena, haematemesis
Local effects
• Pain, sweating, blistering,  
bruising etc.
Assessment of type and 
extent of envenoming
Poisoning
9
208
Acute poisoning is common, accounting for about 1% of 
hospital admissions in the UK. Common or otherwise 
important substances involved are shown in Box 9.1. In 
developed countries, the most frequent cause is intentional 
drug overdose in the context of self-harm and usually 
involves prescribed or ‘over-the-counter’ medicines. Acci-
dental poisoning is also common, especially in children 
and the elderly (Box 9.2). Toxicity also may occur as a 
result of alcohol or recreational substance use, or following 
occupational or environmental exposure. Poisoning is a 
major cause of death in young adults, but most deaths 
occur before patients reach medical attention, and mortal-
ity is much lower than 1% in those admitted to hospital.
In developing countries, the frequency of self-harm is 
more difficult to estimate. Household and agricultural 
products, such as pesticides and herbicides, are more 
freely available, are common sources of poisoning and 
are associated with a much higher case fatality. In China 
and South-east Asia, pesticides account for about 300 000 
suicides each year.
GENERAL APPROACH TO THE 
POISONED PATIENT
A general approach is shown on pages 206–207.
Fig. 9.1  Methods of external decontamination. 
Eye
Dermis
Eye irrigation
Remove contact lenses. Wash eyes thoroughly for at
least 15 minutes with normal saline or water. Remove
particles from palpebral fissures. If pain persists,
fluorescein drops and slit lamp examination for corneal
damage are essential
Direct eye contact
Removal of clothing/skin washing
Wash with copious amounts of soap and water for
chemical or pesticide exposures
Direct skin contact
Inoculation
Methods of preventing absorption or
enhancing elimination
Routes of exposure
to toxins
Triage and resuscitation
Patients who are seriously poisoned must be identified 
early so that appropriate management is not delayed. 
Triage involves:
• immediate assessment of vital signs
• identifying the poison(s) involved and obtaining 
adequate information about them
• identifying patients at risk of further attempts at 
self-harm and removing any remaining hazards.
Those with possible external contamination with chemi-
cal or environmental toxins should undergo appropriate 
decontamination (Fig. 9.1). Critically ill patients must be 
resuscitated (p. 180).
The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is commonly 
employed to assess conscious level, although it has not 
been specifically validated in poisoned patients. The 
AVPU (alert/verbal/painful/unresponsive) scale is also 
a rapid and simple method. An electrocardiogram (ECG) 
should be performed and cardiac monitoring instituted 
in all patients with cardiovascular features or where 
exposure to potentially cardiotoxic substances is sus-
pected. Patients who may need antidotes should be 
weighed when this is feasible, so that appropriate 
weight-related doses can be prescribed.
Substances that are unlikely to be toxic in humans 
should be identified so that inappropriate admission 
and intervention are avoided (Box 9.3).
In the UK
• Analgesics: paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs)
• Antidepressants: tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), selective 
serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and lithium
• Cardiovascular agents: β-blockers, calcium channel blockers 
and cardiac glycosides
• Drugs of misuse: opiates, benzodiazepines, stimulants  
(e.g. amphetamines, MDMA, cocaine)
• Carbon monoxide
• Alcohol
In South and South-east Asia
9.1  Important substances involved in poisoning
• Organophosphorus and 
carbamate insecticides
• Aluminium and zinc 
phosphide
• Oleander
• Snake venoms
• Antimalarial drugs: 
chloroquine
• Antidiabetic medication
• Aetiology: commonly results from accidental poisoning 
(e.g. due to confusion or dementia) or drug toxicity as a 
consequence of impaired renal or hepatic function or drug 
interaction. Toxic prescription medicines are more likely to 
be available.
• Psychiatric illness: self-harm is less common than in 
younger adults but more frequently associated with 
depression and other psychiatric illness, as well as chronic 
illness and pain. There is a higher risk of subsequent suicide.
• Severity of poisoning: increased morbidity and mortality 
result from reduced renal and hepatic function, reduced 
functional reserve, increased sensitivity to sedative agents 
and frequent comorbidity.
9.2  Poisoning in old age
General approach to the poisoned patient
9
209
Clinical assessment and investigations
History and examination are described on page 206. 
Occasionally, patients may be unaware or confused 
about what they have taken, or may exaggerate (or less 
commonly underestimate) the size of the overdose, but 
rarely mislead medical staff deliberately. In regions of 
the world where self-poisoning is illegal, patients may 
be reticent about giving a history.
Toxic causes of abnormal physical signs are shown 
on page 207. The patient may have a cluster of clinical 
features (‘toxidrome’) suggestive of poisoning with a 
particular drug type, e.g. anticholinergic, serotoninergic 
(see Box 9.11, p. 213), stimulant, sedative, opioid (see 
Box 9.12, p. 217) or cholinergic (see Box 9.14, p. 221) 
feature clusters. Poisoning is a common cause of coma, 
especially in younger people, but it is important to 
exclude other potential causes (p. 1159), unless the aeti-
ology is certain.
Urea, electrolytes and creatinine should be measured 
in all patients with suspected systemic poisoning. Arte-
rial blood gases should be checked in those with signifi-
cant respiratory or circulatory compromise, or when 
poisoning with substances likely to affect acid–base 
status is suspected (Box 9.4). Calculation of anion and 
osmolar gaps may help to inform diagnosis and man-
agement (Box 9.5).
For a limited number of specific substances, manage-
ment may be facilitated by measurement of the amount 
of toxin in the blood (Box 9.6). Qualitative urine screens 
for potential toxins, including near-patient testing kits, 
have a limited clinical role.
• Writing/educational materials
• Decorating products
• Cleaning/bathroom products (except dishwasher tablets, 
which are corrosive)
• Pharmaceuticals: oral contraceptives, most antibiotics (but 
not tetracyclines and antituberculous drugs), H2-blockers, 
proton pump inhibitors, emollients and other skin creams, 
baby lotion
• Miscellaneous: plasticine, silica gel, household plants,  
plant food
9.3  Substances of very low toxicity
Cause
Normal lactate*
High lactate
Toxic
Salicylates
Metformin
Methanol
Iron
Ethylene glycol
Cyanide
Paraldehyde
Sodium valproate
Carbon monoxide
Other
Renal failure
Ketoacidosis
Severe diarrhoea
Shock
*Unless circulatory shock is present, when it will be high in any case.
9.4  Causes of acidosis in the poisoned patient
Anion gap
Osmolal gap
Calculation
[Na+ + K+] − 
[Cl− + HCO3
−]
[Osm (measured)] [2 × 
Na + Urea + Glucose 
(all mmol/L)]1
Reference range
12–16 mmol/L
< 10 mOsm/kg
Common toxic 
causes of 
elevation2
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Salicylates
Iron
Cyanide
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
1Osm (measured) stands for measured osmolality. For non-SI units, 
the corresponding formula is [Osm (measured)] – [2 × Na (meq/L) + 
Urea/2.8 (mg/dL) + Glucose/18 (mg/dL)]. 
2Box 16.19 (p. 445) gives non-toxic causes.
9.5  Anion and osmolal gaps in poisoning
Organophosphates
• Plasma cholinesterase is reduced more rapidly but is less 
specific than red cell cholinesterase (p. 222)
• Antidote use should not be delayed pending results
Carboxyhaemoglobin
• > 20% indicates significant carbon monoxide exposure
Digoxin
• Therapeutic range usually 1–2 ng/mL (1.28–2.46 mmol/L)
• Concentrations > 4 ng/mL (5.12 mmol/L) usually associated 
with toxicity, especially with chronic poisoning
Ethanol
• Toxicity at concentrations > 1.8 g/L
Iron
• Take sample ≥ 4 hrs after overdose or if clinical signs of 
toxicity
• Concentrations > 5 mg/L suggest severe toxicity
Lithium
• Take sample ≥ 6 hrs after overdose or if clinical signs of 
toxicity
• Usual therapeutic range 0.4–1.0 mmol/L
Methaemoglobin
• Poisoning with nitrites, benzocaine, dapsone, chloroquine and 
aniline dyes is associated with methaemoglobinaemia
• Concentrations > 20% may require treatment with 
methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue)
Paracetamol
• Take sample ≥ 4 hrs after overdose
• Use nomogram to determine need for antidotal treatment 
(see Fig. 9.2, p. 212)
Salicylate
• Take sample ≥ 2 hrs (symptomatic patients) or 4 hrs 
(asymptomatic patients) after overdose
• Concentrations > 500 mg/L suggest serious toxicity
• Repeat after 2 hrs if severe toxicity is suspected
Theophylline
• Take sample ≥ 4 hrs after overdose or if clinical signs of 
toxicity
• Repeat after 2 hrs if severe toxicity is suspected
• Concentrations > 60 mg/L suggest severe toxicity
9.6  Laboratory analysis in poisoning
Poisoning
9
210
Psychiatric assessment
All patients presenting with deliberate drug overdose 
should undergo psychiatric evaluation by a health pro-
fessional with appropriate training prior to discharge 
(p. 238). This should take place once the patient has 
recovered from any features of poisoning, unless there 
is an urgent issue, such as uncertainty about their capac-
ity to decline medical treatment.
General management
Patients presenting with eye/skin contamination should 
undergo local decontamination procedures (see Fig. 9.1).
Gastrointestinal decontamination
Patients who have ingested potentially life-threatening 
quantities of toxins may be considered for gastrointesti-
nal decontamination if poisoning has been recent (Box 
9.7). Induction of emesis using ipecacuanha is no longer 
recommended.
Activated charcoal
Given orally as slurry, activated charcoal absorbs toxins 
in the bowel as a result of its large surface area. If given 
sufficiently early, it can prevent absorption of an impor-
tant proportion of the ingested dose of toxin. Efficacy 
decreases with time and current guidelines do not advo-
cate use more than 1 hour after overdose in most circum-
stances (see Box 9.7). However, use after a longer interval 
may be reasonable when a delayed-release preparation 
has been taken or when gastric emptying may be 
delayed. Some toxins do not bind to activated charcoal 
(Box 9.8) so it will not affect their absorption. In patients 
with impaired swallowing or a reduced level of con-
sciousness, activated charcoal, even via a nasogastric 
tube, carries a risk of aspiration pneumonitis, which can 
be reduced (but not eliminated) by protecting the airway 
with a cuffed endotracheal tube.
Medicines
• Iron
• Lithium
Chemicals
• Acids*
• Alkalis*
• Ethanol
• Ethylene glycol
• Mercury
• Methanol
• Petroleum distillates*
*Gastric lavage contraindicated.
9.8  Substances poorly adsorbed 
by activated charcoal
Multiple doses of oral activated charcoal (50 g 6 times 
daily in an adult) may enhance the elimination of some 
drugs at any time after poisoning and are recommended 
for serious poisoning with some substances (see Box 
9.7). This interrupts enterohepatic circulation or reduces 
the concentration of free drug in the gut lumen, to the 
extent that drug diffuses from the blood back into the 
bowel to be absorbed on to the charcoal: so-called ‘gas-
trointestinal dialysis’. A laxative is generally given with 
the charcoal to reduce the risk of constipation or intesti-
nal obstruction by charcoal ‘briquette’ formation in the 
gut lumen.
Evidence suggests that single or multiple doses of 
activated charcoal do not improve clinical outcomes 
after poisoning with pesticides or oleander.
Gastric aspiration and lavage
Gastric aspiration and/or lavage is very infrequently 
indicated in acute poisoning, as it is no more effective 
than activated charcoal and complications are common, 
especially aspiration. Use may be justified for life-
threatening overdoses of some substances that are not 
absorbed by activated charcoal (see Box 9.8).
Whole bowel irrigation
This is occasionally indicated to enhance the elimination 
of ingested packets of illicit drugs or slow-release tablets 
such as iron and lithium that are not absorbed by acti-
vated charcoal. It involves the administration of large 
quantities of osmotically balanced polyethylene glycol 
and electrolyte solution (1–2 L/hr for an adult), usually 
by a nasogastric tube, until the rectal effluent is clear. 
Contraindications include inadequate airway protec-
tion, haemodynamic instability, gastrointestinal haem-
orrhage, obstruction or ileus. Whole bowel irrigation 
may precipitate nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain 
and electrolyte disturbances.
Urinary alkalinisation
Urinary excretion of weak acids and bases is affected by 
urinary pH, which changes the extent to which they are 
ionised. Highly ionised molecules pass poorly through 
lipid membranes and therefore little tubular reabsorp-
tion occurs and urinary excretion is increased. If the 
urine is alkalinised (pH > 7.5) by the administration of 
sodium bicarbonate (e.g. 1.5 L of 1.26% sodium bicarbo-
nate over 2 hrs), weak acids (e.g. salicylates, methotrex-
ate and the herbicides 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid 
and mecoprop) are highly ionised, resulting in enhanced 
urinary excretion.
‘Single-dose activated charcoal may be considered if a patient 
has ingested a potentially toxic amount of a poison (known to be 
adsorbed to charcoal) up to 1 hr previously.’1
‘Multiple-dose activated charcoal should be considered only if a 
patient has ingested a life-threatening amount of carbamazepine, 
dapsone, phenobarbital, quinine or theophylline.’2
‘Gastric lavage should not be employed routinely, if ever, in the 
management of poisoned patients.’3
‘Whole bowel irrigation should be considered for:
• poisoning with sustained-release or emetic-coated drugs
• patients who have ingested substantial amounts of iron (as 
morbidity is high and other options are limited)
• removal of ingested packets of illicit drugs.
• American Academy of Clinical Toxicology and European Association of Poison 
Centres and Clinical Toxicologists Joint Position Statements on Gastric 
Decontamination Methods:
• 
1Clin Toxicol 2005; 43:61–87.
• 
2Clin Toxicol 1999; 37:731–751.
• 
3Clin Toxicol 2004; 42:933–943.
9.7  Use of gastric decontamination methods
• 
4J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004; 
42:843–42854.
General approach to the poisoned patient
9
211
Urinary alkalinisation is currently recommended for 
patients with clinically significant salicylate poisoning 
when the criteria for haemodialysis are not met (see 
below). It is also sometimes used for poisoning with 
methotrexate. Complications include alkalaemia, hypo­
kalaemia and occasionally alkalotic tetany (p. 447). 
Hypocalcaemia may occur but is rare.
Haemodialysis and haemoperfusion
These techniques can enhance the elimination of poisons 
that have a small volume of distribution and a long half-
life after overdose, and are appropriate when poisoning 
is sufficiently severe to justify invasive elimination 
methods. The toxin must be small enough to cross the 
dialysis membrane (haemodialysis) or must bind to 
activated charcoal (haemoperfusion) (Box 9.9). Haemo-
dialysis may also correct acid–base and metabolic dis-
turbances associated with poisoning (p. 209).
Lipid emulsion therapy
Lipid emulsion therapy, or ‘lipid rescue’, is being used 
increasingly for the management of poisoning with 
lipid-soluble agents, such as local anaesthetics, tricyclic 
antidepressants, calcium channel blockers and lipid-
soluble β-blockers such as propranolol. It involves 
intravenous infusion of 20% lipid emulsion (e.g. Intra­
lipid®) at an initial dose of 1.5 mL/kg, followed by a 
continued infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min until there is 
clinical improvement. It is thought that lipid-soluble 
toxins partition into the intravenous lipid, reducing 
target tissue concentrations. The elevated myocardial 
concentration of free fatty acid induced by Intralipid 
administration may also have beneficial effects on myo-
cardial metabolism and performance by counteracting 
the inhibition of myocardial fatty acid oxidation pro-
duced by local anaesthetics and some other cardiotoxins. 
This reverses cardiac depression by enabling increased 
ATP synthesis and energy production. Animal studies 
have suggested efficacy and case reports of use in human 
poisoning have also been encouraging, with recovery of 
circulatory collapse reported in cases where other treat-
ment modalities have been unsuccessful. No controlled 
trials of this technique have been performed, however, 
and as a result, its efficacy remains uncertain.
Haemodialysis
• Ethylene glycol
• Isopropanol
• Methanol
• Salicylates
• Sodium valproate
• Lithium
Haemoperfusion
• Theophylline
• Phenytoin
• Carbamazepine
• Phenobarbital
• Amobarbital
9.9  Poisons effectively eliminated by 
haemodialysis or haemoperfusion
Examples of causative agents
Management
Coma
Sedative agents
Appropriate airway protection and ventilatory support
Pressure area and bladder care
Identification and treatment of aspiration pneumonia
Seizures
NSAIDs
Anticonvulsants
TCAs
Theophylline
Appropriate airway and ventilatory support
IV benzodiazepine (e.g. diazepam 10–20 mg, lorazepam 
2–4 mg)
Correction of hypoxia, acid–base and metabolic abnormalities
Acute dystonias
Typical antipsychotics
Metoclopramide
Procyclidine, benzatropine or diazepam
Hypotension
Due to vasodilatation
Vasodilator antihypertensives
Anticholinergic agents
TCAs
IV fluids
Vasopressors (rarely indicated; p. 191)
Due to myocardial 
suppression
β-blockers
Calcium channel blockers
TCAs
Optimisation of volume status
Inotropic agents (p. 191)
Ventricular tachycardia
Monomorphic, associated 
with QRS prolongation
Sodium channel blockers
Correction of electrolyte and acid–base abnormalities and 
hypoxia
Sodium bicarbonate
Torsades de pointes, 
associated with QTc 
prolongation
Anti-arrhythmic drugs (quinidine, 
amiodarone, sotalol)
Antimalarials
Organophosphate insecticides
Antipsychotic agents
Antidepressants
Antibiotics (erythromycin)
Magnesium sulphate, 2 g IV over 1–2 mins, repeated if 
necessary
9.10  Complications of poisoning and their management
Poisoning
9
212
Supportive care
For most poisons, antidotes and methods to accelerate 
elimination are inappropriate, unavailable or incom-
pletely effective. Outcome is dependent on appropriate 
nursing and supportive care, and on treatment of com-
plications (Box 9.10). Patients should be monitored care-
fully until the effects of any toxins have dissipated.
Antidotes
Antidotes are available for some poisons and work by a 
variety of mechanisms: for example, by specific antago-
nism (isoprenaline for β-blockers), chelation (desfer­
rioxamine for iron) or reduction (methylene blue for 
dapsone). The use of some antidotes is described in the 
management of specific poisons below.
POISONING BY SPECIFIC 
PHARMACEUTICAL AGENTS
Analgesics
Paracetamol
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is the drug most com-
monly used in overdose in the UK. Toxicity results from 
formation of an intermediate reactive metabolite that 
binds covalently to cellular proteins, causing cell death. 
This results in hepatic and occasionally renal failure. In 
therapeutic doses, the toxic intermediate metabolite is 
detoxified in reactions requiring glutathione, but in 
overdose, glutathione reserves become exhausted.
Management
Management is summarised in Figure 9.2. Activated 
charcoal may be used in patients presenting within 
1 hour. Antidotes for paracetamol act by replenishing 
hepatic glutathione and should be administered to all 
patients with paracetamol concentrations above the 
‘treatment line’ provided on paracetamol poisoning 
nomograms. Acetylcysteine given intravenously (or 
orally in some countries) is highly efficacious if admin-
istered within 8 hours of the overdose. However, since 
efficacy declines thereafter, administration should not 
be delayed in patients presenting after 8 hours to await 
a paracetamol blood concentration result. The antidote 
can be stopped if the paracetamol concentration is 
shown to be below the nomogram treatment line.
The most important adverse effect of acetylcysteine 
is related to dose-related histamine release, the ‘anaphy-
lactoid’ reaction, which causes itching and urticaria, 
and in occasional severe cases, bronchospasm and 
hypotension. Most cases can be managed by temporary 
discontinuation of acetylcysteine and administration 
of an antihistamine.
An alternative antidote is methionine 2.5 g orally 
(adult dose) every 4 hours to a total of 4 doses, but this 
is less effective, especially after delayed presentation. If 
a patient presents more than 15 hours after ingestion, 
liver function tests, prothrombin time (or international 
normalised ratio – INR), renal function tests and a 
venous bicarbonate should be measured, the antidote 
started, and a poisons information centre or local liver 
unit contacted for advice if results are abnormal. An 
Fig. 9.2  The management of a paracetamol overdose. 
4
12
Plasma paracetamol
concentration (mg/L)
If the paracetamol level is above the
treatment line, start N-acetylcysteine
150 mg/kg
50 mg/kg
100 mg/kg
Check renal
and liver 
function tests
and
prothrombin
time or INR
1
1 hr
5 hrs
21 hrs
Measure paracetamol
concentration after at least
4 hrs have elapsed and
 plot on nomogram
Significant paracetamol
overdose (e.g. > 75 mg/kg
body weight)
Time since ingestion (hrs)
100 mg
200 mg
arterial blood gas sample should be taken in patients 
with severe liver function abnormalities; metabolic aci-
dosis indicates severe poisoning. Liver transplantation 
should be considered in individuals who develop life-
threatening liver failure due to paracetamol poisoning 
(p. 932).
If multiple ingestions of paracetamol have taken 
place over several hours or days (i.e. a staggered over-
dose), acetylcysteine may be indicated. Recommended 
thresholds for treatment vary between countries.
Salicylates (aspirin)
Clinical features
Salicylate overdose commonly causes nausea, vomiting, 
sweating, tinnitus and deafness. Direct stimulation of 
the respiratory centre produces hyperventilation and res­
piratory alkalosis. Peripheral vasodilatation with bound-
ing pulses and profuse sweating occurs in moderately 
severe poisoning. Serious salicylate poisoning is associ-
ated with metabolic acidosis, hypoprothrombinaemia, 
hyperglycaemia, hyperpyrexia, renal failure, pulmonary 
oedema, shock and cerebral oedema. Agitation, confu-
sion, coma and fits may occur, especially in children. 
Toxicity is enhanced by acidosis, which increases sali-
cylate transfer across the blood–brain barrier.
Poisoning by specific pharmaceutical agents
9
213
Management
Activated charcoal should be administered if the patient 
presents within 1 hour. All patients with possible TCA 
overdose should have a 12-lead ECG and ongoing 
cardiac monitoring for at least 6 hours. Prolongation 
of the QRS interval (especially if > 0.16 s) indicates 
severe sodium channel blockade and is associated with 
an increased risk of arrhythmia (Fig. 9.3). QT interval 
prolongation may also occur. Arterial blood gases 
should be measured in suspected severe poisoning.
In patients with arrhythmias, significant QRS or QT 
prolongation or acidosis, intravenous sodium bicarbo-
nate (50 mL of 8.4% solution) should be administered 
and repeated to correct pH. The correction of the acido-
sis and the sodium loading that result is often associated 
with rapid improvement in ECG features and arrhyth-
mias. Hypoxia and electrolyte abnormalities should 
also be corrected. Anti-arrhythmic drugs should only 
be given on specialist advice. Prolonged convulsions 
should be treated with intravenous benzodiazepines 
(see Box 9.10). There is anecdotal evidence of benefit 
Management
Activated charcoal should be administered if the patient 
presents within 1 hour. Multiple doses of activated char-
coal may enhance salicylate elimination but currently 
are not routinely recommended.
The plasma salicylate concentration should be meas-
ured at least 2 (in symptomatic patients) or 4 hours 
(asymptomatic patients) after overdose and repeated 
in suspected serious poisoning, since concentrations 
may continue to rise some hours after overdose. In 
adults, concentrations above 500 mg/L and 700 mg/L 
suggest serious and life-threatening poisoning respec-
tively, although clinical status is more important than 
the salicylate concentration in assessing severity.
Dehydration should be corrected carefully, as there is 
a risk of pulmonary oedema, and metabolic acidosis 
should be identified and treated with intravenous 
sodium bicarbonate (8.4%), once plasma potassium has 
been corrected. Urinary alkalinisation is indicated for 
adults with salicylate concentrations above 500 mg/L.
Haemodialysis is very effective at removing sali-
cylate and correcting acid–base and fluid balance 
abnormalities, and should be considered when serum 
concentrations are above 700 mg/L in adults with severe 
toxic features, or when there is renal failure, pulmonary 
oedema, coma, convulsions or refractory acidosis.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs
Clinical features
Overdose of most non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) usually causes little more than minor 
abdominal discomfort, vomiting and/or diarrhoea, 
but convulsions can occur occasionally, especially with 
mefenamic acid. Coma, prolonged seizures, apnoea, 
liver dysfunction and renal failure can occur after sub-
stantial overdose but are rare. Features of toxicity are 
unlikely to develop in patients who are asymptomatic 
more than 6 hours after overdose.
Management
Electrolytes, liver function tests and a full blood count 
should be checked in all but the most trivial cases. Acti-
vated charcoal may be given if the patient presents suf-
ficiently early. Symptomatic treatment for nausea and 
gastrointestinal irritation may be necessary.
Antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are used frequently in 
overdose and carry a high morbidity and mortality relat-
ing to their sodium channel-blocking, anticholinergic 
and α-adrenoceptor-blocking effects.
Clinical features
Anticholinergic effects are common (Box 9.11). Life-
threatening complications are frequent, including con-
vulsions, coma, arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia, 
ventricular fibrillation and, less commonly, heart block) 
and hypotension, which results from inappropriate 
vasodilatation or impaired myocardial contractility. 
Serious complications appear to be more common with 
dosulepin and amitriptyline.
Anticholinergic
Serotonin syndrome
Common 
causes
Benzodiazepines
Antipsychotics
TCAs
Antihistamines
Scopolamine
Benzatropine
Belladonna
Jimson weed
Mushrooms (some)
SSRIs
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors (MAOIs)
TCAs
Amphetamines
Buspirone
Bupropion (especially 
in combination)
Clinical features
Cardiovascular
Tachycardia, 
hypertension
Tachycardia, 
hyper- or hypotension
CNS
Confusion, 
hallucinations, 
sedation
Confusion, delirium, 
hallucinations, 
sedation, coma
Muscle
Myoclonus
Shivering, tremor, 
myoclonus, raised 
creatine kinase
Temperature
Fever
Fever
Eyes
Diplopia, mydriasis
Normal pupil size
Abdomen
Ileus, palpable 
bladder
Diarrhoea, vomiting
Mouth
Dry
Skin
Flushing, hot, dry
Flushing, sweating
Complications
Seizures
Seizures
Rhabdomyolysis
Renal failure
Metabolic acidosis
Coagulopathies
9.11  Anticholinergic and serotonergic 
feature clusters
Fig 9.3  ECG in severe tricyclic antidepressant poisoning. This 
rhythm strip shows a broad QRS complex due to impaired conduction. 
II
Poisoning
9
214
are reduced substantially during dialysis but rebound 
increases occur after discontinuation, and multiple ses-
sions may be required.
Cardiovascular medications
Beta-adrenoceptor blockers
These have negative inotropic and chronotropic effects. 
Some have additional properties that may increase toxi­
city, such as blockade of sodium channels with pro-
pranolol, acebutolol and carvedilol, and blockade of 
potassium channels with sotalol.
Clinical features
The major features of toxicity are bradycardia and hypo-
tension. Heart block, pulmonary oedema and cardio-
genic shock occur in severe poisoning. Beta-blockers 
with sodium channel-blocking effects may cause sei-
zures, confusion and coma, while sotalol may be associ-
ated with repolarisation abnormalities (including QTc 
prolongation) and torsades de pointes (p. 570).
Management
Intravenous fluids may reverse hypotension but care 
is required to avoid pulmonary oedema. Bradycardia 
and hypotension may respond to high doses of atropine 
(up to 3 mg in an adult). The adrenoceptor agonist iso-
prenaline may also be effective but high doses are 
often needed. Glucagon (5–10 mg over 10 mins, then 
1–5 mg/hr by infusion), which counteracts the effect 
of β-blockers by stimulating intracellular production of 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), is now more 
commonly used. In severe cases, ‘hyperinsulinaemia 
euglycaemic therapy’ has been used, as described under 
calcium channel blockers. Lipid emulsion therapy may 
have a role in severe poisoning with lipid-soluble agents 
such as propranolol, carvedilol and oxprenolol.
Calcium channel blockers
Calcium channel blockers are highly toxic in overdose 
because of their inhibitory effects on L-type calcium 
channels. Dihydropyridines, such as nifedipine or 
amlodipine, affect vascular smooth muscle in particu-
lar, resulting in vasodilatation, whereas diltiazem and 
verapamil, which are used in the treatment of arrhyth-
mias, have predominantly cardiac effects, including 
bradycardia and reduced myocardial contractility.
Clinical features
The usual presentation is with hypotension due to 
vasodilatation or myocardial depression. Bradycardias 
and heart block may also occur, especially with vera-
pamil and diltiazem. Gastrointestinal disturbances, 
confusion, metabolic acidosis, hyperglycaemia and 
hyperkalaemia may also be present.
Management
Hypotension should be corrected with intravenous 
fluids, taking care to avoid pulmonary oedema. Persist-
ent hypotension may respond to intravenous calcium 
gluconate (10 mg IV over 5 mins, repeated as required). 
Isoprenaline and glucagon may also be useful. Success-
ful use of intravenous insulin with glucose (10–20% 
from lipid emulsion therapy in severe intractable 
poisoning.
Selective serotonin and 
noradrenaline re-uptake inhibitors
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are a 
group of antidepressants that include fluoxetine, parox-
etine, fluvoxamine, sertraline, citalopram and escitalo-
pram. They are increasingly used to treat depression, 
partly because they are less toxic in overdose than TCAs. 
A related group of compounds termed serotonin–
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), such as ven-
lafaxine and duloxetine, are also in common use and are 
sometimes taken in overdose.
Clinical features and management
Overdose of SSRIs may produce nausea and vomiting, 
tremor, insomnia and sinus tachycardia. Agitation, 
drowsiness and convulsions occur infrequently and may 
be delayed for several hours after ingestion. Occasion-
ally, features of serotonin syndrome may develop (see 
Box 9.11), especially if SSRIs are taken in combination 
or with other serotonergic agents. Cardiac arrhythmias 
occur infrequently and most patients require supportive 
care only. The toxic effects of SNRIs are similar but 
tachycardia, hypertension or hypotension and ECG 
changes (QRS and QT prolongation) may be more 
prominent and hypoglycaemia can also occur.
Lithium
Severe lithium toxicity is uncommon after intentional 
overdose and is more often encountered in patients 
taking therapeutic doses as the result of interactions 
with drugs such as diuretics or NSAIDs that can cause 
dehydration or renal impairment, or because an exces-
sive dose has been prescribed. Severe toxicity is more 
common with acute overdose in patients taking chronic 
therapy (‘acute on chronic’ poisoning).
Clinical features
Nausea, diarrhoea, polyuria, dizziness and tremor may 
progress to muscular weakness, drowsiness, confusion, 
myoclonus, fasciculations, choreoathetosis and renal 
failure. Coma, convulsions, ataxia, cardiac dysrhythmias 
such as heart block, blood pressure disturbances and 
renal failure may all occur in severe poisoning.
Management
Activated charcoal is ineffective. Gastric lavage is of 
theoretical benefit if used early after overdose, but 
lithium tablets are likely to remain intact in the stomach 
and may be too large for aspiration via a lavage tube. 
Some advocate whole bowel irrigation after substantial 
overdose but efficacy is unknown.
Lithium concentrations should be measured immedi-
ately in symptomatic patients or after at least 6 hours in 
asymptomatic patients following acute overdose. Ade-
quate hydration should be maintained with intravenous 
fluids. Convulsions should be treated as in Box 9.10.
In patients with features suggesting severe toxicity 
associated with high lithium concentrations (e.g. > 
4.0 mmol/L after chronic or ‘acute on chronic’ poison-
ing, or > 7.5 mmol/L after acute poisoning), haemo­
dialysis should be considered. Lithium concentrations 
Poisoning by specific pharmaceutical agents
9
215
hypokalaemia, acidosis, headaches and blurred vision. 
Coma, convulsions and hypotension may occur in severe 
poisoning. ECG changes indicating conduction and 
repolarisation delay (prolonged QRS and QTc intervals) 
occur and are associated with ventricular tachycardia 
(including torsades de pointes), ventricular fibrillation 
and sudden death.
Management
Activated charcoal should be given to all patients pre-
senting within 1 hour of ingestion of chloroquine in 
amounts greater than 15 mg/kg. Cardiac rhythm should 
be monitored and dysrhythmias managed as outlined in 
Box 9.10. The arterial pH should be corrected, but 
hypokalaemia is thought to have a protective effect and 
should not be corrected in the first 8 hours after poison-
ing. High-dose diazepam (2 mg/kg body weight IV 
over 30 mins followed by an infusion of 2 mg/kg/hr) 
has been suggested to have a protective effect, especially 
if given in the early stages of severe chloroquine poison-
ing, but evidence is limited as yet. One controlled trial 
did not show beneficial effects on the ECG. Diazepam 
therapy requires intubation and mechanical ventilation 
to avoid pulmonary aspiration.
Quinine
Quinine salts are widely used for treating malaria and 
leg cramps. Deaths have been reported with ingestion of 
as little as 1.5 g in an adult and 900 mg in a child.
Clinical features
Features of toxicity include nausea, vomiting, tremor, 
tinnitus and deafness. Hypotension, haemolysis, renal 
failure, ataxia, convulsions and coma are features of 
serious poisoning. Conduction and repolarisation delay 
results in prolonged QRS and QTc intervals on the ECG, 
and ventricular tachycardia (including torsades de 
pointes), ventricular fibrillation and sudden death may 
occur. Quinine-induced retinal photoreceptor cell toxic-
ity may result in blurred vision and impaired colour 
perception. This usually develops a few hours after 
overdose and progresses to constriction of the visual 
field, scotoma and complete blindness associated with 
pupillary dilatation and unresponsiveness to light. Fun-
doscopy may show retinal artery spasm, disc pallor and 
retinal oedema. Although visual loss can be permanent, 
some degree of recovery, especially of central vision, 
often occurs over several weeks.
Management
Multiple-dose activated charcoal should be commenced 
in patients who have taken quinine in amounts greater 
than 15 mg/kg. Gastric lavage should be considered in 
patients who have taken a substantial overdose who 
present within 1 hour. All patients should have a 12-lead 
ECG and cardiac monitoring, and their urea, electrolytes 
and glucose checked. Dysrhythmias, hypotension, 
seizures and coma should be managed as outlined in 
Box 9.10.
There are no effective treatments for the visual effects 
of quinine. Stellate ganglion block and retrobulbar or 
intravenous injections of vasodilators such as nitrates 
were previously used but are ineffective, as are haemo-
dialysis and haemoperfusion.
dextrose with insulin initially at 0.5–2.0 U/kg/hr, increas­
ing to 5–10 U/kg/hr according to clinical response), 
so-called ‘hyperinsulinaemia euglycaemic therapy’, has 
been reported in patients unresponsive to other strate-
gies. The mechanism of action remains to be fully eluci-
dated, but in states of shock myocardial metabolism 
switches from use of free fatty acids to glucose. Calcium 
channel blocker poisoning is also associated with 
hypoinsulinaemia and insulin resistance, impeding 
glucose uptake by myocytes. High doses of insulin 
inhibit lipolysis and increase glucose uptake and the 
efficiency of glucose utilisation. Cardiac pacing may be 
needed for severe unresponsive bradycardias or heart 
block. Lipid emulsion therapy has been used in severe 
poisoning with apparent benefit, although evidence is 
largely anecdotal.
Digoxin and oleander
Poisoning with digoxin is usually accidental, arising 
from prescription of an excessive dose, impairment of 
renal function or drug interactions. In South Asia, delib-
erate self-poisoning with yellow oleander (Thevetia peru-
viana), which contains cardiac glycosides, is common.
Clinical features
Characteristic cardiac effects of toxicity are tachy­
arrhythmias (either atrial or ventricular) and bradycar-
dias, with or without atrioventricular block. Ventricular 
bigeminy is common and atrial tachycardia with evi-
dence of atrioventricular block is highly suggestive 
of the diagnosis. Severe poisoning is associated with 
hyperkalaemia. Non-cardiac features include confusion, 
headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and (rarely) 
altered colour vision.
Management
Activated charcoal is commonly administered to patients 
presenting within 1 hour of ingestion of an acute over-
dose, although evidence of benefit is lacking. Urea, elec-
trolytes and creatinine should be measured, a 12-lead 
ECG performed and cardiac monitoring instituted. 
Hypoxia, hypokalaemia (sometimes associated with 
concurrent diuretic use), hypomagnesaemia and acido-
sis increase the risk of arrhythmias and should be cor-
rected. Significant bradycardias may respond to atropine, 
although temporary pacing is sometimes needed. Ven-
tricular arrhythmias may respond to intravenous mag-
nesium (see Box 9.10). If available, digoxin-specific 
antibody fragments should be administered when there 
are severe ventricular arrhythmias or unresponsive 
bradycardias. This antidote has been shown to be effec-
tive for both digitalis and yellow oleander poisoning.
Antimalarials
Chloroquine
Chloroquine is highly toxic in overdose and quantities 
of 5 g or more of chloroquine base are likely to be fatal 
in an adult.
Clinical features
Features of toxicity occur within 1 hour of ingestion 
and include nausea, vomiting, agitation, drowsiness, 
Poisoning
9
216
biguanides like metformin and phenformin; and insu-
lins. Overdose may also be encountered with some of 
the newer antidiabetic drugs, such as thiazolidinediones 
(pioglitazone), meglinides (nateglinide, repaglinide) and 
dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)-IV inhibitors (sitagliptin).
Clinical features
Sulphonylureas, meglitinides and parenteral insulin 
cause hypoglycaemia when taken in overdose, although 
insulin is non-toxic if ingested by mouth. The duration 
of hypoglycaemia depends on the half-life or release 
characteristics of the preparation and may be prolonged 
over several days with long-acting agents such as chlor­
propamide, insulin zinc suspension or insulin glargine.
Features of hypoglycaemia include nausea, agitation, 
sweating, aggression and behavioural disturbances, con-
fusion, tachycardia, hypothermia, drowsiness, coma or 
convulsions (p. 814). Permanent neurological damage can 
occur if hypoglycaemia is prolonged. Hypoglycaemia can 
be diagnosed using bedside glucose strips but venous 
blood should also be sent for laboratory confirmation.
Metformin is uncommonly associated with hypogly-
caemia. Its major toxic effect in overdose is lactic acido-
sis, which can have a high mortality, and is particularly 
common in older patients and those with renal or hepatic 
impairment, or when ethanol is co-ingested. Other fea-
tures of metformin overdose are nausea and vomiting, 
diarrhoea, abdominal pain, drowsiness, coma, hypoten-
sion and cardiovascular collapse.
There is limited experience of overdose involving 
thiazolidinediones and DPP-IV inhibitors, but signifi-
cant hypoglycaemia is unlikely.
Management
Activated charcoal should be considered for all patients 
who present within 1 hour of ingestion of a substantial 
overdose of an oral hypoglycaemic agent. Venous blood 
glucose and urea and electrolytes should be measured 
and tests repeated regularly. Hypoglycaemia should be 
corrected using oral or intravenous glucose (50 mL of 
50% dextrose); an infusion of 10–20% dextrose may be 
required to prevent recurrence. Intramuscular glucagon 
can be used as an alternative, especially if intravenous 
access is unavailable. Failure to regain consciousness 
within a few minutes of normalisation of the blood 
glucose can indicate that a central nervous system (CNS) 
depressant has also been ingested, the hypoglycaemia 
has been prolonged, or that the coma has another cause 
(e.g. cerebral haemorrhage or oedema).
Arterial blood gases should be taken after metformin 
overdose to assess the extent of acidosis. If present, 
plasma lactate should be measured and acidosis should 
be corrected with intravenous sodium bicarbonate 
(250 mL 1.26% solution or 50 mL 8.4% solution, repeated 
as necessary). In severe cases, haemodialysis or haemo-
diafiltration is used.
DRUGS OF MISUSE
Cannabis
Cannabis is derived from the dried leaves and flowers 
of Cannabis sativa. When it is smoked, the onset of effect 
occurs within 10–30 minutes, whereas after ingestion 
Iron
Overdose with iron can cause severe and sometimes 
fatal poisoning. The toxicity of individual iron prepara-
tions is related to their elemental iron content.
Clinical features
Early clinical features include gastrointestinal distur-
bance with the passage of grey or black stools. Hyper­
glycaemia and leucocytosis may occur. Haematemesis, 
rectal bleeding, drowsiness, convulsions, coma, meta-
bolic acidosis and cardiovascular collapse may occur in 
severe poisoning.
Early symptoms may improve or even resolve within 
6–12 hours, but hepatocellular necrosis may develop 
12–24 hours after overdose and occasionally progresses 
to hepatic failure. Gastrointestinal strictures are late 
complications of iron poisoning.
Management
Gastric lavage may be considered in patients presenting 
within 1 hour of life-threatening overdose but efficacy 
has not been established. Activated charcoal is ineffective 
since iron is not bound. Serum iron concentration should 
be measured (see Box 9.6, p. 209). The antidote desferri-
oxamine chelates iron and should be administered imme-
diately in patients with severe features, without waiting 
for serum iron concentrations to be available. Sympto-
matic patients with high serum iron concentrations (e.g. 
> 5 mg/L) should also receive desferrioxamine. Desfer-
rioxamine may cause hypotension, allergic reactions and 
occasionally pulmonary oedema. Otherwise, treatment 
is supportive and directed at complications.
Antipsychotic drugs
Antipsychotic drugs (p. 248) are often prescribed for 
patients at high risk of self-harm or suicide, and are 
commonly encountered in overdose.
Clinical features
Drowsiness, tachycardia and hypotension are frequently 
found. Anticholinergic features (see Box 9.11) and acute 
dystonias, such as oculogyric crisis, torticollis and 
trismus, may occur after overdose with typical antipsy-
chotics like haloperidol or chlorpromazine. QT interval 
prolongation and torsades de pointes can occur with 
typical antipsychotics such as thioridazine and haloperi-
dol, as well as atypical antipsychotics like quetiapine, 
amisulpride and ziprasidone. Convulsions may occur 
with both groups of agent.
Management
Activated charcoal may be of benefit if given within 
1 hour of overdose. Cardiac monitoring should be 
undertaken for at least 6 hours. Management is largely 
supportive, with treatment directed at complications 
(see Box 9.10, p. 211).
Antidiabetic agents
Antidiabetic agents commonly causing toxicity in over-
dose include sulphonylureas such as chlorpropamide, 
glibenclamide, gliclazide, glipizide and tolbutamide; 
Drugs of misuse
9
217
and hypotension may occur with severe poisoning in 
susceptible groups, especially after intravenous admin-
istration of short-acting agents.
Management
Activated charcoal may be useful after ingestion in sus-
ceptible patients or after mixed overdose, if given within 
1 hour. Conscious level, respiratory rate and oxygen 
saturation should be monitored for at least 6 hours after 
substantial overdose.
The specific benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil 
increases conscious level in patients with overdose but 
carries a risk of seizures, and is contraindicated in 
patients co-ingesting proconvulsant agents such as 
TCAs and in those with a history of seizures.
Stimulants and entactogens
This group includes amphetamines, ecstasy, cathinones 
such as mephedrone, piperazines and cocaine. These 
are sympathomimetic and serotonergic amines; as a 
result, they have clinical features of poisoning that over­
lap (see Box 9.12).
the onset is 1–3 hours later. The duration of effect is 
4–8 hours. Cannabis produces euphoria, perceptual 
alterations and conjunctival injection, followed by 
enhanced appetite, relaxation and occasionally hyperten-
sion, tachy­cardia, slurred speech and ataxia. High doses 
may produce anxiety, confusion, hallucinations and psy-
chosis (Box 9.12). Psychological dependence is common 
but tolerance and withdrawal symptoms are unusual. 
Long-term use is thought to increase the lifetime risk of 
developing schizophrenia. Ingestion or smoking of can-
nabis rarely results in serious poisoning and supportive 
treatment is all that is required.
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines may be prescribed or used illicitly. 
They are of low toxicity when taken alone in overdose 
but can enhance CNS depression when taken with other 
sedative agents, including alcohol. They may also cause 
significant toxicity in the elderly and those with chronic 
lung or neuromuscular disease.
Clinical features
Clinical features of toxicity include drowsiness, ataxia 
and confusion (see Box 9.12). Respiratory depression 
Stimulant
Sedative hypnotic
Opioid
Common causes
Amphetamines
MDMA (‘ecstasy’)
Ephedrine
Pseudoephedrine
Cocaine
Cannabis
Phencyclidine
Cathinones (e.g. mephedrone)
Benzylpiperazine
Benzodiazepines
Barbiturates
Ethanol
Gammahydroxybutyrate (GHB)
Heroin
Morphine
Methadone
Oxycodone
Dihydrocodeine
Codeine
Pethidine
Dipipanone
Buprenorphine
Dextropropoxyphene
Tramadol
Clinical features
Respiratory
Tachypnoea
Reduced respiratory rate and 
ventilation1
Reduced respiratory rate and 
ventilation
Cardiovascular
Tachycardia, hypertension
Hypotension1
Hypotension, relative bradycardia
CNS
Restlessness, anxiety, anorexia, 
insomnia
Confusion, hallucinations, slurred 
speech
Confusion, hallucinations, slurred 
speech
Hallucinations
Sedation, coma1
Sedation, coma2
Muscle
Tremor
Ataxia, reduced muscle tone
Ataxia, reduced muscle tone
Temperature
Fever
Hypothermia
Hypothermia
Eyes
Mydriasis
Diplopia, strabismus, nystagmus
Normal pupil size
Miosis
Abdomen
Abdominal pain, diarrhoea
–
Ileus
Mouth
Dry
–
–
Skin
Piloerection
Blisters, pressure sores
Needle tracks2
Complications
Seizures
Myocardial infarction
Dysrhythmias
Rhabdomyolysis
Renal failure
Intracerebral haemorrhage or 
infarction
Respiratory failure1
Respiratory failure2
1Especially barbiturates. 2IV use.
9.12  Stimulant, sedative and opioid feature clusters
Poisoning
9
218
Management
Management is supportive and directed at complica-
tions (see Box 9.10, p. 211).
Gammahydroxybutyrate and  
gamma butyrolactone
Gamma hydroxybuterate (GHB) and gamma butyrolac-
tone (GBL) are sedative agents with psychedelic and 
body-building effects. They are easily manufactured 
from commonly available industrial chemicals, includ-
ing 1,4 butanediol, which is metabolised to GHB in vivo 
and has similar effects after ingestion. GHB solution is 
drunk by users, who titrate the dose until the desired 
effects are achieved.
Clinical features
Toxic features are those of a sedative hypnotic (see 
Box 9.12). Nausea, diarrhoea, vertigo, tremor, myo-
clonus, extrapyramidal signs, euphoria, bradycardia, 
convulsions, metabolic acidosis, hypokalaemia and 
hyperglycaemia may also occur. As the drug may be 
produced in batches and shared amongst a number of 
individuals, several patients may present with coma 
at the same time. The sedative effects are potentiated 
by other CNS depressants, such as alcohol, benzodi-
azepines, opioids and neuroleptics. Coma usually 
resolves spontaneously and abruptly within a few hours 
but may occasionally persist for several days. Depend-
ence may develop in regular users, who may experience 
severe prolonged withdrawal effects if use is discontin-
ued abruptly.
Management
Activated charcoal is recommended within 1 hour for 
ingestion of GHB in amounts greater than 20 mg/kg. 
Urea, electrolytes and glucose should be measured in all 
but the most trivial of cases. All patients should be 
observed for a minimum of 2 hours, with monitoring of 
blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and oxygena-
tion. Patients who remain symptomatic should be 
observed in hospital until symptoms resolve, but require 
supportive care only. Withdrawal may require treat-
ment with high doses of benzodiazepines.
d-Lysergic acid diethyamide
d-Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is a synthetic hal-
lucinogen usually ingested as small squares of impreg-
nated absorbent paper (often printed with a distinctive 
design) or as ‘microdots’. The drug causes perceptual 
effects, such as heightened visual awareness of colours, 
distortion of images, and hallucinations that may be 
pleasurable or terrifying (‘bad trip’) and associated with 
panic, confusion, agitation or aggression. Dilated pupils, 
hypertension, pyrexia and metabolic acidosis may occur 
and psychosis may sometimes last several days.
Patients with psychotic reactions or CNS depression 
should be observed in hospital, preferably in a quiet, 
dimly lit room to minimise external stimulation. Where 
sedation is required, diazepam is the drug of choice. 
Antipsychotics should be avoided if possible, as they 
may precipitate cardiovascular collapse or convulsions.
Cocaine
Cocaine is available as a water-soluble hydrochloride 
salt suitable for nasal inhalation (‘snorting’), or as an 
insoluble free base (‘crack’ cocaine) that, unlike the 
hydrochloride salt, vaporises at high temperature and 
can be smoked, giving a more rapid and intense 
effect. Cocaine hydrochloride is usually purchased 
as a white crystalline powder, and crack cocaine in 
‘rocks’.
Clinical features
Effects appear rapidly after inhalation and especially 
after smoking. Sympathomimetic stimulant effects are 
common (see Box 9.12). Serious complications usually 
occur within 3 hours of use and include coronary artery 
spasm, which may result in myocardial ischaemia or 
infarction, even in patients with normal coronary arter-
ies. This may lead to hypotension, cyanosis and 
ventricular arrhythmias. Cocaine toxicity should be con-
sidered in young adults who present with ischaemic 
chest pain. Hyperpyrexia may be associated with rhab-
domyolysis, acute renal failure and disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation.
Management
All patients should be observed with ECG monitoring 
for a minimum of 4 hours. A 12-lead ECG should be 
performed. Abnormalities are common, including ST 
segment elevation, which may occur even in the absence 
of myocardial infarction. Troponin T estimations are 
the most sensitive and specific markers of myocardial 
damage. Benzodiazepines and intravenous nitrates are 
useful for managing patients with chest pain or hyper-
tension, but β-blockers are best avoided because of the 
risk of unopposed α-adrenoceptor stimulation. Coro-
nary angiography should be considered in patients with 
myocardial infarction or acute coronary syndromes. Aci-
dosis should be corrected. Physical cooling measures 
may be required for hyperthermia (p. 105).
Amphetamines and cathinones
These 
include 
amphetamine 
sulphate 
(‘speed’), 
methylamphetamine (‘crystal meth’), 3,4-methylene- 
dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ‘ecstasy’) and mephe-
drone. Tolerance is common, leading regular users to 
seek progressively higher doses.
Clinical features
Toxic features usually appear within a few minutes 
of use and last 4–6 hours, or substantially longer after 
a large overdose. Sympathomimetic stimulant and sero-
tonergic effects are common (see Boxes 9.11 and 9.12). 
A proportion of ecstasy users develop hyponatraemia as 
a result of excessive water drinking and inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone secretion. Muscle rigidity, pain 
and bruxism (clenching of the jaw) may occur. Hyper-
pyrexia, rhabdomyolysis, metabolic acidosis, acute renal 
failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, hepato-
cellular necrosis, acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS) and cardiovascular collapse have all been 
described following MDMA use but are rare. Cerebral 
infarction and haemorrhage have been reported, espe-
cially after intravenous amphetamine use.
Chemicals and pesticides
9
219
have ingested unpackaged or poorly wrapped sub-
stances, often to avoid arrest. Both groups are at risk of 
severe toxicity if the packages rupture. This is more 
likely for body stuffers, who may start to develop symp-
toms of poisoning within 8 hours of ingestion. The risk 
of poisoning depends on the quality of the wrapping, 
and the amount and type of drug ingested. Cocaine, for 
example, presents a much higher risk than heroin because 
of its high toxicity and lack of a specific antidote.
Patients suspected of body packing or stuffing should 
be admitted for observation. A careful history taken in 
private is important, but for obvious reasons patients 
may withhold details of the drugs involved. The mouth, 
rectum and vagina should be examined as possible 
sites for concealed drugs. A urine toxicology screen per-
formed at intervals may provide evidence of leakage, 
although positive results may reflect earlier recreational 
drug use. Packages may be visible on plain abdominal 
films (Fig. 9.4), but this is not always the case, and ultra-
sound and computed tomography (CT) are more sensi-
tive methods of visualisation. One of these (preferably 
CT) should be performed in all suspected body packers.
Antimotility agents are often used by body packers 
to prevent premature passage of packages, so it can take 
a number of days for packages to pass spontaneously; 
during this period the carrier is at risk from package 
rupture. Whole bowel irrigation is commonly used to 
accelerate passage and is continued until all packages 
have passed. Surgery may be required for mechanical 
bowel obstruction or when evolving clinical features 
suggest package rupture, especially with cocaine.
CHEMICALS AND PESTICIDES
Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colourless, odourless gas 
produced by faulty appliances burning organic fuels. It 
is also present in vehicle exhaust fumes and sometimes 
in smoke from house fires. It causes toxicity by binding 
with haemoglobin and cytochrome oxidase, which 
Opioids
Commonly encountered opioids are shown in Box 9.12. 
Toxicity may result from misuse of illicit drugs such as 
heroin or after overdose of medicinal opiates such as 
dextropropoxyphene. Intravenous use of heroin or mor-
phine gives a rapid, intensely pleasurable experience, 
often accompanied by heightened sexual arousal. Physi-
cal dependence occurs within a few weeks of regular 
high-dose injection; as a result, the dose is escalated and 
the user’s life becomes increasingly centred on obtaining 
and taking the drug. Withdrawal, which can start within 
12 hours, presents with intense craving, rhinorrhoea, 
lacrimation, yawning, perspiration, shivering, piloerec-
tion, vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal cramps. Exam-
ination reveals tachycardia, hypertension, mydriasis 
and facial flushing.
Accidental overdose with prescribed strong opioid 
preparations is common, especially in the elderly.
Clinical features
These are shown in Box 9.12. Needle tracks may be 
visible in intravenous drug misusers and drug-related 
paraphernalia may be found amongst their possessions. 
Severe poisoning results in respiratory depression, 
hypotension, non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema and 
hypothermia, leading to respiratory arrest or aspiration 
of gastric contents. Dextropropoxyphene (the opioid 
component of co-proxamol) may cause cardiac conduc-
tion effects, particularly QRS prolongation, ventricular 
arrhythmias and heart block, and has been withdrawn 
in the UK and other countries. Methadone may cause 
QTc prolongation and torsades de pointes.
Symptoms of opioid poisoning can be prolonged for 
up to 48 hours after use of long-acting agents such as 
methadone, dextropropoxyphene and oxycodone.
Management
The airway should be cleared and, if necessary, respira-
tory support and oxygen given. Oxygen saturation moni-
toring and measurement of arterial blood gases should be 
performed. Prompt use of the specific opioid antagonist 
naloxone (0.4–2 mg IV in an adult, repeated if necessary) 
may obviate the need for intubation, although excessive 
doses may precipitate acute withdrawal in chronic opiate 
users. An infusion may be required in some cases because 
the half-life of the antidote is short compared to that of 
most opiates, especially those with prolonged elimina-
tion. Patients must be monitored for at least 6 hours after 
the last naloxone dose. Other complications of naloxone 
therapy include fits and ventricular arrhythmias, 
although these are rare. Box 9.10 (p. 211) describes the 
management of coma, fits and hypotension. Non-
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema does not usually respond 
to diuretic therapy, and continuous positive airways 
pressure (CPAP) or positive end-expiratory pressure 
(PEEP) ventilatory support (p. 193) may be required.
Body packers and body stuffers
Body packers (‘mules’) attempt to smuggle illicit drugs 
(usually cocaine, heroin or amphetamines) by ingesting 
multiple small packages wrapped in several layers of 
clingfilm or in condoms. Body stuffers are those who 
Fig. 9.4  Abdominal X-ray of a body packer showing multiple 
drug-filled condoms. 
Poisoning
9
220
Nerve agents developed for chemical warfare are 
derived from OP insecticides but are much more toxic. 
They are commonly classified as G (originally synthe-
sised in Germany) or V (‘venomous’) agents. The ‘G’ 
agents, such as tabun, sarin and soman, are volatile, 
absorbed by inhalation or via the skin, and dissipate 
rapidly after use. ‘V’ agents, such as VX, are contact 
poisons unless aerosolised, and contaminate ground for 
weeks or months.
The toxicology and management of nerve agent and 
pesticide poisoning are similar.
Mechanism of toxicity
OP compounds phosphonylate the active site of acetyl-
cholinesterase (AChE), inactivating the enzyme and 
leading to the accumulation of acetylcholine (ACh) in 
cholinergic synapses (Fig. 9.5). Spontaneous hydrolysis 
of the OP–enzyme complex allows reactivation of the 
enzyme. However, loss of a chemical group from the 
OP–enzyme complex prevents further enzyme reactiva-
tion, a process termed ‘ageing’. After ageing has taken 
place, new enzyme needs to be synthesised before func-
tion can be restored. The rate of ageing is an important 
determinant of toxicity and is more rapid with dimethyl 
compounds (3.7 hours) than diethyl (31 hours), and 
especially rapid after exposure to nerve agents (soman 
in particular), which cause ageing within minutes.
Clinical features and management
OP poisoning causes an acute cholinergic phase, which 
may occasionally be followed by the intermediate syn-
drome or organophosphate-induced delayed polyneu-
ropathy (OPIDN). The onset, severity and duration of 
poisoning depend on the route of exposure and agent 
involved. Cholinergic features may be prolonged over 
several weeks with some lipid-soluble agents.
Acute cholinergic syndrome
The acute cholinergic syndrome usually starts within a 
few minutes of exposure. Nicotinic or muscarinic fea-
tures may be present (Box 9.14). Vomiting and profuse 
diarrhoea are typical following oral ingestion. Broncho­
constriction, bronchorrhoea and salivation may cause 
severe respiratory compromise. Miosis is characteristic 
and the presence of muscle fasciculations strongly sug-
gests the diagnosis, although this feature is often absent, 
even in serious poisoning. Subsequently, the patient 
may develop generalised flaccid paralysis which can 
affect respiratory and ocular muscles and result in res-
piratory failure. Ataxia, coma and convulsions may 
reduces tissue oxygen delivery and inhibits cellular res-
piration. It is a common cause of death by poisoning and 
most patients who die of CO poisoning do so before 
reaching hospital.
Clinical features
Early clinical features of acute severe carbon monoxide 
poisoning include headache, nausea, irritability, weak-
ness and tachypnoea. Because these are non-specific, the 
correct diagnosis will not be obvious if the exposure is 
occult, such as from a faulty domestic appliance. Sub­
sequently, ataxia, nystagmus, drowsiness and hyper-
reflexia may develop, progressing to coma, convulsions, 
hypotension, respiratory depression, cardiovascular col-
lapse and death. Myocardial ischaemia may occur and 
results in arrhythmias or myocardial infarction. Cerebral 
oedema is common and rhabdomyolysis may lead to 
myoglobinuria and renal failure. In those who recover 
from acute toxicity, longer-term neuropsychiatric effects 
are common, such as personality change, memory loss 
and concentration impairment. Extrapyramidal effects, 
urinary or faecal incontinence, and gait disturbance may 
also occur. Poisoning during pregnancy may cause fetal 
hypoxia and intrauterine death.
Management
Patients should be removed from exposure as soon as 
possible and resuscitated as necessary. Oxygen should 
be administered in as high a concentration as possible 
via a tightly fitting facemask, as this reduces the half- 
life of carboxyhaemoglobin from 4–6 hours to about 
40 minutes. Measurement of carboxyhaemoglobin is 
useful for confirming exposure (see Box 9.6, p. 209) but 
levels do not correlate well with the severity of poison-
ing, partly because concentrations fall rapidly after 
removal of the patient from exposure, especially if sup-
plemental oxygen has been given.
An ECG should be performed in all patients with 
acute poisoning, especially those with pre-existing heart 
disease. Arterial blood gas analysis should be checked 
in those with serious poisoning. Oxygen saturation read-
ings by pulse oximetry are misleading since both car-
boxyhaemoglobin and oxyhaemoglobin are measured. 
Excessive intravenous fluid administration should be 
avoided, particularly in the elderly, because of the risk 
of pulmonary and cerebral oedema. Convulsions should 
be controlled with diazepam.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is controversial. At 2.5 
atmospheres it reduces the half-life of carboxyhaemo­
globin to about 20 minutes and increases the amount 
of dissolved oxygen by a factor of 10, but systematic 
reviews have shown no improvement in clinical out-
comes. The logistical difficulties of transporting sick 
patients to hyperbaric chambers and managing them 
therein should not be underestimated.
Organophosphorus insecticides and 
nerve agents
Organophosphorus (OP) compounds (Box 9.13) are 
widely used as pesticides, especially in developing 
countries. The case fatality rate following deliberate 
ingestion of OP pesticides in developing countries in 
Asia is 5–20%.
Nerve agents
• G agents: sarin, tabun, 
soman
• V agents: VX,VE
Insecticides
Dimethyl compounds
Diethyl compounds
• Dichlorvos
• Fenthion
• Malathion
• Methamidophos
• Chlorpyrifos
• Diazinon
• Parathion-ethyl
• Quinalphos
9.13  Organophosphorus compounds
Chemicals and pesticides
9
221
administered and intravenous access obtained. In the 
event of external contamination, further exposure should 
be prevented, contaminated clothing and contact lenses 
removed, the skin washed with soap and water, and the 
eyes irrigated. Gastric lavage or activated charcoal may 
be considered if the patient presents within 1 hour of 
ingestion. Convulsions should be treated as described in 
Box 9.10 (p. 211). The ECG, oxygen saturation, blood 
gases, temperature, urea and electrolytes, amylase and 
glucose should be monitored closely.
Early use of sufficient doses of atropine is potentially 
life-saving in patients with severe toxicity. Atropine 
reverses ACh-induced bronchospasm, bronchorrhoea, 
bradycardia and hypotension. When the diagnosis is 
uncertain, a marked increase in heart rate associated 
with skin flushing after a 1 mg intravenous dose makes 
OP poisoning unlikely. In OP poisoning, atropine should 
be administered in doses of 0.6–2 mg IV, repeated every 
10–25 mins until secretions are controlled, the skin is dry 
and there is a sinus tachycardia. Large doses may be 
needed but excessive doses may cause anticholinergic 
effects (see Box 9.11, p. 213).
In patients requiring atropine, an oxime such as pra-
lidoxime chloride (or obidoxime), if available, should 
also be administered, as this may reverse or prevent 
muscle weakness, convulsions or coma, especially if 
given rapidly after exposure. The pralidoxime dose for 
an adult is 2 g IV over 4 mins, repeated 4–6 times daily. 
Oximes work by reactivating AChE that has not under-
gone ‘ageing’ and are therefore less effective with di­
methyl compounds and nerve agents, especially soman. 
Oximes may provoke hypotension, especially if admin-
istered rapidly.
Ventilatory support should be instituted before 
the patient develops respiratory failure (p. 193). 
occur. In severe poisoning, cardiac repolarisation abnor-
malities and torsades de pointes may occur. Other early 
complications of OP poisoning include extrapyramidal 
features, pancreatitis, hepatic dysfunction and pyrexia.
Management
The airway should be cleared of excessive secretions, 
breathing and circulation assessed, high-flow oxygen 
Fig. 9.5  Mechanism of toxicity of 
organophosphorus compounds and treatment with 
oxime. 
Acetylcholinesterase
enzyme
‘Ageing’: reactivation
not possible
Organophosphate
Enzyme-substrate complex
Elimination of ‘leaving group’
Reactivation with oxime
Reactivation
AChE–OH  +  X–P–OR1
O
OR2
AChE–O–X–P–OR1
O
OR2
AChE–O–P–OR1  + 
AChE–O–P–OR
O
OR2
OXIME
N–OH
O
O•
AChE–OH + HO–P–OR1
O
OR2
AChE–OH + OXIME
O
OR2
N–P–OR1
 XH
Cholinergic 
muscarinic
Cholinergic 
nicotinic
Respiratory
Bronchorrhoea, 
bronchoconstriction
Reduced ventilation
Cardiovascular
Bradycardia, 
hypotension
Tachycardia, 
hypertension
CNS
Confusion
–
Muscle
–
Fasciculation, 
paralysis
Temperature
Fever
–
Eyes
Diplopia, mydriasis
Lacrimation, miosis
Abdomen
Ileus, palpable 
bladder
Vomiting, profuse 
diarrhoea
Mouth
Dry
Salivation
Skin
Flushing, hot, dry
Sweating
Complications
Seizures
Seizures
9.14  Cholinergic features in poisoning*
*Both muscarinic and nicotinic features occur in OP poisoning. Nicotinic 
features occur in nicotine poisoning and black widow spider bites. 
Cholinergic features are sometimes seen with some mushrooms.
Poisoning
9
222
Benzodiazepines may be used to reduce agitation and 
fascicu­lations, treat convulsions and sedate patients 
during mechanical ventilation.
Exposure is confirmed by measurement of plasma 
(butyrylcholinesterase) or red blood cell cholinesterase 
activity. These correlate poorly with the severity of clini-
cal features, although values are usually less than 10% 
in severe poisoning, 20–50% in moderate poisoning and 
> 50% in subclinical poisoning.
The acute cholinergic phase usually lasts 48–72 hours, 
with most patients requiring intensive cardiorespiratory 
support and monitoring.
The intermediate syndrome
About 20% of patients with OP poisoning develop weak-
ness that spreads rapidly from the ocular muscles to 
those of the head and neck, proximal limbs and the 
muscles of respiration, resulting in ventilatory failure. 
This ‘intermediate syndrome’ (IMS) generally develops 
quite rapidly between 1 and 4 days after exposure, often 
after resolution of the acute cholinergic syndrome, and 
may last 2–3 weeks. There is no specific treatment but 
supportive care, including maintenance of airway and 
ventilation, should be provided if necessary.
Organophosphate-induced delayed 
polyneuropathy
Organophosphate-induced 
delayed 
polyneuropathy 
(OPIDN) is a rare complication that usually occurs 
2–3 weeks after acute exposure. It is a mixed sensory/
motor polyneuropathy, especially affecting long myelin­
ated neurons, and appears to result from inhibition of 
enzymes other than AChE. It is a feature of poisoning 
with some OPs such as trichlorocresylphosphate, but is 
less common with nerve agents,. Early clinical features 
are muscle cramps followed by numbness and paraes-
thesiae, proceeding to flaccid paralysis of the lower and 
subsequently the upper limbs. Paralysis of the lower 
limbs is associated with foot drop and a high-stepping 
gait, progressing to paraplegia. Paralysis of the arms 
leads to wrist drop. Sensory loss may also be present but 
is variable. Initially, tendon reflexes are reduced or lost 
but mild spasticity may develop later.
There is no specific therapy for OPIDN. Regular 
physiotherapy may limit deformity caused by muscle-
wasting. Recovery is often incomplete and may be 
limited to the hands and feet, although substantial func-
tional recovery after 1–2 years may occur, especially in 
younger patients.
Carbamate insecticides
Carbamate insecticides such as aldicarb, carbofuran 
and methomyl inhibit a number of tissue esterases, 
including AChE. The mechanism of action, clinical 
features and management are similar to those of OP 
compounds. However, clinical features tend to be less 
severe and of shorter duration, because the carbamate–
AChE complex dissociates quickly, with a half-life of 
30–40 minutes, and does not undergo ageing. Also, car-
bamates penetrate the CNS poorly. OPIDN and IMS are 
not common features of carbamate poisoning. Pancrea-
titis has been reported as a sequel, and deaths have 
occurred.
Fig. 9.6  Metabolism of methanol and ethylene glycol. 
Ethanol or
fomepizole
Inhibits
Alcohol
dehydrogenase
Ethylene
glycol
Glycoaldehyde
Glycolic acid
Formaldehyde
Formic acid
TOXIC METABOLITES
Glycoxylic acid
Oxalic acid
Methanol
Atropine may be given intravenously in frequent 
small doses (0.6–2.0 mg IV for an adult) until signs of 
atropinisation develop. Diazepam may be used to relieve 
anxiety. The use of oximes is unnecessary.
Methanol and ethylene glycol
Ethylene glycol (1,2-ethanediol) is found in antifreeze, 
brake fluids and, in lower concentrations, windscreen 
washes. Methanol is present in some antifreeze products 
and commercially available industrial solvents, and in 
low concentrations in some screen washes and methyl-
ated spirits. It may also be an adulterant of illicitly pro-
duced alcohol. Both are rapidly absorbed after ingestion. 
Although methanol and ethylene glycol are not of high 
intrinsic toxicity, they are converted via alcohol dehy-
drogenase to toxic metabolites that are largely responsi-
ble for their clinical effects (Fig. 9.6).
Clinical features
Early features with either methanol or ethylene glycol 
include ataxia, drowsiness, dysarthria and nystagmus, 
often associated with vomiting. As the toxic metabolites 
are formed, metabolic acidosis, tachypnoea, coma and 
seizures may develop.
Toxic effects of ethylene glycol include ophthalmo-
plegia, cranial nerve palsies, hyporeflexia and myo-
clonus. Renal pain and acute tubular necrosis occur 
because of precipitation of calcium oxalate in the 
kidneys. Hypocalcaemia, hypomagnesaemia and hyper-
kalaemia are common.
Features of methanol poisoning include headache, 
confusion and vertigo. Visual impairment and photo-
phobia develop, associated with optic disc and retinal 
oedema and impaired pupil reflexes. Blindness may be 
permanent, although some recovery may occur over 
several months. Pancreatitis and abnormal liver function 
have also been reported.
Management
Urea, electrolytes, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, 
calcium, magnesium, albumin and plasma osmolarity 
and arterial blood gases should be measured in all 
Environmental poisoning and illness 
9
223
Bangladesh, Nepal, Thailand, Taiwan, China, Mexico 
and South America, where a large proportion of the 
drinking water (ground water) has a high arsenic 
content, placing large population groups at risk. The 
World Health Organization (WHO) guideline value for 
arsenic content in tube well water is 10 µg/L.
Health effects associated with chronic exposure to 
arsenic in drinking water are shown in Box 9.15. In 
exposed individuals, high concentrations of arsenic are 
present in bone, hair and nails. Specific treatments are 
of no benefit in chronic arsenic toxicity and recovery 
from the peripheral neuropathy may never be complete. 
The emphasis should be on the prevention of exposure 
to arsenic in drinking water.
Fluorosis
Fluoride poisoning can result either from exposure to 
excessive quantities of fluoride (> 10 ppm) in drinking 
water or from industrial exposure to fluoride dust and 
consumption of brick teas. Clinical features include 
yellow staining and pitting of permanent teeth, osteo-
sclerosis, soft tissue calcification, deformities (e.g. 
kyphosis) and joint ankylosis. Changes in the bones of 
the thoracic cage may lead to rigidity that causes dysp-
noea on exertion. Very high doses of fluoride may cause 
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, seizures and muscle 
spasm. In calcium-deficient children, the toxic effects of 
fluoride manifest even at marginally high exposures to 
fluoride.
In endemic areas, such as Jordan, Turkey, Chile, 
India, Bangladesh, China and Tibet, fluorosis is a major 
public health problem. The maximum impact is seen in 
communities engaged in physically strenuous agricul-
tural or industrial activities. Dental fluorosis is endemic 
in East Africa and some West African countries.
patients with suspected methanol or ethylene glycol 
toxicity. The osmolal and anion gaps should be calcu-
lated (see Box 9.5, p. 209). Initially, poisoning is associ-
ated with an increased osmolar gap, but as toxic 
metabolites are produced, an increased anion gap asso-
ciated with metabolic acidosis will develop. The diagno-
sis can be confirmed by measurement of ethylene glycol 
or methanol concentrations, but assays are not widely 
available.
An antidote, either ethanol or fomepizole, should be 
administered to all patients with suspected significant 
exposure while awaiting the results of laboratory inves-
tigations. These block alcohol dehydrogenase and delay 
the formation of toxic metabolites until the parent 
drug is eliminated in the urine or by dialysis. The 
antidote should be continued until ethylene glycol or 
methanol concentrations are undetectable. Metabolic 
acidosis should be corrected with sodium bicarbonate 
(e.g. 250 mL of 1.26% solution, repeated as necessary). 
Convulsions should be treated with an intravenous 
benzodiazepine. In ethylene glycol poisoning, hypo­
calcaemia should only be corrected if there are severe 
ECG features or seizures occur, since this may increase 
calcium oxalate crystal formation.
Haemodialysis or haemodiafiltration should be used 
in severe poisoning, especially if renal failure is present 
or there is visual loss in the context of methanol poison-
ing. It should be continued until acute toxic features are 
no longer present and ethylene glycol or methanol con-
centrations are no longer detectable.
Aluminium and zinc phosphide
These rodenticides and fumigants are a common means 
of self-poisoning in northern India. The mortality rate 
for aluminium phosphide ingestion has been estimated 
at 60%; zinc phosphide ingestion appears less toxic, at 
about 2%. When ingested, both compounds react with 
gastric acid to form phosphine, a potent pulmonary and 
gastrointestinal toxicant. Clinical features include severe 
gastrointestinal disturbances, chest tightness, cough and 
breathlessness progressing to ARDS and respiratory 
failure, tremor, paraesthesiae, convulsions, coma, tachy-
cardia, metabolic acidosis, electrolyte disturbances, 
hypoglycaemia, myocarditis, liver and renal failure, and 
leucopenia. Just a few tablets can be fatal.
Detection of phosphine in the exhaled air or stomach 
aspirate using either a silver nitrate-impregnated strip 
or specific phosphine detector tube is diagnostic, but gas 
chromatography provides the most sensitive indicator. 
Treatment is supportive and directed at correcting elec-
trolyte abnormalities and treating complications; there 
is no specific antidote. Early gastric lavage is sometimes 
used, often with vegetable oil to reduce the release of 
toxic phosphine, but the benefit is uncertain.
ENVIRONMENTAL POISONING  
AND ILLNESS
Arsenism
Chronic arsenic exposure from drinking water has 
been reported in many countries, especially India, 
Gastrointestinal tract
• Anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, diarrhoea, increased 
salivation, metallic taste
Neurological
• Peripheral neuropathy (sensory and motor) with muscle 
wasting and fasciculation, ataxia
Skin
• Hyperpigmentation, palmar and plantar keratosis, alopecia, 
multiple epitheliomas, Mee’s lines (transverse white lines on 
finger nails)
Eyes
• Conjunctivitis, corneal necrosis and ulceration
Bone marrow
• Aplastic anaemia
Other
• Low-grade fever, vasospasm and gangrene, jaundice, 
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly
Increased risk of malignancy
• Lung, liver, bladder, kidney, larynx and lymphoid system
9.15  Clinical features of chronic 
arsenic poisoning
Poisoning
9
224
ENVENOMING
Envenoming occurs when a venomous animal injects 
sufficient venom by a bite or a sting into a prey item or 
perceived predator to cause deleterious local and/or 
systemic effects. Venomous animals generally use their 
venom to acquire and in some cases predigest prey, 
with defensive use a secondary function. Accidental 
encounters between venomous animals and humans are 
SUBSTANCES LESS COMMONLY TAKEN 
IN OVERDOSE
Boxes 9.16 and 9.17 respectively give an overview of the 
clinical features and management for some substances 
that are less often encountered in overdose.
Anticonvulsants
Carbamazepine, phenytoin
• Cerebellar signs
• Convulsions
• Cardiac arrhythmias
• Coma
Sodium valproate
• Coma
• Metabolic acidosis
Isoniazid
• Peripheral neuropathy
• Convulsions
Theophylline
• Cardiac arrhythmias
• Convulsions
• Coma
Corrosives and bleach
• Injuries to stomach (esp. 
acids) and oesophagus 
(esp. alkali)
• GI perforation and late 
strictures
• Aspiration pneumonitis
Lead, e.g. chronic occupational exposure, leaded paint, water 
contaminated by lead pipes, use of kohl cosmetics
• Abdominal pain
• Microcytic anaemia with 
basophilic stippling
• Headache and 
encephalopathy
• Motor neuropathy
• Nephrotoxicity
• Hypertension
• Hypocalcaemia
Petroleum distillates, white spirit, kerosene
• Vomiting
• Aspiration pneumonitis
Paraquat
• Progressive respiratory 
fibrosis with respiratory 
failure
• Buccal ulceration
• Renal failure
Organochlorines, e.g. DDT, lindane, dieldrin, endosulfan
• Nausea, vomiting
• Agitation
• Fasciculation
• Paraesthesiae (face, 
extremities)
• Convulsions
• Coma
• Respiratory depression
• Cardiac arrhythmias
• Hyperthermia
• Rhabdomyolysis
• Pulmonary oedema
• Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
Pyrethroid insecticides, e.g. cypermethrin, permethrin, 
imiprothrin
• Skin contact: dermatitis, 
skin paraesthesiae
• Eye contact: lacrimation, 
photophobia and oedema 
of the eyelids
• Inhalation: dyspnoea, 
nausea, headaches
• Ingestion: epigastric pain, 
nausea, vomiting, 
headache, coma, 
convulsions, pulmonary 
oedema
Anticoagulant rodenticides, (e.g. brodifacoum, bromodialone) 
and warfarin
• Abnormal bleeding (prolonged)
9.16  Clinical features associated with substances 
taken less commonly in overdose
Anticonvulsants
Carbamazepine, phenytoin
• Multiple-dose activated charcoal (carbamazepine)
Sodium valproate
• Haemodialysis for severe poisoning
Isoniazid
• Activated charcoal
• IV pyridoxine
Theophylline
• Multiple-dose activated charcoal
Corrosives and bleach
• Gastric lavage and neutralising chemicals are contraindicated
• Chest X-ray to exclude perforation
• Consider early endoscopy or Gastrografin studies to assess 
extent of damage and need for surgery
Lead
• Prevent further exposure
• Measure blood lead concentration, full blood count and blood 
film, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests and calcium
• Abdominal X-ray in children to detect pica
• Bone X-ray for ‘lead lines’
• Chelation therapy with dimercaprol, DMSA, DMPS or sodium 
calcium edetate for severe poisoning (esp. in children)
Petroleum distillates, white spirit, kerosene
• Gastric lavage contraindicated
• Activated charcoal ineffective
• Oxygen and nebulised bronchodilators
• Chest X-ray to assess pulmonary effects
Paraquat
• Urine screen for paraquat
• Multiple-dose activated charcoal
• Check blood paraquat concentration and compare with 
survival curve for prognosis
Organochlorines
• Activated charcoal (with nasogastric aspiration for liquid 
preparations) within 1 hour of ingestion
• Cardiac monitoring
Pyrethroid insecticides
• Symptomatic and supportive care
• Washing contaminated skin makes irritation worse
Anticoagulant rodenticides and warfarin
• Monitor INR/prothrombin time
• Vitamin K1 by slow IV injection if coagulopathy
• Fresh frozen plasma or specific clotting factors for bleeding
(DMPS = 2,3-dimercapto-1-propane sulphonate; DMSA = 
2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid)
9.17  Specific management of poisoning by 
substances taken less commonly in overdose
Envenoming
9
225
frequent, particularly in the rural tropics, where millions 
of cases of venomous bites and stings occur annually. 
Globally, an increasing number of exotic venomous 
animals are kept privately, so cases of envenoming may 
present to hospitals where doctors have insufficient 
knowledge to manage potentially complex presenta-
tions. Doctors everywhere should thus be aware of the 
basic principles of management of envenoming and how 
to seek expert support.
Venom
Venom is a complex mixture of diverse components, 
often with several separate toxins that can cause adverse 
effects in humans, and each potentially capable of 
multiple effects (Box 9.18). Venom is produced at con-
siderable metabolic cost, so is used sparingly; thus only 
some bites/stings by venomous animals result in signifi-
cant envenoming, the remainder being ‘dry bites’. The 
concept of dry bites is important in understanding 
approaches to management.
Venomous animals
There are many animal groups that contain venomous 
species (Box 9.19). The epidemiology estimates shown 
reflect the importance of snakes and scorpions as 
causes of severe or lethal envenoming. Social insect 
stings from bees and wasps may also cause lethal ana-
phylaxis. Other venomous animals may commonly 
envenom humans but cause mostly non-lethal effects. 
A few rarely envenom humans, but have a high poten-
tial for severe or lethal envenoming. These include 
box jellyfish, cone shells, blue-ringed octopus, paralysis 
ticks and Australian funnel web spiders. Within any 
given group, particularly snakes, there may be a wide 
range of clinical presentations. Some are described here 
but for a more detailed discussion of the types of 
Venom component
Clinical effects
Type of venomous animal
Neurotoxin
Paralytic
Flaccid paralysis
Some snakes, paralysis ticks, cone shells, 
blue-ringed octopus
Excitatory
Neuroexcitation: autonomic storm, cardiotoxicity, 
pulmonary oedema
Some scorpions, spiders, jellyfish
Myotoxins
Systemic or local myolysis
Some snakes
Cardiotoxins
Direct or indirect cardiotoxicity; cardiac collapse, 
shock
Some snakes, scorpions, spiders, and jellyfish
Haemostasis system 
toxins
Vary from rapid coagulopathy and bleeding to 
thrombosis, deep venous thrombosis and 
pulmonary emboli
Many snakes and a few scorpions
Brazilian caterpillars
Nephrotoxins
Renal damage
Some snakes, multiple bee, wasp stings
Necrotoxins
Local tissue injury/necrosis, shock
Some snakes, a few scorpions, spiders, 
jellyfish and stingrays
Allergic toxins
Induce acute allergic response (direct and indirect)
Almost all venoms but particularly those of 
social insects (bees, wasps, ants)
9.18  Key venom effects*
*All venom components have lethal potential.
Phyla
Principal venomous 
animal groups
Estimated number of human 
cases/year
Estimated number of human 
deaths/year
Chordata
Snakes
> 2.5 million
> 100 000
Spiny fish
? > 100 000
Close to 0
Stingrays
? > 100 000
? < 10
Arthropoda
Scorpions
> 1 million
? < 5000
Spiders
? > 100 000
? < 100
Paralysis ticks
? > 1000
? < 10
Insects
? > 1 million
? > 1000*
Mollusca
Cone shells
? < 1000
? < 10
Blue-ringed octopus
? < 100
? < 10
Coelenterata
Jellyfish
? > 1 million
? < 10
*Social insect stings cause death by anaphylaxis rather than primary venom toxicity, except for massive multiple sting attacks.
9.19  Venomous animals and human envenoming
Poisoning
9
226
venomous animal, their venoms and effects on humans 
see www.toxinology.com.
Clinical effects
With the exception of dry bites where no significant 
effects occur, venomous bites/stings can result in three 
broad classes of effect.
Local effects
These vary from trivial to severe (Box 9.20). There may 
be minimal or no local effects with some snakebites (not 
even pain), yet lethal systemic envenoming may still be 
present. For other species, local effects predominate over 
systemic, and for some species such as snakes, both are 
important.
General systemic effects
By definition, these are non-specific (see Box 9.20). Shock 
is an important complication of major local envenoming 
by some snake species and, if inadequately treated, can 
prove lethal, especially in children.
Specific systemic effects
These are important in both diagnosis and treatment.
• Neurotoxic flaccid paralysis can develop very rapidly, 
progressing from mild weakness to full respiratory 
paralysis in less than 30 minutes (blue-ringed 
octopus bite, cone shell sting), or may develop far 
more slowly, over hours (some snakes) to days 
(paralysis tick). For neurotoxic snakes, the cranial 
nerves are usually involved first, with ptosis a 
common initial sign (Fig. 9.7). From this, paralysis 
may extend to the limbs, with weakness and loss of 
deep tendon reflexes, then respiratory paralysis.
• Excitatory neurotoxins cause an ‘autonomic storm’, 
with profuse sweating, variable cardiac effects and 
cardiac failure, sometimes with pulmonary oedema 
(notably Australian funnel web spider bite, some 
scorpions such as Indian red scorpion). This type of 
envenoming can be rapidly fatal (many scorpions, 
funnel web spiders), or may cause distressing 
symptoms but constitute a lesser risk of death 
(widow spiders, banana spiders).
Fig. 9.7  Ptosis following neurotoxin envenomation. 
• Myotoxicity can initially be silent, then present with 
generalised muscle pain, tenderness, myoglobinuria 
and huge rises in serum creatine kinase (CK). 
Secondary renal failure can precipitate potentially 
lethal hyperkalaemic cardiotoxicity.
• Cardiotoxicity is often secondary, but symptoms and 
signs are non-specific in most cases.
• Haemostasis system toxins cause a variety of effects, 
depending on the type of toxin, and the specific 
features can be diagnostic. Coagulopathy may 
present as bruising and bleeding from the bite site, 
gums and intravenous sites. Surgical interventions 
are high-risk in such cases. Other venoms cause 
thrombosis, usually presenting as deep venous 
thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolus or stroke 
(particularly Caribbean/Martinique vipers).
• Renal damage in envenoming is mostly secondary, 
although some species such as Russell’s vipers can 
cause primary renal damage. The presentation is 
similar in both cases, with changes in urine output 
(polyuria, oliguria or anuria) or rises in creatinine 
and urea. In cases with intravascular haemolysis, 
secondary renal damage is likely. The clinical effects 
of specific animals in different regions of the world 
are shown in Boxes 9.21–9.23.
Management
It is important to determine an accurate diagnosis and 
the degree of risk, so that severe and potentially lethal 
cases are identified quickly and managed as a priority. 
With correct care, even severe cases are treatable, but 
delays in initiating effective treatment can severely com-
promise outcome. Expert advice should thus be sought 
at the earliest opportunity.
First aid
Pre-hospital first aid (Box 9.24) can be critical in major 
envenoming. It depends on the type of envenoming, but 
the key principles are to:
• support vital systems
• delay or prevent the onset of envenoming
• avoid harmful ‘treatments’ such as electric shock, 
cut and suck, tourniquets, and cryotherapy in 
snakebite.
Many preventable deaths occur prior to hospital 
transfer when ineffective cardiorespiratory resuscitation 
is given to patients with respiratory paralysis or cardiac 
arrest/failure, which can occur due to either primary 
envenoming or an anaphylactic reaction (p. 91).
Local effects
• Pain
• Sweating
• Swelling
• Erythema
• Bleeding and bruising
• Blistering
• Necrosis
• Major direct tissue trauma 
(e.g. stingray injuries)
Non-specific systemic effects
• Headache
• Nausea
• Vomiting and diarrhoea
• Abdominal pain
• Hypertension or 
hypotension
• Tachycardia or bradycardia
• Dizziness
• Collapse
• Convulsions
• Shock
• Cardiac arrest
9.20  Local and systemic effects of envenoming
Envenoming
9
227
Specific tests for venom are currently only commer-
cially available for Australian snakebite but are likely 
to be developed for snakebite in other regions. They are 
not available for other types of envenoming, where 
venom concentrations are low. For snakebite, a screen 
for envenoming includes full blood count, coagulation 
screen, urea and electrolytes, creatinine, CK and ECG. 
Lung function tests, peripheral oximetry or arterial 
blood gases may be indicated in cases with potential or 
established respiratory failure. In areas without access 
to routine laboratory tests, the whole-blood clotting 
time (using a glass test tube) is a valuable test for 
coagulopathy. A derivative of this, the 20-minute whole-
blood clotting test is useful (a few millilitres of venous 
blood are placed in a glass vessel and checked for clot-
ting at 20 minutes).
If patients state that they have been bitten by a 
particular species, ensure this is accurate. Private 
keepers of venomous animals may not have accurate 
Diagnosis
Envenoming is usually obvious but might not be 
on some occasions. Humans may be bitten or stung by 
an unseen organism, or may not be aware of a bite or 
sting having occurred at all. In such cases the patient 
may present with a variety of symptoms but with no 
linking history to indicate envenoming. Accordingly, 
envenoming should be considered as a possible diagno-
sis in cases of unexplained paralysis, myotoxicity, 
coagulopathy, nephrotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, pulmo-
nary oedema, necrosis, collapse and convulsions.
History, examination and laboratory findings help 
to confirm or exclude a diagnosis of envenoming and 
to determine its extent. It is also important to obtain 
a description of the organism if possible. Multiple 
bites or stings are more likely to cause major envenom-
ing. Ask for specific symptoms and search for specific 
signs that may indicate the type and extent of envenom-
ing (p. 207).
Scientific name1
Common name
Clinical effects
Antivenom/antidote/treatment
Indian subcontinent
Bungarus spp. (E)
Kraits
Flaccid paralysis2,3, myolysis4, 
hyponatraemia4
Indian PV or specific
Naja spp. (E)
Cobras
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis/
blistering, shock
Indian PV or specific
Ophiophagus hannah (E)
King cobra
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis, shock
Indian PV or specific
Echis spp. (Vv)
Saw-scaled vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis/blistering, renal failure
Indian PV or specific
Daboia russelli (Vv)
Russell’s viper
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis/blistering, myolysis, renal 
failure, shock, flaccid paralysis2
Indian PV or specific
Hypnale spp. (Vc)
Hump-nosed vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, 
renal failure
Try Indian PV
Trimeresurus4 spp. (Vc)
Green pit vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis, shock
Indian PV or specific
Mesobuthus spp. (Sc)
Indian scorpions
Neuroexcitation, cardiotoxicity
Indian specific AV, prazosin
East Asia
Bungarus spp. (E)
Kraits
Flaccid paralysis2,3
Specific AV from country
Naja spp. (E)
Cobras (some spitters)
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis/
blistering, shock
Specific AV from country
Ophiophagus hannah (E)
King cobra
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis, shock
King cobra AV
Calloselasma rhodostoma (Vc)
Malayan pit viper
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis/blistering, renal failure, shock
Specific AV from country
Daboia russelli (Vv)
Russell’s viper
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis/blistering, renal failure, shock
Specific AV from country
Gloydius (Vc)
Mamushis, pit vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis/blistering, shock, renal failure, 
flaccid paralysis2
Specific AV from country
Trimeresurus5 (Vc)
Green pit vipers, habus
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis/blistering, shock
Specific AV from country
1Family names: A = Atractaspididae; C = ‘Colubridae’ (mostly ‘non-venomous’; family subject to major taxonomic revisions); E = Elapidae (all venomous); 
Sc = scorpions; Vc = Viperidae crotalinae (New World and Asian vipers); Vv = Viperidae viperinae (Old World vipers). 2Pre-synaptic. 3Post-synaptic. 4Only reported 
so far for B. candidus and B. multicinctus. 5Genus is subject to major taxonomic change (split into at least eight genera).
9.21  Important venomous animals in Asia
(AV = antivenom; PV = polyvalent)
More information is available from WHO-SEARO Guidelines for the management of snakebite and www.toxinology.com.
Poisoning
9
228
knowledge of what they are keeping, and misidentifica-
tion of a snake, scorpion or spider can have dire conse-
quences if the wrong antivenom is used.
Treatment
Envenoming is managed on two levels, which must be 
delivered in tandem:
• supportive management of the organ systems 
affected and of the whole patient
• treating the effects with specific treatments/
antidotes (usually antivenom).
For a snakebite by a potentially lethal species such as 
Russell’s viper, the patient might have local effects with 
oedema, blistering, necrosis, and resultant fluid shifts 
causing shock, and at the same time have systemic 
effects such as intractable vomiting, coagulopathy, 
paralysis and secondary renal failure. Specific treat-
ment with antivenom will be required to reverse 
Scientific name1
Common name
Clinical effects
Antivenom/antidote/treatment
North America
Crotalus spp. (Vc)
Rattlesnakes
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering (flaccid paralysis2 rare)
CroFab AV® or Bioclon 
Antivipmyn AV®
Sistrurus spp. (Vc)
Massasaugas
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, shock
CroFab AV® or Bioclon 
Antivipmyn AV®
Agkistrodon spp. (Vc)
Copperheads and 
moccasins
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, shock
CroFab AV® or Bioclon 
Antivipmyn AV®
Micrurus spp. (E)
Coral snakes
Flaccid paralysis3
Bioclon Coralmyn AV®
Latrodectus mactans
Widow spider
Neuroexcitation
MSD Widow spider AV®
Centruroides sculpturatus
Arizona bark scorpion
Neuroexcitation
Bioclon Anascorp AV®
Central and South America
Crotalus spp. (Vc)
Rattlesnakes
Flaccid paralysis2, myolysis, procoagulant 
coagulopathy, shock, renal failure
Specific AV from country
Bothrops spp. (Vc)
Lancehead vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, shock, renal failure
Specific AV from country
Bothriechis spp. (Vc)
Eyelash pit vipers
Shock, pain and swelling
Specific AV from country
Lachesis spp. (Vc)
Bushmasters
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, renal 
failure, local necrosis/blistering
Specific AV from country
Micrurus spp. (E)
Coral snakes
Flaccid paralysis2,3, myolysis, renal failure
Specific AV from country
Tityus serrulatus
Brazilian scorpion
Neuroexcitation, shock
Instituto Butantan scorpion AV®
Loxosceles spp.
Recluse spiders
Local necrosis
Instituto Butantan spider AV®
Phoneutria nigriventer
Banana spider
Neuroexcitation, shock
Instituto Butantan spider AV®
Potamotrygon, Dasyatis 
spp.
Freshwater stingrays
Necrosis of bite area, shock, severe pain 
and oedema
No available AV; good wound 
care
Australia
Pseudonaja spp. (E)
Brown snakes
Procoagulant coagulopathy, renal failure, 
flaccid paralysis2 (rare)
CSL brown snake AV® or PVAV
Notechis spp. (E)
Tiger snakes
Procoagulant coagulopathy, myolysis, 
flaccid paralysis2,3, renal failure
CSL tiger snake AV® or PVAV
Oxyuranus spp. (E)
Taipans
Procoagulant coagulopathy, flaccid 
paralysis2,3, myolysis, renal failure
CSL taipan AV® or PVAV
Acanthophis spp. (E)
Death adders
Flaccid paralysis3
CSL death adder AV® or PVAV
Pseudechis spp.
Black and mulga snakes
Anticoagulant coagulopathy, myolysis, 
renal failure
CSL black snake AV® or PVAV
Enhydrina schistosa
Sea snakes (all species 
globally)
Flaccid paralysis and/or myolysis
CSL sea snake AV®
Atrax, Hadronyche spp.
Funnel web spiders
Neuroexcitation, shock
CSL funnel web spider AV®
Latrodectus hasseltii
Red back spider
Neuroexcitation, pain and sweating
CSL red back spider AV®
Chironex fleckeri
Box jellyfish
Neuroexcitation, cardiotoxicity, local 
necrosis
CSL box jellyfish AV®
Synanceia spp.
Stonefish
Severe local pain
CSL stonefish AV®
1For family name, see Box 9.21. 2Pre-synaptic. 3Post-synaptic. (CSL = CSL Ltd, Melbourne, producer of Australian antivenoms)
9.22  Important venomous animals in the Americas and Australia
Envenoming
9
229
Scientific name1
Common name
Clinical effects
Antivenom/antidote/treatment
Africa
Naja spp. (E)
Cobras
Non-spitters
Flaccid paralysis3 ± local necrosis/
blistering
South African PV or Sanofi Pasteur 
FavAfrica AV®
Spitters
Local necrosis/blistering (flaccid 
paralysis3 uncommon)
South African PV or Sanofi Pasteur 
FavAfrica AV®
Dendroaspis spp. (E)
Mambas
Mamba neurotoxin flaccid  
paralysis and muscle  
fasciculation, shock, necrosis 
(uncommon)
South African PV or Sanofi Pasteur 
FavAfrica AV®
Hemachatus haemachatus (E)
Rinkhals
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis, 
shock
South African PV
Atheris spp. (Vv)
Bush vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, 
pain and swelling
No available AV (can try South  
African AV)
Bitis spp. (Vv)
Puff adders etc.
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, 
cardiotoxicity, local necrosis/
blistering
South African PV or Sanofi Pasteur 
FavAfrica AV®
Causus spp. (Vv)
Night adders
Pain and swelling
No available AV
Echis spp. (Vv)
Carpet vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, 
renal failure, local necrosis/
blistering
Specific anti-Echis AV for species/
geographic region or Sanofi Pasteur 
FavAfrica AV®
Cerastes spp. (Vv)
Horned desert vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local 
necrosis, shock
Specific or polyspecific AV  
covering Cerastes from country 
of origin
Dispholidus typus (C)
Boomslang
Procoagulant coagulopathy,  
shock
Boomslang AV
Androctonus spp.
North African scorpions
Neuroexcitation
Specific scorpion AV (Algeria,  
Tunisia, Sanofi Pasteur  
Scorpifav®)
Leiurus quinquestriatus
Yellow scorpion
Neuroexcitation, shock
Specific scorpion AV (Algeria,  
Tunisia, Sanofi Pasteur  
Scorpifav®)
Europe
Vipera spp. (Vv)
Vipers and adders
Shock, local necrosis/blistering, 
procoagulant coagulopathy (flaccid 
paralysis2 rare)
ViperaTab AV® or Zagreb AV® or 
SanofiPasteur Viperfav AV®
1For family name, see Box 9.21. 2Pre-synaptic. 3Post-synaptic.
  9.23  Important venomous animals in Africa and Europe
More information is available from WHO Guidelines for the prevention and clinical management of snakebite in Africa and www.toxinology.com.
Method
Situations where indicated
Immobilisation of bitten limb
All snakebites
Pressure bandage and immobilisation of 
bitten limb
Non-necrotic snakebites (Australian snakes, sea snakes, some cobras, king cobra, 
kraits, coral snakes, mambas, a few vipers, Australian funnel web spiders, blue-ringed 
octopus, cone shell)
Local heat (hot water immersion or 
shower, to 45°C)
Venomous fish stings, stingray injuries, jellyfish stings (except possibly box jellyfish)
Staunching local bleeding
Traumatic injury with significant bleeding (some stingray injuries)
Cardiorespiratory support
Cardiac or respiratory impairment and particularly if respiratory paralysis  
is developing (some snakes, paralysis ticks, blue-ringed octopus, cone  
shells)
No specific first aid
Widow and recluse spider bites
9.24  First aid for envenoming
Poisoning
9
230
red scorpion stings, though antivenom is now the pre-
ferred treatment.
Antibiotics are not routinely required for most bites/
stings, though a few animals regularly cause significant 
wound infection/abscess, such as some South American 
pit vipers and stingrays. Tetanus is a risk in some bites 
or stings, such as snakebite, but intramuscular toxoid 
should not be given until any coagulopathy is reversed.
Mechanical ventilation (p. 194) is vital for established 
respiratory paralysis that will not reverse with anti­
venom, and may be required for prolonged periods – up 
to several months in some cases.
Follow-up
Cases with significant envenoming and those receiving 
antivenom should be followed up to ensure that any 
complications have resolved and to identify any delayed 
envenoming.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Books and journal articles
Meier J, White J. Handbook of clinical toxicology of animal 
venoms and poisons. Boca Raton: CRC; 1995.
Thomas SH, Watson ID, on behalf of the National Poisons 
Information Service and Association of Clinical 
Biochemists. Laboratory analyses for poisoned patients. 
Annals of Clinical Biochemistry 2002; 39:328–339.
White J. Snakebite and spiderbite: management guidelines 
for South Australia; 2007.
WHO Regional Office for Africa. Guidelines for the 
prevention and clinical management of snakebite  
in Africa; 2010.
WHO-SEARO. Guidelines for the management of snake-
bites (for SE Asia); 2010.
The last three documents can be accessed via www. 
toxinology.org/Links.htm.
Websites
http://curriculum.toxicology.wikispaces.net/ Free access to 
educational material related to poisoning.
www.toxbase.org Toxbase, the clinical toxicology database of the 
UK National Poisons Information Service. Free for UK health 
professionals but registration is required. Access for overseas 
users by special arrangement.
www.toxinology.com Women’s and Children’s Hospital 
Adelaide Toxinology Department.
www.toxnet.nlm.nih.gov US National Library of Medicine’s 
Toxnet: a hazardous substances databank, including Toxline for 
references to literature on drugs and other chemicals.
www.who.int/gho/phe/chemical safety/poisons centres/
en/ World directory of poisons centres held by the WHO, 
including interactive map and contact details.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 206 insets (Self-cutting) Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson 
C. Macleod’s clinical examination. 11th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2005 (p. 48, Fig. 2.16); copyright 
Elsevier. (Chemical burn) www.firewiki.net. (Needle tracks) 
www.deep6inc.com. (Pinpoint pupil) http://
drugrecognition.com/images. (Injected conjunctiva) 
http://knol.google.com.
the coagulopathy, and may prevent worsening of the 
paralysis and reduce the vomiting, but will not greatly 
affect the local tissue damage or the renal failure or 
shock. The latter will require intravenous fluid therapy, 
possibly respiratory support, renal dialysis and local 
wound care, possibly including antibiotics.
Each animal will cause a particular pat­tern of enven-
oming, requiring a tailored response. Listing all of these 
is beyond the scope of this chapter (see Further informa-
tion below). Pulse, blood pressure, pulse oximetry and 
urine output should be monitored in all cases.
Antivenom
This is the most important tool in treating envenoming. 
It is made by hyperimmunising an animal, usually 
horses, to produce antibodies against venom. Once 
refined, these bind to venom toxins and render them 
inactive or allow their rapid clearance. Antivenom is 
only available for certain venomous animals and cannot 
reverse all types of envenoming. With a few exceptions, 
it should be given intravenously, with adrenaline 
(epinephrine) ready in case of anaphylaxis. It should 
only be used when clearly indicated, and indications 
will vary between animals. It is critical that the correct 
antivenom is used at the appropriate dose. Doses vary 
widely between antivenoms; those recommended for 
North American antivenoms are not applicable to those 
elsewhere. In some situations (such as the Indian sub-
continent), pre-treatment with subcutaneous adrenaline 
may reduce the chance of anaphylaxis to antivenom.
Antivenom can sometimes reverse post-synaptic 
neurotoxic paralysis (α-bungarotoxin-like neurotoxins) 
but will not usually reverse established pre-synaptic 
paralysis (β-bungarotoxin-like neurotoxins), so should 
be given before major paralysis has occurred. Coagu-
lopathy is best reversed by antivenom, but even after all 
venom is neutralised, there may be a delay of hours 
before normal coagulation is restored. More antivenom 
should not be given because coagulopathy has failed 
to normalise fully in the first 1–3 hours (except in 
very particular circumstances). Thrombocytopenia may 
persist for days, despite antivenom. The role of anti­
venom in reversing established myolysis and renal 
failure is uncertain. Antivenom may help limit local 
tissue effects/injury in the bitten limb, but this is quite 
variable and time-dependent. Neuroexcitatory enven-
oming can respond very well to antivenom (Australian 
funnel web spider bites; Mexican, South American, 
Indian scorpion stings), but there is controversy about 
the effectiveness of antivenom for some species (some 
North African and Middle Eastern scorpions). The role 
of antivenom in limiting local venom effects, including 
necrosis, is also controversial; it is most likely to be effec-
tive when given early.
All patients receiving antivenom are at risk of both 
early and late adverse reactions, including anaphylaxis 
(early; not always IgE-related) and serum sickness (late).
Other treatments
Anticholinesterases are used as an adjunctive treatment 
for post-synaptic paralysis.
Prazosin (an α-adrenoceptor antagonist) is used in 
the management of hypertension or pulmonary oedema 
in scorpion sting cardiotoxicity, particularly for Indian 
231
10 
Classification of psychiatric disorders 232
Epidemiology of psychiatric disorders 232
Aetiology of psychiatric disorders 232
Diagnosing psychiatric disorders 233
Presenting problems in psychiatric  
illness 234
Anxiety symptoms 234
Depressed mood 235
Elated mood 235
Medically unexplained somatic symptoms 236
Delusions and hallucinations 236
Disturbed and aggressive behaviour 237
Confusion 238
Self-harm 238
Alcohol misuse 240
Substance misuse 240
Psychological factors affecting medical 
conditions 240
Treating psychiatric disorders 240
Biological treatments 240
Psychological treatments 241
Social interventions 242
Medical psychiatry
M.C. Sharpe
S.M. Lawrie
Psychiatric disorders 242
Stress-related disorders 242
Anxiety disorders 242
Mood disorders 243
Somatoform disorders 245
Factitious disorders and malingering 247
Schizophrenia 247
Delirium, dementia and other organic 
disorders 250
Alcohol misuse and dependence 252
Substance misuse disorder 254
Personality disorders 255
Eating disorders 255
Puerperal disorders 256
Psychiatry and the law 257
Medical psychiatry
10
232
Psychiatric disorders have traditionally been considered 
as ‘mental’ rather than as ‘physical’ illnesses. This is 
because they manifest with disordered functioning in 
the areas of emotion, perception, thinking and memory, 
and/or have had no clearly established biological basis. 
However, as research identifies abnormalities of the 
brain in an increasing number of psychiatric disorders 
and an important role for psychological and behavioural 
factors in many medical illnesses, a clear distinction 
between mental and physical illness has become increas-
ingly questionable. We therefore refer to psychiatric dis-
orders simply to mean those conditions traditionally 
regarded as the province of psychiatry.
CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS
There are two main classifications of psychiatric disor-
ders in current use:
•	 the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual (4th edition), or DSM-IV
•	 the World Health Organization’s International 
Classification of Disease (10th edition), known as 
ICD-10.
The two systems are similar; here we use the ICD-10 
classification (Box 10.1).
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS
Psychiatric disorders are amongst the most common of 
all human illnesses. The relative frequency of each varies 
with the setting (Box 10.2). In the general population, 
depression, anxiety disorders and adjustment disorders 
are most common (10%) and psychosis is rare (1–2%); in 
acute medical wards of general hospitals, organic disor-
ders such as delirium (20–30%) are prevalent; in special-
ist general psychiatric services, psychoses are the most 
common disorders.
AETIOLOGY OF PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS
The aetiology of psychiatric disorders is multifactorial, 
with a combination of biological, psychological and 
social causes. Each of these factors may play a role in 
predisposing to, precipitating or perpetuating the disor-
der (Box 10.3).
Biological factors
Genetic
Genetic factors play a predisposing role in many psychi-
atric disorders, including schizophrenia and bipolar 
Stress-related disorders
• Acute stress disorder
• Adjustment disorder
• Post-traumatic stress disorder
Anxiety disorders
• Generalised anxiety
• Phobic anxiety
• Panic disorder
• Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Affective (mood) disorders
• Depressive disorder
• Mania and bipolar disorder
Schizophrenia and delusional 
disorders
Substance misuse disorders
• Alcohol
• Drugs
Organic disorders
• Acute, e.g. delirium
• Chronic, e.g. dementia
Disorders of adult personality 
and behaviour
• Personality disorder
• Factitious disorder
Eating disorders
• Anorexia nervosa
• Bulimia nervosa
Somatoform disorders
• Somatisation disorder
• Dissociative (conversion) disorder
• Pain disorder
• Hypochondriasis
• Body dysmorphic disorder
• Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
Neurasthenia
Puerperal mental disorders
10.1  Classification of psychiatric disorders
Medical/surgical
Psychiatric services
General practice
Outpatients
Inpatients
Adjustment disorders
++
++
+++
++
Depression/anxiety
++
++
+++
+++
Alcohol abuse
++
++
+++
+++
Personality disorders
++
++
++
+++
Somatoform disorders
+
+++
++
+
Delirium
–
–
+++
–
Psychosis
–
–
–
+++
(– rare; + uncommon; ++ common; +++ very common)
10.2  Prevalence of psychiatric disorders by medical setting
Diagnosing psychiatric disorders
10
233
affective disorder. However, whilst some disorders 
such as Huntington’s disease are due to mutations in 
a single gene, the genetic contribution to most psychi-
atric disorders is polygenic in nature and mediated by 
the combined effects of several genetic variants, each 
with modest effects and modulated by environmental 
factors.
Brain structure and function
Brain structure is grossly normal in most psychiatric 
disorders, although abnormalities may be observed 
in some conditions, such as generalised atrophy in 
Alzheimer’s disease and enlarged ventricles with a 
slight decrease in brain size in schizophrenia. The 
functioning of the brain, however, is commonly altered 
with, for example, changes in neurotransmitters such 
as dopamine, noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin), and differences 
in activity of specific areas of the brain, as seen on func-
tional brain scans.
Psychological and  
behavioural factors
Early environment
Early childhood adversity, such as emotional depriva-
tion or abuse, predisposes to psychiatric disorders such 
as depression and eating disorders in adulthood.
Personality
The relationship between personality and psychiatric 
disorder can be difficult to assess because the develop-
ment of psychiatric disorder can change a patient’s per-
sonality. However, some personality types predispose 
the individual to develop psychiatric disorder; for 
example, a depressive personality increases the risk of 
depression. A disordered personality may also perpetu-
ate a psychiatric disorder once it is established, leading 
to a poorer prognosis.
Behaviour
A person’s behaviour may predispose to the develop-
ment of a disorder (e.g. excess alcohol intake leading 
to dependence, and dieting to anorexia) or perpetuate it, 
as in persistent avoidance of the feared situation in 
phobias.
Social and environmental factors
Social isolation
The lack of a close, confiding relationship predisposes 
to some psychiatric disorders such as depression. The 
reduced social support resulting from having a psychi-
atric disorder may also act to perpetuate it.
Stressors
Social and environmental stressors often play an impor-
tant role in precipitating psychiatric disorder in those 
who are predisposed. For example, trauma in post-
traumatic stress disorder, losses (such as bereavement) 
in depression, and events perceived as threatening (such 
as potential loss of employment) in anxiety.
DIAGNOSING PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
Psychiatric assessment differs from a standard medical 
assessment in the following ways:
•	 There is greater emphasis on the history.
•	 It includes a systematic examination of the patient’s 
thinking, emotion and behaviour (mental state).
•	 It commonly includes the routine interviewing of an 
informant (usually a relative or friend who knows 
the patient), especially when the illness affects the 
patient’s ability to give an accurate history.
Because of its greater complexity, a full psychiatric 
history (Box 10.4) and detailed mental state examination 
(MSE) may take an hour or more. However, a brief 
mental state examination, usually taking no more than 
a few minutes (see below), should be part of the assess-
ment of all patients, not merely those deemed to be 
‘psychiatric’.
Psychiatric interview
The aims of the interview are to:
•	 establish a therapeutic relationship with the patient
•	 elicit the symptoms, history and background 
information (see Box 10.4)
•	 examine the mental state
•	 provide information, reassurance and advice.
Whilst some aspects of the patient’s mental state 
may be observed whilst the history is being taken, spe-
cific enquiries for important features should always 
be made.
Mental state examination
General appearance and behaviour
Any abnormalities of alertness or motor behaviour, such 
as restlessness or retardation, are noted. The level of 
consciousness should be determined, especially in the 
assessment of possible delirium.
Speech
Speed and fluency should be observed, including slow 
(retarded) speech and word-finding difficulty. ‘Pressure 
of speech’ describes rapid speech that is difficult to 
interrupt.
Predisposing
• Increase susceptibility to psychiatric disorder
• Established in utero or in childhood
• Operate throughout patient’s lifetime (e.g. genetic factors, 
congenital defects, disturbed family background, chronic 
physical illness)
Precipitating
• Trigger an episode of illness
• Determine its time of onset (e.g. stressful life events, acute 
physical illness)
Perpetuating
• Delay recovery from illness (e.g. lack of social support, 
chronic physical illness)
10.3  Classification of aetiological factors in 
psychiatric disorders
Medical psychiatry
10
234
Mood
This can be judged by facial expression, posture and 
movements. Patients should also be asked if they feel 
sad or depressed and if they lack ability to experience 
pleasure (anhedonia). Are they anxious, worried or 
tense? Is mood elevated with excess energy and a 
reduced need for sleep, as in mania?
Thoughts
The content of thought can be elicited by asking ‘What 
are your main concerns?’ Is thinking negative, guilty or 
hopeless, suggesting depression? Are there thoughts of 
self-harm? If so, enquiry should be made about plans. 
Is he or she excessively worried about many things, 
suggesting anxiety? Does the patient think that he or 
she is especially powerful, important or gifted (grandi-
ose thoughts), suggesting mania?
The form of thinking may also be abnormal. In schizo­
phrenia, patients may display loosened associations 
between ideas, making it difficult to follow their train of 
thought. There may also be abnormalities of thought 
possession, when patients experience the intrusion of 
alien thoughts into their mind or the broadcasting of 
their own thoughts to other people (p. 247).
Abnormal beliefs
A delusion is a false belief, out of keeping with a patient’s 
cultural background, which is held with conviction 
despite evidence to the contrary (p. 236).
Abnormal perceptions
Illusions are abnormal perceptions of real stimuli. Hal-
lucinations are sensory perceptions which occur in the 
absence of external stimuli: for example, hearing voices 
when no one is present (p. 237).
Cognitive function
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) is a useful 
screening questionnaire to detect cognitive impairment. 
A score of less than 24 out of 30 typically suggests cogni-
tive impairment. The Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Exami-
nation – Revised (ACE-R) provides a more comprehensive 
assessment. A brief clinical assessment is as follows:
•	 Memory. Registration of memories is tested by asking 
the patient to repeat simple new information, such 
as a name and address, immediately after hearing it. 
Short-term memory is assessed by asking him or her 
to repeat it after an interval of 1–2 minutes, during 
which time the patient’s attention should be diverted 
elsewhere. Long-term memory is assessed by 
gauging the recall of previous events.
•	 Concentration. Serial 7s is a test in which the patient 
is asked to subtract 7 from 100 and then 7 from the 
answer, and so on.
•	 Orientation. This is assessed by asking the patient 
about place – his or her exact location; time – what 
day, date, month and year it is now; and person 
– details of personal identity, such as name, date of 
birth, marital status and address.
•	 Intellectual ability. This can be gauged from the 
history of the patient’s educational background and 
attainments but can also be assessed during the 
interview from the patient’s speech, vocabulary and 
grasp of the interviewer’s questions.
Note that the degree of cognitive impairment in delir-
ium typically fluctuates over time, and consequently 
may be missed by a single assessment.
Patients’ own understanding of their 
symptoms (‘insight’)
Patients should be asked what they think their symp-
toms are due to, and whether they warrant treatment. 
Lack of insight refers to a failure to accept that one is ill 
and/or in need of treatment, and is characteristic of 
acute psychosis.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN 
PSYCHIATRIC ILLNESS
Anxiety symptoms
Anxiety may be transient, persistent, episodic or limited 
to specific situations. The symptoms of anxiety are both 
psychological and somatic (Box 10.5). The differential 
diagnosis of anxiety is shown in Box 10.6. Most anxiety 
is part of a transient adjustment to stressful events: 
adjustment disorders (p. 242). Other more persistent 
forms of anxiety are described in detail on page 242. 
Presenting problem
Reason for referral
• Why the patient has been referred and by whom
Presenting complaints
• The patient should be asked to describe the main problems 
for which help is requested and what he or she wants the 
doctor to do
History of present illness
• The patient should be asked to describe the course of the 
illness from when symptoms were first noticed
• The interviewer asks direct questions to determine the 
nature, duration and severity of symptoms, and any 
associated factors
Background
Family history
• Description of parents and siblings, and a record of any 
mental illness in relatives
Personal history
• Birth history, major events in childhood, education, 
occupational history, relationship(s), marriage, children, 
current social circumstances
Previous medical and psychiatric history
• Previous health, accidents and operations
• Use of alcohol, tobacco and other drugs
• Direct questions may be needed concerning previous 
psychiatric history since this may not be volunteered: ‘Have 
you ever been treated for depression or nerves?’ or ‘Have 
you ever suffered a nervous breakdown?’
Previous personality
• The patterns of behaviour and thinking that characterise a 
person, including their relationships with other people and 
reactions to stress
• The most useful information may be obtained from an 
informant who has known the patient well for many years
10.4  How to structure a psychiatric interview
Presenting problems in psychiatric illness
10
235
Psychological
• Apprehension
• Irritability
• Worry
• Fear of impending disaster
• Poor concentration
• Depersonalisation
Somatic
• Palpitations
• Fatigue
• Tremor
• Dizziness
• Sweating
• Diarrhoea
• Frequent desire to pass urine
• Chest pain
• Initial insomnia
• Breathlessness
• Headache
10.5  Symptoms of anxiety disorder
• Normal response to threat
• Adjustment disorder
• Generalised anxiety disorder
• Panic disorder
• Phobic disorder
• Organic (medical) cause
Hyperthyroidism
Paroxysmal arrhythmias
Phaeochromocytoma
Alcohol and benzodiazepine withdrawal
Hypoglycaemia
Temporal lobe epilepsy
10.6  Differential diagnosis of anxiety
Anxiety may occasionally be a manifestation of a medical 
condition such as thyrotoxicosis (see Box 10.6).
Depressed mood
Depressive disorder is common, with a prevalence of 
approximately 5% in the general population. Depression 
is at least twice as common in the medically ill. It 
is important to note that depression has physical as 
well as mental symptoms (Box 10.7). The diagnosis of 
depression in the medically ill, who may have physical 
symptoms of disease, relies on detection of the core 
psychological symptoms of low mood and anhedonia.
Differential diagnosis
Depressive disorder must be differentiated from an 
adjustment disorder with depressed mood (p. 242). 
Adjustment disorders are common, self-limiting reac-
tions to adversity, including physical illness, which are 
transient and require only general support. Depressive 
disorders (p. 243) are characterised by a more severe and 
persistent disturbance of mood and require specific 
treatment. In some cases, depression may occur as a 
result of a direct effect of a medical condition or its treat-
ment on the brain, when it is referred to as an ‘organic 
mood disorder’ (Box 10.8).
Suicide
Depression is the major risk factor for suicide. Other risk 
factors are shown in Box 10.9. When depression is sus-
pected, tactful enquiry should always be made into sui-
cidal thoughts and plans. Asking about suicide does not 
Psychological
• Depressed mood
• Reduced self-esteem
• Pessimism
• Guilt
• Loss of interest
• Loss of enjoyment 
(anhedonia)
• Suicidal thinking
Somatic
• Reduced appetite
• Weight change
• Disturbed sleep
• Fatigue
• Loss of libido
• Bowel disturbance
• Motor retardation (slowing 
of activity)
10.7  Symptoms of depressive disorders
Neurological
• Cerebrovascular disease
• Cerebral tumour
• Multiple sclerosis
• Parkinson’s disease
• Huntington’s disease
• Alzheimer’s disease
• Epilepsy
Endocrine
• Hypothyroidism
• Hyperthyroidism
• Cushing’s syndrome
• Addison’s disease
• Hyperparathyroidism
Malignant disease
Infections
• Infectious mononucleosis
• Herpes simplex
• Brucellosis
• Typhoid
• Toxoplasmosis
Connective tissue disease
• Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Drugs
• Phenothiazines
• Phenylbutazone
• Corticosteroids, oral 
contraceptives
• Interferon
10.8  Organic mood disorders*
*Diseases that may cause organic affective disorders by direct action on the 
brain.
• Psychiatric illness (depressive illness, schizophrenia)
• Older age
• Male sex
• Living alone
• Unemployment
• Recent bereavement, divorce or separation
• Chronic physical ill health
• Drug or alcohol misuse
• Suicide note written
• History of previous attempts (especially if a violent method 
was used)
10.9  Risk factors for suicide
increase the risk of it occurring, whereas failure to 
enquire denies the opportunity to prevent it.
Elated mood
Elation, or euphoria, is the converse of depression and 
is characteristic of mania. It may manifest as infectious 
joviality, over-activity, lack of sleep and appetite, undue 
optimism, over-talkativeness, irritability, and reckless-
ness in spending and sexual behaviour. When elated 
mood is severe, psychotic symptoms are often evident, 
such as delusions of grandeur (e.g. believing errone-
ously that one is royalty). Elevated mood is much less 
Medical psychiatry
10
236
common than depressed mood, and in medical settings 
is often secondary to drug or alcohol misuse, an organic 
disorder or medical treatment. Where none of these 
applies, the patient may have a bipolar disorder (p. 244).
Medically unexplained  
somatic symptoms
Patients commonly present to doctors with physical 
symptoms. Whilst these symptoms may be an expres-
sion of a medical condition, they often are not. They 
may then be referred to as ‘medically unexplained 
symptoms’ (MUS). MUS are very common in patients 
attending general medical outpatient clinics. Almost any 
symptom can be medically unexplained, e.g.:
•	 pain (including back, chest, abdominal and 
headache)
•	 fatigue
•	 dizziness
•	 fits, ‘funny turns’ and feelings of weakness.
Patients with MUS may receive a medical diagnosis 
of a so-called functional somatic syndrome, such as irri-
table bowel syndrome (Box 10.10), and may also merit a 
psychiatric diagnosis on the basis of the same symp-
toms. The most frequent psychiatric diagnoses associ-
ated with MUS are anxiety or depressive disorders. 
When these are absent, a diagnosis of somatoform dis-
order may be appropriate (Box 10.11).
Differential diagnosis
The main medical differential diagnosis for MUS is from 
symptoms of a medical disease. Diagnostic difficulties 
are most likely with unusual presentations of common 
diseases and with rare diseases. MUS are commonly an 
Fig. 10.1  Diagnosis of medically unexplained symptoms (MUS). 
No
Yes
Patient’s presentation more
likely to be MUS if:
• multiple previous
 presentations with MUS
• large numbers of symptoms
• female sex
History, examination and
investigation
Are symptoms explained by
disease?
Disease
Yes
Is there localised loss of
physical or mental function?
Dissociative
disorder
No
Yes
What are the patient’s beliefs
and fears of disease? Fear of
serious disease despite
appropriate medical
reassurance?
Hypochondriasis
No
Yes
Does the patient have a
depressive and/or anxiety
disorder that explains the
symptoms?
Depression/
anxiety
No
Yes
Does the patient have years
of multiple MUS?
Somatisation
disorder
(Briquet’s
syndrome)
No
Pain disorder, neurasthenia or
simple (undifferentiated)
somatoform disorder
• Gastroenterology: irritable bowel syndrome, functional 
dyspepsia
• Gynaecology: premenstrual syndrome, chronic pelvic pain
• Rheumatology: fibromyalgia
• Cardiology: atypical or non-cardiac chest pain
• Respiratory medicine: hyperventilation syndrome
• Infectious diseases: chronic (post-viral) fatigue syndrome
• Neurology: tension headache, non-epileptic attacks
• Dentistry: temporomandibular joint dysfunction, atypical facial 
pain
• Ear, nose and throat: globus syndrome
• Allergy: multiple chemical sensitivity
10.10  Functional somatic syndromes
• Hypochondriasis: predominant concern about disease
• Somatisation: predominant concern about symptoms
• Somatic presentation of depression and anxiety
• Simple somatoform disorders: small number of symptoms
• Somatisation disorder (Briquet’s syndrome): chronic multiple 
symptoms
• Conversion disorder: loss of function
• Body dysmorphic disorder: dislike of body parts
10.11  Psychiatric diagnoses for medically 
unexplained somatic symptoms
expression of depression and anxiety. A medical and 
psychiatric assessment should be completed in all cases 
(Fig. 10.1).
Delusions and hallucinations
Delusions
Various types of delusion are identified on the basis of 
their content. They may be:
•	 persecutory, such as a conviction that others are out 
to get me
Presenting problems in psychiatric illness
10
237
•	 hypochondriacal, such as an unfounded conviction 
that one has cancer
•	 grandiose, such as a belief that one has special 
powers or status
•	 nihilistic, e.g. ‘My head is missing’, ‘I have no 
body’, ‘I am dead’.
Delusions should be differentiated from over-valued 
ideas, which are strongly held but not fixed.
Hallucinations
These are perceptions without external stimuli. They 
can occur in any sensory modality, most commonly 
visual or auditory. Typical examples are hearing voices 
when no one else is present, or seeing ‘visions’. Halluci-
nations have the quality of ordinary perceptions and 
are perceived as originating in the external world, not 
in the patient’s own mind (when they are termed 
pseudo-hallucinations). Those occurring when falling 
asleep (‘hypnagogic’) and on waking (‘hypnopompic’) 
are not pathological. Hallucinations should be distin-
guished from illusions, which are misperceptions of 
real external stimuli (such as mistaking a shrub for a 
person in poor light).
Differential diagnosis
Agitation, terror or the fear of being thought ‘mad’  
may make patients unable or unwilling to volunteer or 
describe their abnormal beliefs or experiences. Careful 
and tactful enquiry is therefore required. The nature 
of hallucinations can be important diagnostically; for 
example, ‘running commentary’ voices that discuss the 
patient are strongly associated with schizophrenia. In 
general, auditory hallucinations suggest schizophrenia, 
while hallucinations in other sensory modalities, espe-
cially vision but also taste and smell, suggest an ‘organic 
psychosis’ such as delirium or temporal lobe epilepsy.
Hallucinations and delusions often co-occur; if their 
content is consistent with coexisting emotional symp-
toms, they are described as ‘mood-congruent’. Thus, 
patients with severely depressed mood may believe 
themselves responsible for all the evils in the world, and 
hear voices saying ‘You’re worthless. Go and kill your-
self.’ In this case, the diagnosis of depressive psychosis 
is made on the basis of the congruence of different 
phenomena (mood, delusion and hallucination). Incon-
gruence between hallucinations, delusions and mood 
suggests schizophrenia.
Where hallucinations and delusions arise within dis-
turbed consciousness and impaired cognition, the diag-
nosis is usually an organic disorder, most commonly 
delirium and/or dementia (p. 244). This differential 
diagnosis is made by assessing the nature, extent and 
time course of any cognitive disturbances, and by inves-
tigating for underlying causes.
Disturbed and aggressive behaviour
Disturbed and aggressive behaviour is common in 
general hospitals, especially in emergency departments. 
Most behavioural disturbance arises not from medical 
or psychiatric illness, but from alcohol intoxication, reac-
tion to the situation and personality characteristics. The 
key principles of management are, first, to establish 
control of the situation rapidly and thereby ensure the 
safety of the patient and others, and, second, to assess 
the cause of the disturbance in order to remedy it. Estab-
lishing control requires the presence of an adequate 
number of trained staff, an appropriate physical envi-
ronment and sometimes sedation (Fig. 10.2). Hospital 
security staff and sometimes the assistance of the police 
may be required. In all cases, the staff approach is 
important; a calm, non-threatening manner expressing 
understanding of the patient’s concerns is often all that 
is required to defuse potential aggression (Box 10.12).
If sedating drugs are required, antipsychotic drugs, 
such as haloperidol, and benzodiazepines, such as 
diazepam, are commonly used. The choice of drug, dose, 
route and rate of administration will depend on the 
Fig. 10.2  Acute management of disturbed behaviour. 
Yes
No
Disturbed behaviour
Does it seem likely to be caused
by mental disorder?
Consider calling
security/police
Is the behaviour putting the patient
or others at risk?
Yes
No
Monitor
and review
Yes
No
Monitor
and review
1. Ensure availability of adequate personnel
    to provide ‘overwhelming force’
2. Try to attain a safe and quiet environment
3. Consider emergency sedation with
    haloperidol (0.5– 5 mg IM/orally)
                or
    diazepam (5–10 mg IV slowly, with great
    care— risk of respiratory depression)
                or
    lorazepam (1– 2 mg IM)
Consult with senior staff
Consider repeating drug, increasing dose
or using other agents such as midazolam
or paraldehyde
Are measures effective?
Medical psychiatry
10
238
patient’s age, sex and physical health, as well as the 
likely cause of the disturbed behaviour. The benefits of 
sedation must be balanced against the associated risks, 
however. Haloperidol can cause acute dystonias, includ-
ing oculogyric crises, while the benzodiazepines can 
precipitate respiratory depression in patients with lung 
disease, and encephalopathy in those with liver disease. 
Thus, for a frail elderly woman with emphysema and 
delirium, sedation may be achieved with a low dose 
(0.5 mg) of oral haloperidol, while for a strong young 
man with an acute psychotic episode, at least 10 mg of 
intravenous diazepam and a similar dose of haloperidol 
may be needed. A parenterally administered anticholin-
ergic agent, such as procyclidine, should be available to 
treat extrapyramidal effects arising from haloperidol, 
and flumazenil (p. 217) to reverse respiratory depression 
if large doses of benzodiazepines are used.
Differential diagnosis
Many factors may contribute to disturbed behaviour. 
When the patient is cooperative, these are best deter-
mined at interview. Other sources of information about 
the patient include medical and psychiatric records, and 
discussion with nursing staff, family members and other 
informants, including the patient’s general practitioner. 
The following information should be sought:
•	 psychiatric, medical (especially neurological) and 
criminal history
•	 current psychiatric and medical treatment
•	 alcohol and drug misuse
•	 recent stressors
•	 the time course and accompaniments of the current 
episode in terms of mood, belief and behaviour.
Observation of the patient’s behaviour may also yield 
useful clues. Do they appear to be responding to hallu-
cinations? Are they alert or variably drowsy and con-
fused? Are there physical features suggestive of drug or 
alcohol misuse or withdrawal? Are there new injuries or 
old scars, especially on the head? Do they smell of 
alcohol or solvents? Do they bear the marks of drug 
injection? Are they unwashed and unkempt, suggesting 
a gradual development of their condition?
If the person has an acute psychiatric disorder, then 
admission to a psychiatric facility may be indicated. If a 
medical cause is likely, psychiatric transfer is usually 
inappropriate and the patient should be managed in a 
medical setting, with whatever nursing and security 
support is required. Where it is clear that there is no 
medical or psychiatric illness, the person should be 
removed from the hospital, to police custody if 
necessary.
Measures such as restraint, sedation, the investiga-
tion and treatment of medical problems, and psychiatric 
• Intervene as necessary to reduce the risk of harm to the 
patient and to others
• Adopt a calm, non-threatening approach
• Arrange availability of other staff and parenteral medication
• Consider diagnostic possibilities of drug intoxication, acute 
psychosis and delirium
• Involve friends and relatives as appropriate
10.12  Psychiatric emergencies
• Organic psychiatric disorders: especially common, so 
cognitive function should always be assessed; if impaired, an 
associated medical condition or adverse drug effect should 
be suspected.
• Disturbed behaviour: delirium is the most common cause.
• Depression: common. Just because a person is old and frail 
does not mean that depression is ‘to be expected’ and that it 
should not be treated.
• Self-harm: associated with an increased risk of completed 
suicide.
• Medically unexplained symptoms: common and often 
associated with depressive disorder.
• Loneliness, poverty and lack of social support: must be 
taken into consideration in management decisions.
10.13  Medical psychiatry in old age
transfer all raise legal as well as medical issues (p. 257). 
In most countries, including the UK, common law 
confers upon doctors the right, and indeed the duty, to 
intervene against a patient’s wishes in cases of acute 
behavioural disturbance, if this is necessary to protect 
the patient or other people. Many countries, such as the 
UK, also have specific mental health legislation that may 
be used to detain patients.
Confusion
This is a vague term used to describe a range of pri­
marily cognitive problems, including disturbances in 
perception, belief and behaviour. ‘Confusion’ usually 
presents as a problem when it becomes clear that the 
patient cannot comply with medical care; they may 
repeatedly wander off the ward, pull out essential can-
nulae and catheters, and hit nurses. The methods of 
assessment of cognitive function range from simple 
screening questions to detailed psychometric testing. All 
doctors should be able to undertake a brief cognitive 
assessment, as outlined above (p. 233).
Differential diagnosis
A history from the patient and informants is essential 
to establish the time course, variability and functional 
consequences of any cognitive deficit. Mental state 
examination is necessary to seek evidence of associated 
mood disorder, hallucinations, delusions or behavioural 
abnormalities, and physical examination to identify any 
relevant medical conditions. The assessment should 
seek to distinguish between:
•	 organic disorders such as delirium, dementia, and 
focal deficits secondary to brain lesions
•	 psychiatric disorders such as depressive pseudo-
dementia and dissociative disorder
•	 malingering (p. 247).
Further investigation will usually be needed to identify 
the specific causes of any cognitive impairment identi-
fied (see Box 10.32, p. 250, and p. 209).
Self-harm
Self-harm (SH) is a common reason for presentation 
to medical services. The term ‘attempted suicide’ is 
Presenting problems in psychiatric illness
10
239
especially any evidence of planning. The nature and 
severity of any current psychiatric symptoms must be 
assessed, along with the personal and social supports 
available to the patient outside hospital.
Most SH patients have depressive and anxiety symp-
toms on a background of chronic social and personal 
difficulties and alcohol misuse but no psychiatric 
disorder. They do not usually require psychotropic 
potentially misleading, as most such patients are not 
unequivocally trying to kill themselves. Most cases of 
SH involve overdose, of either prescribed or non-
prescribed drugs (Ch. 9). Less common methods include 
asphyxiation, drowning, hanging, jumping from a 
height or in front of a moving vehicle, and the use of 
firearms. Methods that carry a high chance of being fatal 
are more likely to be associated with serious psychiatric 
disorder. Self-cutting is common and often repetitive, 
but rarely leads to contact with medical services.
The incidence of SH varies over time and between 
countries. In the UK, the lifetime prevalence of suicidal 
ideation is 15% and that of acts of SH is 4%. SH is more 
common in women than men, and in young adults than 
the elderly. (In contrast, completed suicide is more 
common in men and the elderly (see Box 10.9).) There is 
a higher incidence of self-harm among lower socioeco-
nomic groups, particularly those living in crowded, 
socially deprived urban areas. There is also an associa-
tion with alcohol misuse, child abuse, unemployment 
and recently broken relationships.
Differential diagnosis
The main differential diagnosis is from accidental poi-
soning and so-called ‘recreational’ overdose in drug 
users. It must be remembered that SH is not a diagnosis 
but a presentation, and may be associated with any psy-
chiatric diagnosis, the most common being adjustment 
disorder, substance and alcohol misuse, depressive dis-
order and personality disorder. In many cases, however, 
no psychiatric diagnosis can be made.
Initial management
A thorough psychiatric and social assessment should 
be attempted in all cases (Fig. 10.3), although some 
patients will discharge themselves before this can take 
place. The need for psychiatric assessment should not, 
however, delay urgent medical or surgical treatment, 
and may need to be deferred until the patient is well 
enough for interview. The purpose of the psychiatric 
assessment is to:
•	 establish the short-term risk of suicide
•	 identify potentially treatable problems, whether 
medical, psychiatric or social.
Topics to be covered when assessing a patient are 
listed in Box 10.14. The history should include events 
occurring immediately before and after the act, and 
Current attempt
• Patient’s account
• Degree of intent at the time: preparations, plans, precautions 
against discovery, note
• Method used, particularly whether violent
• Degree of intent now
• Symptoms of psychiatric illness
Background
• Previous attempts and their outcome
• Family and personal history
• Social support
• Previous response to stress
• Extent of drug and alcohol misuse
10.14  Assessment of patients after self-harm
Fig. 10.3  Assessment of patients admitted following self-harm 
(SH). 
No
Yes
Patient admitted
following deliberate SH
Medical assessment to determine need
for urgent medical treatment
(e.g. treatment for paracetamol poisoning)
Need for treatment?
Medical treatment
Psychiatric assessment
Immediate and significant suicide risk
No
Yes
Plan to minimise risk:
  • remove methods of self-harm
  • arrange for special support
  • consider use of mental health
    legislation
Assess for significant psychiatric illness
Suspected?
No
Yes
Assess and arrange
management
for other problems
Consider:
• psychiatric admission (using mental health
  legislation if necessary)
• referral to psychiatric service for outpatient
  treatment
Medical psychiatry
10
240
if the anxiety and depression are severe and persistent, 
they may complicate the management of the medical 
condition and active management is required. Anxiety 
may present as an increase in somatic symptoms such 
as breathlessness, tremor or palpitations, or as the avoid-
ance of medical treatment. It is most common in those 
facing difficult or painful treatments, deterioration of 
their illness or death. Depression may manifest as 
increased physical symptoms such as pain or fatigue 
and disability, as well as with depressed mood and loss 
of interest and pleasure. It is most common in patients 
who have suffered actual or anticipated losses, such as 
receiving a terminal diagnosis or undergoing disfigur-
ing surgery.
Treatment is by psychological and/or pharmacologi-
cal therapies, as described below. Care is required when 
prescribing psychotropic drugs to the medically ill in 
order to avoid exacerbation of the medical condition and 
harmful interactions with other prescribed drugs.
TREATING PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
The multifactorial origin of most psychiatric disorders 
means that there are multiple potential targets for 
treatment.
Biological treatments
These aim to relieve psychiatric disorder by modifying 
brain function. The main biological treatments are 
psychotropic drugs. These are widely used for various 
medication or specialised psychiatric treatment but may 
benefit from personal support and practical advice from 
a GP, social worker or community psychiatric nurse. 
Admission to a psychiatric ward is necessary only for 
persons who:
•	 have an acute psychiatric disorder
•	 are at high risk of suicide
•	 need temporary respite from intolerable 
circumstances
•	 require further assessment of their mental state.
Approximately 20% of SH patients make a repeat 
attempt during the following year and 1–2% kill them-
selves. Factors associated with suicide after an episode 
of SH are listed in Box 10.9.
Alcohol misuse
Misuse of alcohol is a major problem worldwide. It 
presents in a multitude of ways, which are discussed 
further on page 252 and in Box 10.35 (p. 253). In many 
cases, the link to alcohol will be all too obvious; in others, 
it may not be. Denial and concealment of alcohol intake 
are common. In the assessment of alcohol intake, the 
patient should be asked to describe a typical week’s 
drinking, quantified in terms of units of alcohol (1 unit 
contains approximately 8 g alcohol and is the equivalent 
of half a pint of beer, a single measure of spirits or a 
small glass of wine). Drinking becomes hazardous at 
levels above 21 units weekly for men and 14 units 
weekly for women. The history from the patient may 
need corroboration by the GP, earlier medical records 
and family members. The mean cell volume (MCV) and 
γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) may be raised, but are 
abnormal in only half of problem drinkers; consequently, 
normal results on these tests do not exclude an alcohol 
problem. When abnormal, these measures may be 
helpful in challenging denial and monitoring treatment 
response. The prevention and management of alcohol-
related problems are discussed on page 253.
Substance misuse
The misuse of drugs of all kinds is also widespread. As 
well as the general headings listed for alcohol problems 
in Box 10.35 (p. 253), there are two additional sets of 
problems associated with drug misuse:
•	 problems linked with the route of administration, 
such as intravenous injection
•	 problems arising from pressure applied to doctors 
to prescribe the misused substances (Box 10.15).
Assessment and management are described on 
page 254.
Psychological factors affecting  
medical conditions
Psychological factors may influence the presentation, 
management and outcome of medical conditions. Spe-
cific factors are shown in Box 10.16. The most common 
psychiatric diagnoses in the medically ill are anxiety and 
depressive disorders. Often these appear understand­
able as adjustments to illness and its treatment; however, 
Complications arising from the route of use
Intravenous
• Local: abscesses, cellulitis, thrombosis
• Systemic: bacterial (endocarditis), viral (hepatitis, human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV))
Nasal ingestion
• Erosion of nasal septum, epistaxis
Smoking
• Oral, laryngeal and lung cancer
Inhalation
• Burns, chemical pneumonitis, rashes
Pressure to prescribe misused substance
• Manipulation, deceit and threats
• Factitious description of illness
• Malingering
10.15  Substance misuse: additional 
presenting problems
• Previous history of depression or anxiety
• Lack of social support
• New diagnosis of a serious medical condition
• Deterioration of or failure of treatment for medical condition
• Unpleasant, disabling or disfiguring treatment
• Change in medical care, e.g. discharge from hospital
• Impending death
10.16  Risk factors for psychological problems 
associated with medical conditions
Treating psychiatric disorders
10
241
in the patient’s conscious thinking: for example, a ten-
dency to interpret events in a negative way or see them 
as unduly threatening. A triad of ‘cognitive errors’ has 
been described in depression (Box 10.18). Cognitive 
therapy aims to help patients to identify such cognitive 
errors and to learn how to challenge them. It is widely 
used for depression, anxiety and eating and somatoform 
disorders, and also increasingly in psychoses.
Behaviour therapy
This is a practically orientated form of treatment, in 
which patients are assisted in changing unhelpful 
behaviour: for example, helping patients to implement 
carefully graded exposure to the feared stimulus in 
phobias.
Cognitive behaviour therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) combines the 
methods of behaviour therapy and cognitive therapy. It 
is the most widely available and extensively researched 
psychological treatment.
Problem-solving therapy
This is a simplified brief form of CBT, which helps 
patients actively tackle problems in a structured way 
(Box 10.19). It is of benefit in mild to moderate depres-
sion, and can be delivered by non-psychiatric doctors 
and nurses after appropriate training.
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
This treatment, also known as ‘interpretive psycho­
therapy’, was pioneered by Freud, Jung and Klein, 
amongst others. It is based upon the theory that early 
life experience generates powerful but unconscious 
motivations. Psychotherapy aims to help the patient to 
purposes; a pragmatic classification is set out in Box 
10.17. It should be noted that some drugs have applica-
tions to more than one condition; for example, antide-
pressants are also widely used in the treatment of 
anxiety and chronic pain. The specific subgroups of psy-
chotropic drugs are discussed in the sections on the 
appropriate disorders.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) entails producing a 
convulsion by the administration of high-voltage, brief, 
direct-current impulses to the head while the patient 
is anaesthetised and paralysed by muscle relaxant. If 
properly administered, it is remarkably safe, has few 
side-effects, and is of proven efficacy for severe depres-
sive illness. There may be amnesia for events occurring 
a few hours before ECT (retrograde) and after it (antero-
grade). Pronounced amnesia can occur but is infrequent 
and difficult to distinguish from the effects of severe 
depression. Surgery to the brain (psychosurgery) has 
a very limited place and then only in the treatment 
of severe chronic psychiatric illness resistant to other 
measures.
Psychological treatments
These treatments are useful in many psychiatric disor-
ders and also in non-psychiatric conditions. They are 
based on talking with patients, either individually or 
in groups. Sometimes discussion is supplemented by 
‘homework’ or tasks to complete between treatment 
sessions. Psychological treatments take a number of 
forms based on the duration and frequency of contact, 
the specific techniques applied and their underlying 
theory.
General or supportive psychotherapy
This should be part of all medical treatment. It involves 
empathic listening to the patient’s account of their 
symptoms and associated fears and concerns, followed 
by the sympathetic provision of accurate information 
that addresses these.
Cognitive therapy
This therapy is based on the observation that some psy-
chiatric disorders are associated with systematic errors 
• Negative view of self, e.g. ‘I am no good’
• Negative view of current life experiences, e.g. ‘The world is 
an awful place’
• Negative view of the future, e.g. ‘The future is hopeless’
10.18  The negative cognitive triad associated 
with depression
10.17  Classification of commonly used psychotropic drugs
Medical psychiatry
10
242
become aware of these unconscious factors on the 
assumption that, once identified, their negative effects 
are reduced. The relationship between therapist and 
patient is used as a therapeutic tool to identify issues in 
patients’ relationships with others, particularly parents, 
which may be replicated or transferred to their relation-
ship with the therapist. Explicit discussion of this rela-
tionship (transference) is the basis for the treatment, 
which traditionally requires frequent sessions over a 
period of months or even years.
Interpersonal psychotherapy
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a specific form of 
brief psychotherapy that focuses on patients’ current 
interpersonal relationships and is an effective treatment 
for mild to moderate depression.
Social interventions
Some adverse social factors, such as unemployment, 
may not be readily amenable to intervention, but others, 
such as access to benefits and poor housing, may be. 
Patients can be helped to address these problems them-
selves by being taught problem-solving. Befrienders 
and day centres can reduce social isolation, benefits 
advisers can ensure appropriate financial assistance, and 
medical recommendations can be made to local housing 
departments to help patients obtain more appropriate 
accommodation.
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
Stress-related disorders
Acute stress reaction
Following a stressful event such as a serious medical 
diagnosis or a major accident, some people develop 
a characteristic pattern of symptoms. These include 
a sense of bewilderment, anxiety, anger, depression, 
altered activity and withdrawal. The symptoms are tran-
sient and usually resolve completely within a few days.
Adjustment disorder
A more common psychological response to a major 
stressor is a less severe but more prolonged emotional 
reaction. The predominant symptom is usually depres-
sion and/or anxiety, which is insufficiently persistent or 
intense to merit a diagnosis of depressive or anxiety 
disorder. There may also be anger, aggressive behaviour 
and associated excessive alcohol use. Symptoms develop 
within a month of the onset of the stress, and their 
duration and severity reflect the course of the underly-
ing stressor.
Grief reactions following bereavement are a particu-
lar type of adjustment disorder. They manifest as a brief 
period of emotional numbing, followed by a period of 
distress lasting several weeks, during which sorrow, 
tearfulness, sleep disturbance, loss of interest and a 
sense of futility are common. Perceptual distortions may 
occur, including misinterpreting sounds as the dead per-
son’s voice. ‘Pathological grief’ describes a grief reaction 
that is abnormally intense or persistent.
Management and prognosis
Ongoing contact with and support from a doctor or 
other who can listen, reassure, explain and advise are 
often all that is needed. Most patients do not require 
psychotropic medication, although benzodiazepines 
reduce arousal in acute stress reactions and can aid 
sleep in adjustment disorders. Psychotherapy may 
be helpful for patients with abnormal grief reactions. 
These conditions usually resolve with time but can 
develop into depressive or anxiety disorders and require 
treating as such.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a protracted 
response to a stressful event of an exceptionally threat-
ening or catastrophic nature. Examples of such events 
include natural disasters, terrorist activity, serious acci-
dents and witnessing violent deaths. PTSD may also 
sometimes occur after distressing medical treatments. 
There is usually a delay ranging from a few days to 
several months between the traumatic event and the 
onset of symptoms. Typical symptoms are recurrent 
intrusive memories (flashbacks) of the trauma, as well 
as sleep disturbance, especially nightmares (usually of 
the traumatic event) from which the patient awakes in a 
state of anxiety, symptoms of autonomic arousal, emo-
tional blunting and avoidance of situations that evoke 
memories of the trauma. Anxiety and depression are 
often associated and excessive use of alcohol or drugs 
frequently complicates the clinical picture.
Management and prognosis
Immediate counselling for those who have survived a 
major trauma is only likely to benefit those who request 
it. The main aims are to provide support, direct advice 
and the opportunity for emotional catharsis. In estab-
lished PTSD, structured psychological approaches 
(CBT, eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing 
(EMDR), and stress management) are effective. Anti­
depressant drugs are moderately effective. The con­
dition runs a fluctuating course, with most patients 
recovering within 2 years. In a small proportion, the 
symptoms become chronic.
Anxiety disorders
These are characterised by the emotion of anxiety, wor-
risome thoughts, avoidance behaviour and the somatic 
symptoms of autonomic arousal. Anxiety disorders are 
divided into three main subtypes: phobic, paroxysmal 
(panic) and generalised (Box 10.20). The nature and 
prominence of the somatic symptoms often lead the 
• Define and list problems
• Choose one to work on
• List possible solutions
• Evaluate these and choose the best
• Try it out
• Evaluate the result
• Repeat until problems are resolved
10.19  Stages of problem-solving therapy
Psychiatric disorders
10
243
patient to present initially to medical services. Anxiety 
may be stress-related and phobic anxiety may follow an 
unpleasant incident. Patients with anxiety often also 
have depression.
Phobic anxiety disorder
A phobia is an abnormal or excessive fear of an object 
or situation, which leads to avoidance of it (such as 
excessive fear of dying in an air crash leading to avoid-
ance of flying). A generalised phobia of going out alone 
or being in crowded places is called agoraphobia. Phobic 
responses can develop to medical procedures such as 
venepuncture.
Panic disorder
Panic disorder describes repeated attacks of severe 
anxiety, which are not restricted to any particular situa-
tion or circumstances. Somatic symptoms such as chest 
pain, palpitations and paraesthesiae in lips and fingers 
are common. The symptoms are in part due to involun-
tary over-breathing (hyperventilation). Patients with 
panic attacks often fear that they are suffering from a 
serious illness such as a heart attack or stroke, and seek 
emergency medical attention. Panic disorder is often 
associated with agoraphobia.
Generalised anxiety disorder
This is a chronic anxiety state associated with uncontrol-
lable worry. The associated somatic symptoms of muscle 
tension and bowel disturbance often lead to a medical 
presentation.
Management of anxiety disorders
Psychological treatment
Explanation and reassurance are essential, especially 
when patients fear they have a serious medical condi-
tion. Specific treatment may be needed. Treatments 
include relaxation, graded exposure (desensitisation) to 
feared situations for phobic disorders, and CBT.
Drug treatment
Antidepressants are the drugs of choice. Benzo­
diazepines are useful in the short term but long-term use 
can lead to dependence. A β-blocker such as propranolol 
can help when somatic symptoms are prominent.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterised 
by obsessive thoughts, which are recurrent, unwanted 
and usually anxiety-provoking, but recognised as one’s 
own; and by compulsions, which are repeated acts 
performed to relieve the anxiety. An example is repeated 
hand-washing related to thoughts of contamination. 
The differential diagnosis is normal checking behaviour 
and delusional beliefs about thought possession. Unlike 
other anxiety disorders, which are more common in 
women, OCD is equally common in men and women.
Management and prognosis
OCD usually responds to some degree to antidepressant 
drugs (SSRIs; see Box 10.17) and to CBT, which helps 
patients expose themselves to the feared thought or situ-
ation without performing the anxiety-relieving compul-
sions. However, relapses are common and the condition 
often becomes chronic.
Mood disorders
Mood or affective disorders include:
•	 unipolar depression: one or more episodes of low 
mood and associated symptoms
•	 bipolar disorder: episodes of elevated mood 
interspersed with episodes of depression
•	 dysthymia: chronic low-grade depressed mood 
without sufficient other symptoms to count as 
‘clinically significant’ or ‘major’ depression.
Depression
Major depressive disorder has a prevalence of 5% in the 
general population and approximately 10–20% in chron-
ically ill medical outpatients. It is a major cause of dis-
ability and suicide. If comorbid with a medical condition, 
depression magnifies disability, diminishes adherence 
to medical treatment and rehabilitation, and may even 
shorten life expectancy.
Aetiology
There is a genetic predisposition to depression, espe-
cially when of early onset. The number and identity of 
the genes are largely unknown but the serotonin trans-
porter gene is a candidate. Adversity and emotional 
deprivation early in life also predispose to depression. 
Depressive episodes are often, but not always, triggered 
by stressful life events (especially those that involve 
loss), including medical illnesses. Associated biological 
factors include hypofunction of monoamine neurotrans-
mitter systems (5-HT and noradrenaline (norepineph­
rine)) and abnormal hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal 
axis (HPA) regulation, which results in elevated 
cortisol levels that do not suppress with dexamethasone. 
Exclusion of Cushing’s syndrome is described on 
page 773.
Diagnosis
The symptoms are listed in Box 10.7 (p. 235). Depression 
may be mild, moderate or severe. It may also be 
episodic, recurrent or chronic. It can be both a complica-
tion of a medical condition and a cause of MUS (see 
below), so physical examination is essential; an associ-
ated medical condition should always be considered 
(Box 10.21).
Management and prognosis
There is evidence that both drug and psychological 
treatments work in depression. In practice, the choice is 
Phobic anxiety 
disorder
Panic 
disorder
Generalised 
anxiety disorder
Occurrence
Situational
Paroxysmal
Persistent
Behaviour
Avoidance
Escape
Agitation
Cognitions
Fear of 
situation
Fear of 
symptoms
Worry
Symptoms
On exposure
Episodic
Persistent
10.20  Classification of anxiety disorders
Medical psychiatry
10
244
as sedation, anticholinergic effects, postural 
hypotension, lowering of the seizure threshold and 
cardiotoxicity, can be troublesome during this 
period. TCAs may be dangerous in overdose and in 
people who have coexisting heart disease, glaucoma 
and prostatism.
•	 Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs). These 
are less cardiotoxic and less sedative than TCAs, 
and have fewer anticholinergic effects. They are 
safer in overdose, but can still cause headache, 
nausea, anorexia and sexual dysfunction. They can 
also interact with other drugs increasing serotonin 
to produce ‘serotonin syndrome’. This is a rare 
syndrome of neuromuscular hyperactivity, 
autonomic hyperactivity and agitation, and 
potentially seizures, hyperthermia, confusion and 
even death.
•	 Newer antidepressants. A variety is available, 
including venlafaxine, mirtazapine and duloxetine. 
They have slightly different modes of action and 
adverse effects but are generally no more effective 
than the agents listed above.
•	 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). These drugs 
increase the availability of neurotransmitters at 
synaptic clefts by inhibiting metabolism of 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and 5-HT. They are 
now rarely prescribed in the UK, since they can 
cause potentially dangerous interactions with drugs 
such as amphetamines, and foods rich in tyramine 
such as cheese and red wine. This is due to 
accumulation of amines in the systemic circulation, 
causing a potentially fatal hypertensive crisis.
These different classes of antidepressant have similar 
efficacy and about three-quarters of patients respond to 
treatment. Successful treatment requires the patient to 
take an appropriate dose of an effective drug for an 
adequate period. For patients who do not respond, a 
proportion will do so if changed to another antidepres-
sant. The patient’s progress must be monitored and, 
after recovery, treatment should be continued for at least 
6–12 months to reduce the high risk of relapse. The dose 
should then be tapered off over several weeks to avoid 
discontinuation symptoms. SIGN (www.sign.ac.uk) and 
NICE (www.nice.org.uk) have published treatment 
guidelines.
Psychological treatments
Both CBT and interpersonal therapy are as effective as 
antidepressants for mild to moderate depression. Anti-
depressant drugs are, however, preferred for severe 
depression. Drug and psychological treatments can be 
used in combination.
Over 50% of people who have had one depressive 
episode and over 90% of people who have had three or 
more episodes will have another. The risk of suicide in 
an individual who has had a depressive disorder is ten 
times greater than in the general population.
Bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is an episodic disturbance with inter-
spersed periods of depressed and elevated mood; the 
latter is known as hypomania when mild or short-lived, 
or mania when severe or chronic. The lifetime risk of 
developing bipolar disorder is approximately 1–2%. 
Onset is usually in the twenties, and men and women 
determined by patient preference and local availability. 
Severe depression complicated by psychosis, dehydra-
tion or suicide risk may require ECT.
Drug treatment
Antidepressant drugs are effective in patients whose 
depression is secondary to medical illness, as well as 
those in whom it is the primary problem (Box 10.22). 
These agents are all effective in moderate and severe 
depression. Commonly used antidepressants are shown 
in Box 10.23.
•	 Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). These agents inhibit the 
re-uptake of the amines noradrenaline (norepinephrine) 
and 5-HT at synaptic clefts. The therapeutic effect is 
noticeable within a week or two. Side-effects, such 
• Late age of onset of psychiatric illness
• No previous history of psychiatric illness
• No family history of psychiatric illness
• No apparent psychological precipitant
10.21  Pointers to an organic cause for 
psychiatric disorder
Group
Drug
Usual dose*
Tricyclics
Amitriptyline
75–150 mg daily
Imipramine
75–150 mg daily
Dosulepin
75–150 mg daily
Clomipramine
75–150 mg daily
Selective serotonin 
re-uptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)
Citalopram
20–40 mg daily
Escitalopram
10–20 mg daily
Fluoxetine
20–60 mg daily
Fluvoxamine
100–300 mg daily
Sertraline
50–100 mg daily
Paroxetine
20–50 mg daily
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors (MAOIs)
Phenelzine
Tranylcypromine
45–90 mg daily
20–40 mg daily
Moclobemide
300–600 mg daily
Noradrenergic 
re-uptake inhibitors 
and SSRIs
Venlafaxine
75–375 mg daily
Noradrenergic and 
specific serotonergic 
inhibitor
Mirtazapine
15–45 mg daily
*Higher doses may be required: see guidelines.
10.23  Antidepressant drugs
‘Antidepressants are efficacious and safe in the treatment of 
depression occurring in the context of chronic physical health 
problems. The selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors are 
probably the antidepressants of first choice, given their 
demonstrable effect on quality of life and their apparent safety in 
cardiovascular disease.’
• Taylor D, et al. B J Psych 2011; 198:179–188.
10.22  Antidepressants in the medically ill
Psychiatric disorders
10
245
defects and should also not be used in women of 
child-bearing age. Olanzapine can cause significant 
weight gain. (For a list of the adverse effects of 
antipsychotic drugs, see Box 10.31.)
The relapse rate of bipolar disorder is high, although 
patients may be perfectly well between episodes. After 
one episode the annual average risk of relapse is about 
10–15%, which doubles after more than three episodes. 
There is a substantially increased lifetime risk of suicide 
of 5–10%.
Somatoform disorders
The essential feature of these disorders is that the 
somatic symptoms are not explained by a medical condi-
tion (medically unexplained symptoms), nor better diag-
nosed as part of a depressive or anxiety disorder. Several 
syndromes are described within this category; there is 
considerable overlap between them in both aetiology 
and clinical presentation.
Aetiology
The cause of somatoform disorders is incompletely 
understood but contributory factors include depression 
and anxiety, the erroneous interpretation of somatic 
symptoms as evidence of disease, excessive concern 
with physical illness and a tendency to seek medical 
care. A family history or previous history of a particular 
condition may have shaped the patient’s beliefs about 
illness. Doctors may exacerbate the problem, either by 
dismissing the complaints as non-existent or by over-
emphasising the possibility of disease.
Somatisation disorder
Somatisation disorder (Briquet’s syndrome) is character-
ised by the occurrence of chronic multiple somatic 
symptoms for which there is no physical cause. Symp-
toms start in early adult life and may be referred to any 
part of the body. The disorder is much more common in 
women. Common complaints include pain, vomiting, 
nausea, headache, dizziness, menstrual irregularities 
and sexual dysfunction. Patients may undergo a multi-
tude of negative investigations and unhelpful opera-
tions, particularly hysterectomy and cholecystectomy. 
There is no proven treatment but minimisation of iatro-
genic harm from multiple investigations and attempts at 
medical treatment is important.
Hypochondriacal disorder
Patients with this condition, also known as health 
anxiety, have a strong fear or belief that they have a 
serious, often fatal, disease and that fear persists despite 
appropriate medical reassurance. They are typically 
highly anxious and seek many medical opinions and 
investigations in futile but repeated attempts to relieve 
their fears. Treatment with CBT may be helpful. The 
condition may become chronic.
In a small proportion of cases, the conviction that 
disease is present reaches delusional intensity. The best-
known example is that of parasitic infestation (‘delu-
sional parasitosis’), which leads patients to consult 
dermatologists. Antipsychotic medication may be effec-
tive in such cases.
are equally affected. In DSM-IV, bipolar disorder has 
been divided into two types:
•	 Bipolar I disorder has a clinical course characterised 
by one or more manic episodes or mixed episodes. 
Often individuals have also had one or more major 
depressive episodes.
•	 Bipolar II disorder features depressive episodes that 
are more frequent and more intense than manic 
episodes, but there is a history of at least one 
hypomanic episode.
Aetiology
Bipolar disorder is strongly heritable (approximately 
70%). Relatives of patients have an increased incidence 
of both bipolar and unipolar affective disorder. Life 
events, such as physical illness, sleep deprivation and 
medication, may play a role in triggering episodes.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on clear evidence of episodes of 
depression and mania. Isolated episodes of hypomania 
or mania do occur but they are usually preceded or fol-
lowed by an episode of depression. Psychosis may occur 
in both the depressive and the manic phases, with delu-
sions and hallucinations that are usually in keeping with 
the mood disturbance. This is described as an affective 
psychosis. Patients who present with symptoms of both 
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia may be given a diag-
nosis of schizoaffective disorder. A clinical picture of 
recurrent depression with one or more episodes of hypo-
mania may be referred to as type 2 bipolar disorder.
Management and prognosis
Depression should be treated as described above. 
However, if antidepressants are prescribed, they should 
be combined with a mood-stabilising drug (see below) 
to avoid ‘switching’ the patients into (hypo)mania. 
Manic episodes and psychotic symptoms usually 
respond well to antipsychotic drugs (see Box 10.30, 
p. 249).
Prophylaxis to prevent recurrent episodes of depres-
sion and mania with mood-stabilising agents is impor-
tant. The main drugs used are lithium and sodium 
valproate. Olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone are 
increasingly used. Caution must be exercised when 
stopping these drugs, as a relapse may follow.
•	 Lithium carbonate is the drug of choice. It is also 
used for acute mania, and in combination with a 
tricyclic as an adjuvant treatment for resistant 
depression. It has a narrow therapeutic range, so 
regular blood monitoring is required to maintain a 
serum level of 0.5–1.0 mmol/L. Toxic effects include 
nausea, vomiting, tremor and convulsions. With 
long-term treatment, weight gain, hypothyroidism, 
increased calcium and parathormone, nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus (p. 794) and renal failure can 
occur. Thyroid and renal function should be 
checked before treatment is started and regularly 
thereafter. Lithium may be teratogenic, and should 
not be prescribed during the first trimester of 
pregnancy.
•	 Sodium valproate (an anticonvulsant) and olanzapine 
(an antipsychotic) are both used as prophylaxis in 
bipolar disorder, usually as a second-line alternative 
to lithium. Valproate conveys a high risk of birth 
Medical psychiatry
10
246
Body dysmorphic disorder
This describes a preoccupation with bodily shape or 
appearance, with the belief that one is disfigured in 
some way (previously known as dysmorphophobia). 
People with this condition may make inappropriate 
requests for cosmetic surgery. CBT or antidepressants 
may be helpful. The belief in disfigurement may some-
times be delusional, in which case antipsychotic drugs 
may help.
Somatoform autonomic 
dysfunction
This describes somatic symptoms referable to bodily 
organs that are largely under the control of the auto-
nomic nervous system. The most common examples 
involve the cardiovascular system (‘cardiac neurosis’), 
respiratory system (psychogenic hyperventilation) and 
gut (psychogenic vomiting and irritable bowel syn-
drome). Antidepressant drugs and CBT may be helpful.
Somatoform pain disorder
This describes severe, persistent pain that cannot be 
adequately explained by a medical condition. Anti­
depressant drugs (especially tricyclics and dual action 
drugs such as duloxetine and mirtazapine) are helpful, 
as are some of the anticonvulsant drugs, particularly 
carbamazepine, gabapentin and pregabalin. CBT and 
multidisciplinary pain management teams are also 
useful.
Chronic fatigue syndrome
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is also referred to as 
neurasthenia. It is characterised by excessive fatigue 
after minimal physical or mental exertion, poor concen-
tration, dizziness, muscular aches and sleep disturbance. 
This pattern of symptoms may follow a viral infection 
such as infectious mononucleosis, influenza or hepatitis. 
Symptoms overlap with those of depression and anxiety. 
There is good evidence that many patients improve with 
carefully graded exercise and with CBT, as long as the 
benefits of such treatment are carefully explained.
Dissociative (conversion) disorder
Dissociative disorder refers to a loss or distortion of 
neurological functioning that is not fully explained by 
organic disease. Psychological functions commonly 
affected include conscious awareness and memory. 
Physical functions affected (conversion) include changes 
in sensory or motor function that may mimic lesions in 
the motor or sensory nervous system (Box 10.24). The 
aetiology of dissociation is unknown. There is an asso-
ciation with adverse childhood experiences, including 
physical and sexual abuse. Organic disease may both 
facilitate dissociative mechanisms and provide a model 
for symptoms; thus, for example, non-epileptic seizures 
often occur in those with epilepsy. CBT may be of 
benefit. Coexisting depression should be treated with 
CBT or antidepressant drugs.
General management for medically 
unexplained symptoms
The management of the various syndromes of medically 
unexplained complaints described above is based on 
general principles (Box 10.25).
Reassurance
Patients should be asked what they are most worried 
about. Clearly, it may be unwise to state categorically 
that the patient does not have any disease, as that is dif-
ficult to establish with certainty. However, it can be 
emphasised that the probability of having a disease is 
low. If patients repeatedly ask for reassurance about the 
same health concern despite reassurance, they may have 
hypochondriasis.
Explanation
Patients need a positive explanation for their symptoms. 
It is unhelpful to say that symptoms are psychological 
or ‘all in the mind’. Rather, a term such as ‘functional’ 
(meaning that the symptoms represent a reversible dis-
turbance of bodily function) may be more acceptable. 
When possible, it is useful to describe a plausible physi-
ological mechanism that is linked to psychological 
factors such as stress and implies that the symptoms are 
reversible. For example, in irritable bowel syndrome, 
psychological stress results in increased activation of the 
autonomic nervous system, which leads to constriction 
of smooth muscle in the gut wall, which in turn causes 
pain and bowel disturbance.
Advice
This should focus on how to overcome factors perpetu-
ating the symptoms: for example, by resolving stressful 
social problems or by practising relaxation. The doctor 
can offer to review progress, to prescribe (for example) 
an antidepressant drug and, if appropriate, to refer for 
physiotherapy or psychological treatments such as CBT. 
The attitudes of relatives may need to be addressed if 
they have adopted an over-protective role, unwittingly 
reinforcing the patient’s disability.
Drug treatment
Antidepressant drugs are often helpful, even if the 
patient is not depressed (Box 10.26).
• Gait disturbance
• Loss of function in limbs
• Aphonia
• Non-epileptic seizures
• Sensory loss
• Blindness
10.24  Common presentations of dissociative 
(conversion) disorder
• Take a full sympathetic history
• Exclude disease but avoid unnecessary investigation or 
referral
• Seek specific treatable psychiatric syndromes
• Demonstrate to patients that you believe their  
complaints
• Establish a collaborative relationship
• Give a positive explanation for the symptoms, including but 
not over-emphasising psychological factors
• Encourage a return to normal functioning
10.25  General management principles for 
medically unexplained symptoms
Psychiatric disorders
10
247
patient’s history and show that he has presented simi-
larly elsewhere, often changing name several times. 
Some emergency departments hold lists of such patients.
Management is by gentle but firm confrontation with 
clear evidence of the fabrication of illness, together with 
an offer of psychological support. Treatment is usually 
declined but recognition of the condition may help to 
avoid further iatrogenic harm.
Malingering
Malingering is a description of behaviour, not a psychi-
atric diagnosis. It refers to the deliberate and conscious 
simulation of signs of disease and disability. Patients 
have motives that are clear to them but which they 
conceal from doctors. Examples include the avoidance 
of burdensome responsibilities (such as work or court 
appearances) or the pursuit of financial gain (fraudulent 
claims for benefits or compensation). Malingering can be 
hard to detect at clinical assessment, but is suggested by 
evasion or inconsistency in the history.
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a psychosis characterised by delusions, 
hallucinations and lack of insight. Acute schizophrenia 
may present with disturbed behaviour, marked delu-
sions, hallucinations and disordered thinking, or with 
insidious social withdrawal and other so-called negative 
symptoms and less obvious delusions and hallucina-
tions. The prevalence is similar worldwide at about 
1% and the disorder is more common in men. The chil-
dren of one affected parent have approximately a 10% 
risk of developing the illness, but this rises to 50% if an 
identical twin is affected. The usual age of onset is the 
mid-twenties.
Aetiology
There is a strong genetic contribution, probably involv-
ing many susceptibility genes, each of small effect. The 
best candidates, such as disrupted in schizophrenia-1 
(DISC1) and neuregulin-1 (NRG1), have supportive 
linkage, association, animal model and basic neurobio-
logical evidence. Environmental risk factors include 
obstetric complications and urban birth. Brain imaging 
techniques have identified subtle structural abnormali-
ties, including an enlargement of the lateral ventricles 
and an overall decrease in brain size (by about 3% on 
average), with relatively greater reduction in temporal 
lobe volume (5–10%). Episodes of acute schizophrenia 
may be precipitated by social stress and also by canna-
bis, which increase dopamine turnover and sensitivity. 
Consequently, schizophrenia is now viewed as a neuro­
developmental disorder, caused by abnormalities of 
brain development associated with genetic predisposi-
tion and early environmental influences, but precipi-
tated by later triggers.
Diagnosis
Schizophrenia usually presents with an acute episode 
and progresses to a chronic state. Acute schizophrenia 
should be suspected in any individual with bizarre 
behaviour accompanied by delusions and hallucinations 
that are not due to organic brain disease or substance 
misuse. The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds, with 
Psychological treatment
There is evidence for the effectiveness of CBT (Box 
10.27). Other psychological treatments such as IPT may 
also have a role.
Rehabilitation
Where there is chronic disability, particularly in disso-
ciative (conversion) disorder, conventional physical 
rehabilitation may be the best approach.
Shared care with the GP
Ongoing planned care is required for patients with 
chronic intractable symptoms, especially those of soma-
tisation disorder. Review by the same specialist, inter-
spersed with visits to the same GP, is probably the best 
way to avoid unnecessary multiple re-referral for inves-
tigation, to ensure that treatable aspects of the patient’s 
problems, such as depression, are actively managed, and 
to prevent the GP from becoming demoralised.
Factitious disorder and malingering
It is important to distinguish somatoform disorders 
from factitious disorder and malingering.
Factitious disorder
This describes the repeated and deliberate production 
of the signs or symptoms of disease to obtain medical 
care. It is uncommon. An example is the dipping of 
thermometers into hot drinks to fake a fever. The disor-
der feigned is usually medical but can be a psychiatric 
illness, with false reports of hallucinations or symptoms 
of depression.
Münchausen’s syndrome
This refers to a severe chronic form of factitious dis­
order. Patients are usually older and male, with a 
solitary, peripatetic lifestyle in which they travel 
widely, sometimes visiting several hospitals in one day. 
Although the condition is rare, such patients are memo-
rable because they present so dramatically. The history 
can be convincing enough to persuade doctors to under-
take investigations or initiate treatment, including 
exploratory surgery. It may be possible to trace the 
‘There is evidence for the efficacy of antidepressant drugs for 
patients with medically unexplained symptoms.’
• Sumathipala A. Psychosom Med 2007; 69:889–900.
10.26  Antidepressants for medically unexplained 
somatic symptoms
‘CBT is consistently effective (11 of 13 trials) across a spectrum 
of somatoform disorders. Also, a psychiatric consultation letter to 
the primary care physician about strategies for managing the 
somatising patient seems to improve physical functioning and 
reduce costs.’
• Kroenke K. Psychosom Med 2007; 69:881–888.
10.27  CBT for medically unexplained 
somatic symptoms
Medical psychiatry
10
248
so-called positive symptoms resolve, or at least do 
not dominate the clinical picture, leaving so-called 
negative symptoms that include blunt affect, apathy, 
social isolation, poverty of speech and poor self-care. 
Patients with chronic schizophrenia may also manifest 
positive symptoms, particularly when under stress, and 
it can be difficult for those who do not know the patient 
to judge whether or not these are signs of an acute 
relapse.
Management
First-episode schizophrenia usually requires admission 
to hospital because patients lack the insight that they are 
ill and are unwilling to accept treatment. In some cases, 
they may be at risk of harming themselves or others. 
Subsequent acute relapses and chronic schizophrenia 
are now usually managed in the community.
Drug treatment
Antipsychotic agents are effective against the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia in the majority of cases. 
They take 2–4 weeks to be maximally effective but have 
some beneficial effects shortly after administration. 
Treatment is then ideally continued to prevent relapse. 
In a patient with a first episode of schizophrenia, this 
will usually be for 1–2 years, but in patients with multi-
ple episodes, treatment may be required for many years. 
The benefits of prolonged treatment must be weighed 
against the adverse effects, which include extrapyrami-
dal side-effects (EPSE) like acute dystonic reactions 
(which may require treatment with parenteral anti-
cholinergics), akathisia, Parkinsonism and tardive dys-
kinesia (abnormal movements, commonly of the face, 
over which the patient has no voluntary control). For 
long-term use, antipsychotic agents are often given in 
slow-release (depot) injected form to improve patient 
adherence.
investigations used principally to rule out organic brain 
disease. The characteristic clinical features are listed 
in Box 10.28. Hallucinations are typically auditory, 
although they can occur in any sensory modality. They 
commonly involve voices from outside the head that 
talk to or about the person. Sometimes the voices repeat 
the person’s thoughts. Patients may also describe ‘pas-
sivity of thought’, experienced as disturbances in the 
normal privacy of thinking – for example, the delusional 
belief that their thoughts are being ‘withdrawn’ from 
them, perhaps ‘broadcast’ to others, and/or alien 
thoughts being ‘inserted’ into their mind. Other charac-
teristic symptoms are delusions of control: believing that 
one’s emotions, impulses or acts are controlled by others. 
Another phenomenon is delusional perception, a delu-
sion that arises suddenly alongside a normal perception 
(e.g. ‘I saw the moon and I immediately knew he was 
evil’). Many other, less specific symptoms may occur, 
including thought disorder, as manifest by incompre-
hensible speech and abnormalities of movement, such 
as those in which the patient can become immobile 
or adopt awkward postures for prolonged periods 
(catatonia).
The main differential diagnosis of schizophrenia 
(Box 10.29) is:
•	 Other functional psychoses, particularly psychotic 
depression and mania, in which delusions and 
hallucinations are congruent with a marked mood 
disturbance (negative in depression and grandiose 
in mania). If features of schizophrenia and affective 
disorder coexist in equal measure, a diagnosis of 
schizoaffective disorder is made. Schizophrenia 
must also be differentiated from specific delusional 
disorders that are not associated with the other 
typical features of schizophrenia.
•	 Organic psychoses, including delirium, in which 
there is impairment of consciousness and loss of 
orientation (not found in schizophrenia), typically 
with visual hallucinations, and drug misuse, the 
latter particularly in young people. Schizophrenia 
must also be differentiated from other organic 
psychoses such as temporal lobe epilepsy, in which 
olfactory and gustatory hallucinations may occur.
Many of those who experience acute schizophrenia 
go on to develop a chronic state in which the acute, 
First-rank symptoms of acute schizophrenia
• A = Auditory hallucinations – second- or third-person/écho 
de la pensée
• B = Broadcasting, insertion/withdrawal of thoughts
• C = Controlled feelings, impulses or acts (‘passivity’ 
experiences/phenomena)
• D = Delusional perception (a particular experience is bizarrely 
interpreted)
Symptoms of chronic schizophrenia (negative symptoms)
• Flattened (blunted) affect
• Apathy and loss of drive (avolition)
• Social isolation/withdrawal (autism)
• Poverty of speech (alogia)
• Poor self-care
10.28  Symptoms of schizophrenia
Alternative diagnosis
Distinguishing features
Other functional psychoses
Delusional disorders
Absence of specific features of 
schizophrenia
Psychotic depression
Prominent depressive 
symptoms
Manic episode
Prominent manic symptoms
Schizoaffective disorder
Mood and schizophrenia 
symptoms both prominent
Puerperal psychosis
Acute onset after childbirth
Organic disorders
Drug-induced psychosis
Evidence of drug or alcohol 
misuse
Side-effects of prescribed 
drugs
Levodopa, methyldopa, 
corticosteroids, antimalarial 
drugs
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Other evidence of seizures
Delirium
Visual hallucinations; impaired 
consciousness
Dementia
Age; established cognitive 
impairment
Huntington’s disease
Family history; choreiform 
movements; dementia
10.29  Differential diagnosis of schizophrenia
Psychiatric disorders
10
249
A number of antipsychotic agents are available (Box 
10.30). These may be divided into conventional (typical, 
first-generation) drugs such as chlorpromazine and 
haloperidol, and newer or atypical (also so-called novel 
or second-generation) drugs such as clozapine. All are 
believed to work by blocking D2 dopamine receptors in 
the brain. Patients who have not responded to conven-
tional drugs may respond to newer agents, which are 
also less likely to produce unwanted EPSE but do tend 
to cause greater weight gain and metabolic disturbances 
such as dyslipidaemia. Clozapine can also cause an 
agranulocytosis and consequently requires regular mon-
itoring of the white blood cell count, initially on a weekly 
basis. Details of the side-effects of antipsychotic drugs 
are listed in Box 10.31.
Serious adverse effects of antipsychotic drugs include:
•	 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, which is a rare but 
serious condition. It is characterised by fever, 
tremor and rigidity, autonomic instability and 
confusion. Characteristic laboratory findings are an 
elevated creatinine phosphokinase and leucocytosis. 
Antipsychotic medication must be stopped 
immediately and supportive therapy provided, 
often in an intensive care unit. Treatment includes 
ensuring hydration and reducing hyperthermia. 
Dantrolene sodium and bromocriptine may be 
helpful. Mortality is 20% untreated and 5% with 
treatment.
•	 Prolongation of the QTc interval, which may be 
associated with ventricular tachycardia, torsades de 
pointes and sudden death. Treatment is by stopping 
the drug, monitoring the electrocardiogram (ECG) 
and treating serious arrhythmias (p. 562).
Psychological treatment
Psychological treatment, including general support for 
the patient and his or her family, is now seen as an 
essential component of management. CBT may help 
patients to cope with symptoms. There is evidence that 
personal and/or family education, when given as part 
of an integrated treatment package, reduces the rate of 
relapse.
Social treatment
After an acute episode of schizophrenia has been con-
trolled by drug therapy, social rehabilitation may be 
required. Recurrent illness is likely to cause disruption 
to patients’ relationships and their ability to manage 
their accommodation and occupation; consequently, 
they may need help to obtain housing and employment. 
A graded return to employment and sometimes a period 
of supported accommodation are required.
Patients with chronic schizophrenia have particular 
difficulties and may need long-term, supervised accom-
modation. This now tends to be in sheltered or hostel 
accommodation in the community. Patients may also 
benefit from sheltered employment if they are unable to 
participate effectively in the labour market. Ongoing 
contact with a health worker allows monitoring for 
signs of relapse, sometimes as part of a multidisciplinary 
team working to agreed plans (the ‘care programme 
approach’). Partly because of a tendency to inactivity, 
smoking and a poor diet, patients with chronic schizo-
phrenia are at increased risk of cardiovascular disease, 
diabetes and stroke, and require proactive medical as 
well as psychiatric care.
Prognosis
About one-quarter of those who develop an acute 
schizo­phrenic episode have a good outcome. One-third 
develop chronic, incapacitating schizophrenia, and the 
remainder largely recover after each episode but suffer 
relapses. Most will not work or live independently. Pro-
phylactic treatment with antipsychotic drugs reduces 
the rate of relapse in the first 2 years after an episode of 
schizophrenia from 50% to 10%. Schizophrenia is associ-
ated with suicide, with up to 1 in 10 patients taking their 
own lives.
Group
Drug
Dose range
Phenothiazines
Chlorpromazine
100–1000 mg 
daily
Butyrophenones
Haloperidol
5–30 mg daily
Thioxanthenes
Flupentixol 
decanoate
20–200 mg 
fortnightly 
(depot injection)
Diphenylbutylpiperidines
Pimozide
4–30 mg daily
Substituted benzamides
Sulpiride
200–1800 mg 
daily
Dibenzodiazepines*
Clozapine
200–900 mg 
daily
Benzisoxazole*
Risperidone
2–16 mg daily
Thienobenzodiazepines*
Olanzapine
5–20 mg daily
Dibenzothiazepines
Quetiapine
25–800 mg 
daily
*Second-generation antipsychotics.
10.30  Antipsychotic drugs
Weight gain due to increased appetite
Effects due to dopamine blockade*
• Acute dystonia
• Akathisia (motor 
restlessness)
• Parkinsonism
• Tardive dyskinesia
• Gynaecomastia
• Galactorrhoea
Effects due to cholinergic blockade
• Dry mouth
• Blurred vision
• Impotence
• Constipation
• Urinary retention
Hypersensitivity reactions
• Blood dyscrasias 
(neutropenia with 
clozapine)
• Cholestatic jaundice
• Photosensitive dermatitis
Ocular complications (long-term use)
• Corneal and lens opacities
*Less severe with clozapine, quetiapine and olanzapine, possibly  
because of strong 5-HT-blocking effect and relatively weak dopamine 
blockade.
10.31  Side-effects of antipsychotic drugs
Medical psychiatry
10
250
attention gradually become apparent. There are many 
causes (Box 10.32) but Alzheimer’s disease and diffuse 
vascular disease are the most common. Rarer causes of 
dementia should be actively sought in younger patients 
and those with short histories.
Aetiology
Dementia may be divided into ‘cortical’ and ‘subcortical’ 
types, depending on the clinical features. Many of the 
primary degenerative diseases that cause dementia have 
characteristic features that may allow a specific diagno-
sis during life. Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, for example, 
is usually relatively rapidly progressive (over months), 
is associated with myoclonus, and demonstrates charac-
teristic abnormalities on electroencephalogram (EEG). 
The more slowly progressive dementias are more diffi-
cult to distinguish during life, but fronto-temporal 
dementia typically presents with focal (temporal or 
frontal lobe) dysfunction, and Lewy body dementia may 
present with visual hallucinations. The course may also 
help to distinguish types of dementia, as it may be 
gradual (as in Alzheimer’s disease) or step-wise (as in 
vascular dementia).
Clinical features
The usual presentation is with a disturbance of personal-
ity or memory dysfunction. A careful history is essential 
Delirium, dementia and other  
organic disorders
Delirium, dementia and other organic disorders could 
be considered to be medical conditions rather than psy-
chiatric disorders, as they are a result of reduced brain 
function; they are, however, included in psychiatric clas-
sifications and are sometimes misdiagnosed because 
they often manifest with disturbed behaviour.
Delirium
Delirium is common in acute medical settings, especially 
in the elderly and patients in high-dependency and 
intensive care units. Aetiology, assessment and manage-
ment are described in Chapters 7 and 26.
Dementia
Dementia is a clinical syndrome characterised by a loss 
of previously acquired intellectual function in the 
absence of impairment of arousal, and affects 5% of 
those over 65 and 20% of those over 85. It is defined as 
a global impairment of cognitive function, and is typi-
cally progressive and non-reversible. Although memory 
is most affected in the early stages, deficits in visuo-
spatial function, language ability, concentration and 
Type
Common
Unusual
Rare
Vascular
Diffuse small-vessel disease
Amyloid angiopathy
Multiple emboli
Cerebral vasculitis
Degenerative/
inherited
Alzheimer’s disease
Fronto-temporal dementia (including 
Pick’s disease)
Leucodystrophies
Huntington’s disease
Wilson’s disease
Dystrophia myotonica
Cortical Lewy body disease
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Others (e.g. cortico-basal 
degeneration)
Mitochondrial encephalopathies
Neoplastic
(p. 1193)
Secondary deposits
Primary cerebral tumour
Paraneoplastic syndrome (limbic 
encephalitis)
Inflammatory
–
Multiple sclerosis
Sarcoidosis
Traumatic
Chronic subdural haematoma
Post-head injury
Punch-drunk syndrome
–
Hydrocephalus
(p. 1216)
Communicating/non-communicating 
‘normal pressure’ hydrocephalus
–
Toxic/nutritional
Alcohol
Thiamin deficiency
B12 deficiency
Anoxia/carbon monoxide 
poisoning
Heavy metal poisoning
Infective
–
Syphilis
HIV
Post-encephalitic
Whipple’s disease
Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis
Prion diseases
(p. 1211)
–
Sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease 
(CJD)
Variant CJD
Kuru
Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker 
disease
10.32  Causes of dementia
Psychiatric disorders
10
251
Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease is the most common cause of 
dementia, but is rare under the age of 45 years.
Aetiology
Genetic factors play an important role and about 15% of 
cases are familial. Familial cases fall into two main 
groups: early-onset disease with autosomal dominant 
inheritance and a later-onset group whose inheritance 
is polygenic. Mutations in several genes have been 
described. The inheritance of one of the alleles of apo­
lipoprotein ε (apo ε4) is associated with an increased risk 
of developing the disease (2–4 times higher in hetero­
zygotes and 6–8 times in homozygotes). Its presence is, 
however, neither necessary nor sufficient for the devel-
opment of the disease, so screening for its presence 
is not clinically useful. The brain in Alzheimer’s disease 
is macroscopically atrophic, particularly the cerebral 
cortex and hippocampus. Histologically, the disease is 
characterised by the presence of senile plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles in the cerebral cortex. Histochem-
ical staining demonstrates significant quantities of 
amyloid in the plaques (Fig. 10.4), which typically stain 
positive for the protein ubiquitin, involved in targeting 
unwanted or damaged proteins for degradation. This 
has led to the suggestion that the disease may be due 
to defects in the ability of neuronal cells to degrade 
unwanted proteins. Many different neurotransmitter 
abnormalities have also been described. In particular, 
there is impairment of cholinergic transmission, although 
and it is important to interview both the patient and 
a close family member. Simple bedside tests such as 
the MMSE (p. 234), are useful in assessing the nature 
and severity of the cognitive deficit, although a more 
intensive neuropsychological assessment may some-
times be required, especially if there is diagnostic uncer-
tainty. It is important to exclude a focal brain lesion. This 
is done by determining that there is cognitive distur-
bance in more than one area. Mental state assessment is 
important to seek evidence of depression, which may 
coexist with or occasionally cause apparent cognitive 
impairment.
Investigations
The aim is to seek treatable causes and to estimate prog-
nosis. This is done using a standard set of investigations 
(Box 10.33). Imaging of the brain can exclude potentially 
treatable structural lesions, such as hydrocephalus, cer-
ebral tumour or chronic subdural haematoma, though 
the only abnormality usually seen is that of generalised 
atrophy. If the initial tests are negative, more invasive 
investigations, such as lumbar puncture or, rarely, brain 
biopsy, may be indicated.
Management
This is directed at addressing treatable causes, and pro-
viding support for patient and carers if no specific 
treatment exists. If the diagnosis is Alzheimer-type 
dementia, anticholinesterase inhibitors and memantine 
may arrest progression for a time. Treating vascular 
risk factors may slow deterioration in vascular demen-
tia. Psychotropic drugs may help where there is associ-
ated disturbance of sleep, perception or mood, but 
should be used with care because of an increased mortal-
ity in patients who have been treated long-term with 
these agents. Sedation is not a substitute for good care 
for patients and carers or, in the later stages, attentive 
residential nursing care. In the UK, incapacity and 
mental health legislation may be required to manage 
patients’ financial and domestic affairs, as well as to 
determine their safe placement.
In most patients
• Imaging of head (computed tomography (CT) and/or magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI))
• Blood tests
 Full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate
 Urea and electrolytes, glucose
 Calcium, liver function tests
 Thyroid function tests
 Vitamin B12
 Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory (VDRL) test
 ANA, anti-dsDNA
• Chest X-ray
• EEG
In selected patients
• Lumbar puncture
• HIV serology
• Brain biopsy
10.33  Initial investigation of dementia
Fig. 10.4  Alzheimer’s disease. Section of neocortex stained with 
polyclonal antibody against βA4 peptide showing amyloid deposits in 
plaques in brain substance (arrow A) and in blood vessel walls (arrow B). 
A
B
Medical psychiatry
10
252
Lewy body dementia
This is a neurodegenerative disorder clinically charac-
terised by dementia and signs of Parkinson’s disease. 
The cognitive state often fluctuates and there is a 
high incidence of visual hallucinations. Affected indi-
viduals are particularly sensitive to the side-effects of 
anti-Parkinsonian medication and also to antipsychotic 
drugs. The condition is associated with accumulation of 
abnormal protein aggregates in neurons that contain the 
protein α-synuclein in association with other proteins 
including ubiquitin (see Fig. 26.29, p. 1195). The condi-
tion is often inherited and mutations in the α-synuclein 
and β-synuclein genes have been identified in affected 
patients. There is no specific treatment but anticholin­
esterase agents may well be helpful.
Alcohol misuse and dependence
Alcohol consumption associated with social, psycho-
logical and physical problems constitutes misuse. The 
criteria for alcohol dependence, a more restricted term, 
are shown in Box 10.34. Approximately one-quarter of 
male patients in general hospital medical wards in the 
UK have a current or previous alcohol problem.
Aetiology
Availability of alcohol and social patterns of use appear 
to be the most important factors. Genetic factors 
predispose to dependence. The majority of alcoholics 
do not have an associated psychiatric disorder, but a 
few drink heavily in an attempt to relieve anxiety or 
depression.
abnormalities of noradrenaline, 5-HT, glutamate and 
substance P have also been described.
Clinical features
The key clinical feature is impairment of the ability to 
remember new information. Hence, patients present 
with gradual impairment of memory, usually in associa-
tion with disorders of other cortical functions. Short-
term and long-term memory are both affected, but 
defects in the former are usually more obvious. Later in 
the course of the disease, typical features include apraxia, 
visuo-spatial impairment and aphasia. In the early 
stages of the disease, patients may notice these prob-
lems, but as the disease progresses it is common for 
patients to deny that there is anything wrong (anosog-
nosia). In this situation, patients are often brought to 
medical attention by their carers. Depression is com-
monly present. Occasionally, patients become aggres-
sive, and the clinical features can be made acutely worse 
by intercurrent physical disease.
Investigations and management
Investigation is aimed at excluding treatable causes 
of dementia (see Box 10.32), as histological confirmation 
of the diagnosis usually occurs only after death. There 
is no known treatment, though anticholinesterases such 
as donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine, and the 
NMDA receptor antagonist, memantine, have been 
shown to be of some benefit. Management consists 
largely of providing a familiar environment for the 
patient and support for the carers. Many patients 
are depressed, and treatment with antidepressant 
medication may be helpful.
Fronto-temporal dementia
This term encompasses a number of different syn-
dromes, including Pick’s diseases and primary progres-
sive aphasia. Patients may present with personality 
change due to frontal lobe involvement or with language 
disturbance due to temporal lobe involvement. These 
diseases are much rarer than Alzheimer’s disease. His-
tological examination of the brain reveals argyrophilic 
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies of tau (τ) protein rather 
than the ubiquitin as in Alzheimer’s disease (Fig. 10.5). 
Memory is relatively preserved in the early stages. There 
is no specific treatment.
Fig. 10.5  Fronto-temporal dementia.  A Lateral view of formalin-fixed brain from a patient who died of Pick’s disease, showing gyral atrophy of 
frontal and parietal lobes and a more severe degree of atrophy affecting the anterior half of the temporal lobe (arrow).  B High power (× 200) of 
hippocampal pyramidal layer, prepared with monoclonal anti-tau antibody. Many neuronal cell bodies contain sharply circumscribed, spherical cytoplasmic 
inclusion bodies (Pick bodies). 
A
B
• Narrowing of the drinking repertoire
• Priority of drinking over other activities (salience)
• Tolerance of effects of alcohol
• Repeated withdrawal symptoms
• Relief of withdrawal symptoms by further drinking
• Subjective compulsion to drink
• Reinstatement of drinking behaviour after abstinence
10.34  Criteria for alcohol dependence
Psychiatric disorders
10
253
Effects on other organs
These are protean and virtually any organ can be 
involved (see Box 10.35). These effects are discussed in 
detail in the relevant chapters.
Management and prognosis
For the person misusing alcohol, provision of clear infor-
mation from a doctor about the harmful effects of alcohol 
and the safe levels of consumption is often all that is 
needed. In more serious cases, patients may have to be 
advised to alter leisure activities or change jobs to help 
them to reduce their consumption. Psychological treat-
ment is used for patients who have recurrent relapses 
and is usually available at specialised centres. Support 
to stop drinking is also provided by voluntary organisa-
tions, such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) in the UK.
Alcohol withdrawal syndromes can be prevented, 
or treated once established, with benzodiazepines. 
Large doses may be required (e.g. diazepam 20 mg 
4 times daily), tailed off over a period of 5–7 days as 
Diagnosis
Alcohol misuse may emerge during the patient’s history, 
although patients may minimise their intake. It may also 
present via its effects on one or more aspects of the 
patient’s life, listed below. Alcohol dependence com-
monly presents with withdrawal in those admitted to 
hospital, as they can no longer maintain their high 
alcohol intake in this setting.
Complications of chronic alcohol misuse
•	 Social problems include absenteeism from work, 
unemployment, marital tensions, child abuse, 
financial difficulties and problems with the law, 
such as violence and traffic offences.
•	 Depression is common. Alcohol has a direct 
depressant effect and heavy drinking creates 
numerous social problems. Attempted and 
completed suicide are associated with alcohol 
misuse.
•	 Anxiety is relieved by alcohol in the short term. 
People who are socially anxious may consequently 
use alcohol in this way and may develop 
dependence. Conversely, alcohol withdrawal 
increases anxiety.
•	 Alcoholic hallucinosis is a rare condition in which 
alcoholic individuals experience auditory 
hallucination in clear consciousness.
•	 Alcohol withdrawal is described in Box 10.35. 
Symptoms usually become maximal about  
2–3 days after the last drink and can include 
seizures (‘rum fits’).
•	 Delirium tremens is a form of delirium associated 
with severe alcohol withdrawal. It has a significant 
mortality and morbidity (see Box 10.35).
Effects on the brain
The familiar features of drunkenness are ataxia, slurred 
speech, emotional incontinence and aggression. Very 
heavy drinkers may experience periods of amnesia for 
events that occurred during bouts of intoxication, termed 
‘alcoholic blackouts’. Established alcoholism may lead 
to alcoholic dementia, a global cognitive impairment 
resembling Alzheimer’s disease, but which does not 
progress and may even improve if the patient becomes 
abstinent. Indirect effects on behaviour can result 
from head injury, hypoglycaemia and encephalo­
pathy (p. 941).
A rare but important effect of chronic alcohol misuse 
is the Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome. This organic brain 
disorder results from damage to the mamillary bodies, 
dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus and adjacent areas 
of periventricular grey matter caused by a deficiency of 
thiamin (vitamin B1), which most commonly results 
from long-standing heavy drinking and an inadequate 
diet. It can also arise from malabsorption or even pro-
tracted vomiting. Without prompt treatment (see below), 
the acute presentation of Wernicke’s encephalopathy 
(nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and confusion) 
can progress to the irreversible deficits of Korsakoff’s 
syndrome (severe short-term memory deficits and 
confabulation, and also reduced red blood cell trans­
ketolase). In those who die in the acute stage, micro-
scopic examination of the brain shows hyperaemia, 
petechial haemorrhages and astrocytic proliferation.
Acute intoxication
• Emotional and behavioural disturbance
• Medical problems: hypoglycaemia, aspiration of vomit, 
respiratory depression
• Complication of other medical problems
• Accidents, injuries sustained in fights
Withdrawal phenomena
• Psychological symptoms: restlessness, anxiety, panic attacks
• Autonomic symptoms: tachycardia, sweating, pupil dilatation, 
nausea, vomiting
• Delirium tremens: agitation, hallucinations, illusions, 
delusions
• Seizures
Harmful use
Medical consequences
• Neurological: peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar degeneration, 
cerebral haemorrhage, dementia
• Hepatic: fatty change and cirrhosis, liver cancer
• Gastrointestinal: oesophagitis, gastritis, pancreatitis, 
oesophageal cancer, Mallory–Weiss syndrome, 
malabsorption, oesophageal varices
• Respiratory: pulmonary tuberculosis, pneumonia
• Skin: spider naevi, palmar erythema, Dupuytren’s 
contractures, telangiectasias
• Cardiac: cardiomyopathy, hypertension
• Musculoskeletal: myopathy, fractures
• Endocrine and metabolic: pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome, 
hypoglycaemia, gout
• Reproductive: hypogonadism, fetal alcohol syndrome, 
infertility
Psychiatric and cerebral consequences
• Depression
• Alcoholic hallucinosis
• Alcoholic ‘blackouts’
• Wernicke’s encephalopathy: nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia, 
ataxia, confusion
• Korsakoff’s syndrome: short-term memory deficits, 
confabulation
10.35  Consequences of chronic alcohol misuse
Medical psychiatry
10
254
cramps. Examination reveals tachycardia, hypertension, 
mydriasis and facial flushing.
Stimulants
Stimulant drugs include amphetamines and cocaine. 
They are less dangerous than the sedatives in overdose, 
although they can cause cardiac and cerebrovascular 
problems through their pressor effects. Physical depend-
ence syndromes do not arise, but withdrawal causes 
a rebound lowering in mood and can give rise to 
an intense craving for further use, especially in any 
form of drug with a rapid onset and offset of effect, 
such as crack cocaine. Chronic ingestion can cause a 
paranoid psychosis similar to schizophrenia. A ‘toxic 
psychosis’ (delirium) can occur with high levels of con-
sumption, and tactile hallucinations (formication) may 
be prominent.
Hallucinogens
The hallucinogens are a disparate group of drugs that 
cause prominent sensory disturbances. They include 
cannabis, ecstasy, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and 
Psilocybin (magic mushrooms). A toxic confusional state 
can occur after heavy cannabis consumption. Acute psy-
chotic episodes are well recognised, especially in those 
with a family or personal history of psychosis, and there 
is evidence that prolonged heavy use increases the risk 
of developing schizophrenia. Paranoid psychoses have 
been reported in association with ecstasy. A chronic psy-
chosis has also been reported after regular LSD use.
Organic solvents
Solvent inhalation (glue sniffing) is popular in some 
adolescent groups. Solvents produce acute intoxication 
characterised by euphoria, excitement, dizziness and a 
floating sensation. Further inhalation leads to loss of 
consciousness; death can occur from the direct toxic 
effect of the solvent, or from asphyxiation if the sub-
stance is inhaled from a plastic bag.
Aetiology
Many of the aetiological factors for alcohol misuse 
also apply to drug dependence. The main factors are 
cultural pressures, particularly within a peer group, and 
availability of a drug. In the case of some drugs, medical 
over-prescribing (for example, of synthetic opiates) has 
increased their availability, but there has also been a 
relative decline in the price of illegal drugs. Most drug 
users take a range of drugs – so-called polydrug misuse.
Diagnosis
As with alcohol, the diagnosis either may be apparent 
from the history, or may only be made once the patient 
presents with a complication. Drug screening of samples 
of urine or blood can be valuable in confirming the diag-
nosis, especially if the patient persists in denial.
Management and prognosis
The first step is to determine whether patients wish to 
stop using the drug. If they do not, they can still benefit 
from advice about how to minimise harm from their 
habit: for example, how to obtain and use clean needles 
for those who inject. For those who are physically 
dependent on sedative drugs, substitute prescribing 
(using methadone, for example, in opiate dependence) 
may help stabilise their lives sufficiently to allow a 
symptoms subside. Prevention of the Wernicke–
Korsakoff syndrome requires the immediate use of high 
doses of thiamine, which is initially given parenterally 
in the form of Pabrinex (two vials 3 times daily for 
48 hours) and then orally (100 mg 3 times daily). There 
is no treatment for Korsakoff’s syndrome once it has 
arisen. The risk of side-effects, such as respiratory 
depression with benzodiazepines and anaphylaxis with 
Pabrinex, is small when weighed against the risks of no 
treatment.
Acamprosate (666 mg 3 times daily) may help to 
maintain abstinence by reducing the craving for alcohol. 
Disulfiram (200–400 mg daily) can be given as a deter-
rent to patients who have difficulty resisting the impulse 
to drink after becoming abstinent. It blocks the metabo-
lism of alcohol, causing acetaldehyde to accumulate. 
When alcohol is consumed, an unpleasant reaction 
follows, with headache, flushing and nausea. Disulfiram 
is always an adjunct to other treatments, especially sup-
portive psychotherapy. Treatment with antidepressants 
may be required if depression is severe or does not 
resolve with abstinence. Antipsychotics (e.g. chlorpro-
mazine 100 mg 3 times daily) are needed for alcoholic 
hallucinosis. Although such treatment may be success-
ful, there is a high relapse rate.
Chronic alcohol misuse greatly increases the risk of 
death from accidents, disease and suicide (p. 100).
Substance misuse disorder
Dependence on and misuse of both illegal and pre-
scribed drugs is a major problem worldwide. Drugs of 
misuse are described in detail in Chapter 9. They can be 
grouped as follows.
Sedatives
These commonly give rise to physical dependence, the 
manifestations of which are tolerance and a withdrawal 
syndrome. Drugs include benzodiazepines, opiates 
(including morphine, heroin, methadone and dihydro­
codeine) and barbiturates (now rarely prescribed). Over-
dosage with opiates and benzodiazepines can be fatal, 
primarily as a result of respiratory depression (Ch. 9). 
Withdrawal from opiates is notoriously unpleasant, and 
withdrawal from benzodiazepines (Box 10.36) and bar-
biturates may cause seizures.
Intravenous opiate users are prone to bacterial infec-
tions, hepatitis B (p. 950), hepatitis C (p. 954) and HIV 
infection (Ch. 14) through needle contamination. Acci-
dental overdose is common, mainly because of the 
varied and uncertain potency of illicit supplies of the 
drug. The withdrawal syndrome, which can start within 
12 hours of last use, presents with intense craving, 
rhinorrhoea, lacrimation, yawning, perspiration, shiver-
ing, piloerection, vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal 
• Anxiety
• Heightened sensory 
perception
• Hallucinations
• Epileptic seizures
• Ataxia
• Paranoid delusions
10.36  Benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms
Psychiatric disorders
10
255
gradual reduction in dosage until they reach abstinence. 
Some specialist units offer inpatient detoxification. For 
details of the medical management of overdose, see 
Chapter 9.
The drug lofexidine, a centrally acting α-agonist, can 
be useful in treating the autonomic symptoms of opiate 
withdrawal, as can clonidine, although this carries a risk 
of hypotension and is best used by specialists. Long-
acting opiate antagonists, such as naltrexone, may also 
have a place, again in specialist hands, in blocking 
the euphoriant effects of the opiate, thereby reducing 
addiction.
In some cases, complete opiate withdrawal is not suc-
cessful and the patient functions better if maintained on 
regular doses of oral methadone as an outpatient. This 
decision to prescribe long-term methadone should only 
be taken by a specialist, and carried out under long-term 
supervision at a specialist drug treatment centre.
Substitute prescribing is neither necessary nor pos-
sible for the hallucinogens and stimulants, but the prin-
ciples of management are the same as those that should 
accompany prescribing for the sedatives. These include 
identifying problems associated with the drug misuse 
that may serve to maintain it, and intervening where 
possible. Intervention may be directed at physical illness, 
psychiatric comorbidity, social problems or family 
disharmony.
Relapsing patients and those with complications 
should be referred to specialist drug misuse services. 
Support can also be provided by self-help groups and 
voluntary bodies, such as Narcotics Anonymous in 
the UK.
Personality disorders
Personality refers to the set of characteristics and behav-
ioural traits that best describes an individual’s patterns 
of interaction with the world. The intensity of particular 
traits varies from person to person, although many, such 
as shyness or irritability, are displayed to some degree 
by most people.
A personality disorder (PD) is diagnosed when an 
individual’s personality causes persistent and severe 
problems for the person or for others. For example, 
anxiety may be so pronounced that the individual rarely 
ventures into any situation where he or she fears scru-
tiny. Antisocial traits, such as disregard for the well-
being of others and a lack of guilt concerning the adverse 
effects of one’s actions on others, if pronounced, may 
lead to damage to others and to criminal acts.
PD is classified into several subtypes (such as emo-
tionally unstable, antisocial or schizotypal), depending 
on the particular behavioural traits in question. A patient 
who meets diagnostic criteria for one subtype com-
monly meets criteria for two or three others. As alloca-
tion to one particular subtype gives little guidance to 
management or prognosis, classification is of limited 
value. PD commonly accompanies other psychiatric con-
ditions, making treatment of the latter more difficult and 
therefore affecting their prognosis.
Aetiology
Some personality disorders appear to have an inherited 
aspect (especially paranoid and schizotypal types) but 
most are more clearly related to an unsatisfactory 
upbringing and adverse childhood experiences.
Management and prognosis
Personality disorders usually persist throughout life and 
are not readily treated. However, they often become less 
extreme with age. Treatment options are limited but 
there is some evidence that emotionally unstable PD 
may also respond to dialectical behavioural therapy (an 
intensive type of CBT). Anxious (avoidant) and obses-
sional (anankastic) PD may benefit from prescription of 
anxiolytic drugs, while paranoid/schizotypal PD may 
benefit from treatment with low doses of antipsychotic 
agents.
Eating disorders
There are two well-defined eating disorders, anorexia 
nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN); they share 
some overlapping features. Ninety per cent of cases are 
female. There is a much higher prevalence of abnormal 
eating behaviour in the population that does not meet 
diagnostic criteria for AN or BN. In developed societies, 
obesity is arguably a much greater problem but is 
usually considered to be more a disorder of lifestyle or 
physiology than a psychiatric disorder.
Anorexia nervosa
There is marked weight loss, arising from food avoid-
ance, often in combination with bingeing, purging, 
excessive exercise, or the use of diuretics and laxatives. 
Body image is profoundly disturbed so that, despite 
emaciation, patients still feel overweight and are terri-
fied of weight gain. These preoccupations are intense 
and pervasive, and the false beliefs may be held with a 
conviction approaching the delusional. Anxiety and 
depressive symptoms are common accompaniments. 
Downy hair (lanugo) may develop on the back, forearms 
and cheeks. Extreme starvation is associated with a 
wide range of physiological and pathological bodily 
changes. All organ systems may be affected, although 
the most serious problems are cardiac and skeletal 
(Box 10.37).
Aetiology
This is unknown but probably includes genetic and 
environmental factors, including, in many societies, the 
social pressure on women to be thin.
Diagnosis
The condition usually emerges in adolescence, with a 
marked female preponderance. Diagnostic criteria are 
shown in Box 10.38. Differential diagnosis is from other 
causes of weight loss, including psychiatric disorders 
such as depression, and medical conditions such as 
inflammatory bowel disease, malabsorption, hypopitui-
tarism and cancer. The diagnosis is based on a pro-
nounced fear of fatness despite being thin, and on the 
absence of alternative causes of weight loss.
Management and prognosis
The aims of management are to ensure patient’s physical 
well-being, whilst helping them to gain weight by 
addressing the beliefs and behaviours that maintain the 
Medical psychiatry
10
256
Bulimia nervosa
In BN, patients are usually at or near normal weight 
(unlike in AN), but display a morbid fear of fatness 
associated with disordered eating behaviour. They 
recurrently embark on eating binges, often followed by 
corrective measures such as self-induced vomiting. The 
prevalence is similar to or slightly greater than that of 
AN, but only a small proportion of sufferers reach treat-
ment services.
Diagnosis
BN usually begins later in adolescence than AN, and is 
even more predominantly a female malady. Diagnostic 
criteria are shown in Box 10.38. Physical signs of repeated 
self-induced vomiting include pitted teeth (from gastric 
acid), calluses on knuckles (‘Russell’s sign’) and parotid 
gland enlargement. There are many associated physical 
complications, including the dental and oesophageal 
consequences of repeated vomiting, as well as elec­
trolyte abnormalities, cardiac arrhythmias and renal 
problems (see Box 10.37).
Management and prognosis
CBT achieves both short-term and long-term improve-
ments. Guided self-help and interpersonal psycho­
therapy may also be of value. There is also evidence for 
benefit from the SSRI, fluoxetine, although high doses 
(60 mg daily) and long courses (1 year) may be required; 
this appears to be independent of the antidepressant 
effect.
Bulimia does not carry the mortality associated with 
AN, and few sufferers develop anorexia. At 10-year 
follow-up, approximately 10% are still unwell, 20% have 
a subclinical degree of BN, and the remainder have 
recovered.
Puerperal disorders
There are three common psychiatric disorders that occur 
after childbirth. When managing these conditions, it is 
important always to consider both the mother and the 
baby, and their relationship (Box 10.39).
Post-partum blues
These are characterised by irritability, labile mood and 
tearfulness. Most women are affected to some degree. 
Symptoms begin soon after childbirth, peak on about the 
fourth day and then resolve. They may be related to 
hormonal or psychological changes associated with 
childbirth. No treatment is required, other than to reas-
sure the mother.
low weight. Treatment is usually given on an outpatient 
basis, inpatient treatment being indicated only if weight 
loss is intractable and severe (for example, less than 65% 
of normal), or if there is a risk of death from medical 
complications or from suicide. There is a limited evi-
dence base for treatment, although CBT and family 
therapy are commonly used. Psychotropic drugs are of 
little benefit except in those with clear-cut comorbid 
depressive disorder.
Weight gain is best achieved in a collaborative 
fashion. Compulsory admission and refeeding (includ-
ing tube feeding) are very occasionally resorted to 
when patients are at risk of death and other measures 
have failed. Whilst this may produce a short-term 
improvement in weight, it probably does not change 
long-term prognosis. About 20% of patients with AN 
have a good outcome, a further 20% develop a chronic 
intractable disorder and the rest have an intermediate 
outcome. There is a long-term mortality rate of 10–20%, 
either due to the complications of starvation or from 
suicide.
Cardiac
• ECG abnormalities: T wave inversion, ST depression and 
prolonged QTc interval
• Arrhythmias, including profound sinus bradycardia and 
ventricular tachycardia
Haematological
• Anaemia, thrombocytopenia and leucopenia
Endocrine
• Pubertal delay or arrest
• Growth retardation and short stature
• Amenorrhoea
• Sick euthyroid state
Metabolic
• Uraemia
• Renal calculi
• Osteoporosis
Gastrointestinal
• Constipation
• Abnormal liver function tests
10.37  Medical consequences of eating disorders
Anorexia nervosa
• Weight loss of at least 15% of total body weight (or body 
mass index ≤ 17.5)
• Avoidance of high-calorie foods
• Distortion of body image so that patients regard themselves 
as fat even when grossly underweight
• Amenorrhoea for at least 3 months
Bulimia nervosa
• Recurrent bouts of binge eating
• Lack of self-control over eating during binges
• Self-induced vomiting, purgation or dieting after binges
• Weight maintained within normal limits
10.38  Diagnostic criteria for eating disorders
• Always consider the effects of psychiatric disorder and 
treatment on mother, fetus and neonate
• Lithium, carbamazepine and valproate are significant 
teratogens, so minimise their use
• Most cases of post-partum low mood (‘blues’) are transient
• However, persistent low mood may indicate depressive 
illness
• Puerperal psychosis usually requires psychiatric admission
10.39  Psychiatric illness and pregnancy
Further information
10
257
and whose symptoms and/or behaviour pose a risk to 
himself/herself or to others.
The UK has three different Mental Health Acts, 
covering England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern 
Ireland, and all of these have recently been revised. 
Other countries may have very different provisions. 
It is important for practitioners to be familiar with the 
relevant provisions that apply in their jurisdictions 
and are likely to arise in the clinical settings in which 
they work.
All the countries that make up the UK have also intro-
duced Incapacity Acts in recent years, with detailed 
provisions covering medical treatments for patients 
incapable of consenting, whether this incapacity arises 
from physical or mental illness. In general, the guiding 
principle in British law is that people should be free to 
make their own decisions about medical treatment, 
except where their ability to decide is impaired by 
mental illness or physical incapacity, and where there 
are clear risks to the health and safety of themselves or 
others. Any restrictions or compulsions applied should 
be the minimum necessary, and they should only be 
applied for as long as is necessary; there should also be 
provisions for appeals and oversight.
Further information
Books
Harrison P, Geddes J, Sharpe M. Lecture notes on 
psychiatry. 10th edn. Oxford: Blackwell Science; 2010.
Johnstone EC, Owens DGC, Lawrie SM, et al (eds). 
Companion to psychiatric studies. 8th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2009.
Websites
http://cebmh.warne.ox.ac.uk/cebmh/ Website of the Centre 
for Evidence-based Mental Health.
www.depressionalliance.org Information on depression.
www.niaaa.nih.gov/ Information on alcoholism.
www.rcpsych.ac.uk/info/index.htm Royal College of 
Psychiatrists: mental health information.
www.who.int/mental_health/ WHO website on mental health 
and brain disorders.
Post-partum depression
This occurs in 10–15% of women and within a month of 
delivery. Women with a previous history of depression 
are at risk. Explanation and reassurance are important. 
The usual psychological and drug treatments for depres-
sion should be considered, as well as practical help with 
childcare. If hospital admission is required, it should 
ideally be to a mother and baby unit. Further episodes 
of depression, both after childbirth and in response to 
other stressors, are likely.
Puerperal psychosis
This has its onset in the first 2 weeks after childbirth. 
It is a rare but serious complication affecting about 1 in 
500 women and usually takes the form of a manic or 
depressive psychosis. There is an association with a per-
sonal or familial history of bipolar disorder. Delirium is 
rare with modern obstetric management but should still 
be considered in the differential diagnosis. Admission to 
a psychiatric mother and baby unit may be required. 
Management depends on the type of psychosis that 
presents. In addition, it is important to consider the 
welfare of the baby, especially if the mother has ideas of 
harming it. If so, the risk to the baby must be assessed 
and, if necessary, the baby temporarily removed. Most 
women recover but are at an increased (25%) risk of 
puerperal psychosis with the next pregnancy, and a 50% 
lifetime risk.
PSYCHIATRY AND THE LAW
Medicine takes place in a legal framework, made up of 
legislation (statute law) drafted by parliament or other 
governing bodies, and common law (case law) built up 
from court judgements over time. Psychiatry is similar 
to other branches of medicine in the applicability of 
common law but differs in that patients with psychiatric 
disorders can also be subject to legislative requirements 
to remain in hospital or to undergo treatments they 
refuse, such as the administration of antipsychotic drugs 
to a patient with acute schizophrenia who lacks insight, 
This page intentionally left blank
259
11 
Clinical examination of the cancer  
patient 260
The ten hallmarks of cancer 262
Environmental and genetic determinants of 
cancer 266
Investigations 268
Histology 268
Imaging 269
Biochemical markers 269
Presenting problems in oncology 269
Palpable mass 270
Weight loss and fever 271
Finger clubbing 271
Ectopic hormone production 271
Neurological paraneoplastic syndromes 271
Cutaneous manifestations of cancer 272
Oncology
Specific cancers 279
Breast cancer 279
Ovarian cancer 280
Endometrial cancer 281
Cervical cancer 281
Head and neck tumours 281
Carcinoma of unknown origin 282
G.G. Dark
A.R. Abdul Razak
Emergency complications of cancer 272
Metastatic disease 274
Therapeutics in oncology 276
Surgical treatment 276
Systemic chemotherapy 276
Radiation therapy 277
Hormone therapy 278
Immunotherapy 278
Biological therapies 278
Oncology
260
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CANCER PATIENT
7
6
5
9
8
1
10
2
3
4
Observation
Breast
Lymph nodes
Neck
Supraclavicular
Axillary
Antecubital
Inguinal
Para-aortic
Face
Conjunctival pallor
Icterus, jaundice
Horner’s syndrome
Cushingoid features
Cardiovascular
Superior vena cava (SVC)
obstruction
Atrial fibrillation
Pericardial effusion
Hypo-/hypertension
Abdomen
Surgical scars
Umbilical nodule
Mass in epigastrium
Visible peristalsis
Abdominal distension
Ascites
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Renal mass
Pelvic or adnexal mass
Respiratory
Stridor
Consolidation
Pleural effusion
• Skin changes
• Ascites
• Cushingoid appearance
• Cachexia
• Dehydration
Hands
Clubbing
Signs of smoking
Pallor
Tylosis of palms
Periphery
Calf tenderness, venous
thrombosis
Clubbing (if present in hands)
Skin tethering
above the nipple
Cushing’s syndrome
in a patient with ectopic
adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH) production
Finger clubbing
in lung cancer
SVC obstruction in a patient
with a mediastinal mass
Skeletal survey
Focal bone tenderness
(pelvis, spine, long bones)
Wrist tenderness
(hypertrophic pulmonary
osteoarthropathy)
Neurological
Focal neurological signs
Sensory deficit
Spinal cord compression
Memory deficit
Personality change
Ascites (ovarian carcinoma)
Clinical examination of the cancer patient
261
7  Abdominal examination
• Are there scars from previous surgery?
• Is the umbilicus everted, suggesting ascites?
• Is there a firm nodule at the umbilicus due to ovarian or gastric cancer metastasis, 
causing a Sister Mary Joseph’s nodule?
• Is there smooth hepatomegaly – possibly primary liver cancer or heart failure?
• Is the liver firm or knobbly, suggesting metastasis?
• Is the ascites too tense to demonstrate hepatomegaly?
• Are other masses palpable in the abdomen?
• Are there signs of obstruction or paralytic ileus with absence of bowel sounds?
• Palpate for inguinal nodes (occasionally involved in ovarian cancer)
• Percuss for flank dullness and shifting dullness
• Perform vaginal and rectal examinations to detect adnexal or rectal masses
3  Examination of the lymph nodes
Pre-auricular
Parotid
Submandibular
Submental
Posterior cervical
Supraclavicular
Anterior cervical
Supraclavicular
Axillary
Epitrochlear
Inguinal
Femoral
Popliteal
fossa
5  Superior vena cava 
obstruction
• Venous distension of neck
• Elevated but non-pulsatile jugular 
venous pulse
• Venous distension of chest wall
• Facial oedema
• Cyanosis
• Plethora of face
• Oedema of arms
5  Pericardial effusion
• Tachycardia
• Falling blood pressure
• Rising jugular venous pressure
• Muffled heart sounds
• Kussmaul’s sign
6  Malignant pleural effusions
Large right pleural effusion
Inspection
  Tachypnoea
Palpation
  ↓Expansion on R
  Trachea and apex may be
  moved to L
Percussion
  Stony dull
  R mid- and lower zones
Auscultation
  Absent breath sounds and
 diminished or absent
  vocal resonance R base
  Crackles above effusion
Important features of skin lesions that 
should alert suspicion include:
• Asymmetry: irregular shape
• Bleeding
• Border: not a smooth edge
• Colour: uneven, variegated or 
changing colour
• Diameter: > 6 mm in diameter or 
growing
• Itching or pain in a pre-existing  
mole
Examination of the skin
Oncology
11
262
Fig. 11.1  The most commonly diagnosed cancers in the UK. 
(NHL = non-Hodgkin lymphoma) Statistics from Cancer Research UK 
website (http://info.cancerresearchuk.org). 
NHL
Bladder
Prostate
Large bowel
Lung
Breast
5
Stomach
Head and neck
Oesophagus
Melanoma
Pancreas
Ovary
Leukaemia
Kidney
Body of uterus
Other
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
Number of new cases (thousands)
Male
Female
Cancer is a significant global health-care problem, with 
an estimated worldwide incidence of 10 million new 
cases per year, 46% of which are in developed countries. 
Mortality is high, with more than 7 million deaths 
per year. The global costs and socioeconomic impact 
are considerable. The most common solid organ malig-
nancies arise in the lung, breast and gastrointestinal 
tract (Fig. 11.1), but the most common form world­
wide is skin cancer. Tobacco is a major factor in the 
aetiology of 30% of cancers, including those of the 
lung, nasopharynx, bladder and kidney, and these 
could be prevented by smoking cessation. Diet and 
alcohol contribute to a further 30% of cancers, includ­
ing those of the stomach, colon, oesophagus, breast 
and liver. Lifestyle modification could reduce these 
if steps were taken to avoid animal fat and red meat, 
reduce alcohol, increase fibre, fresh fruit and vege­
table intake, and avoid obesity. Infections account for a 
further 15% of cancers, including those of the cervix, 
stomach, liver, nasopharynx and bladder, and some of 
these could be prevented by infection control and 
vaccination.
THE TEN HALLMARKS OF CANCER
The formation and growth of cancer constitute a multi-
step process, during which sequentially occurring gene 
mutations result in the formation of a cancerous cell. For 
cells to initiate carcinogenesis successfully, they require 
key characteristics, collectively referred to as the hall-
marks of cancer.
1.  Genome instability  
and mutation
Random genetic mutations occur continuously through-
out all cells of the body and very rarely confer a selective 
advantage on single cells, allowing overgrowth and 
dominance in local tissue environments. Multistep car-
cinogenesis results from successive clonal expansions of 
pre-malignant cells, each expansion being triggered by 
acquisition of a random enabling genetic mutation. 
Under normal circumstances, cellular DNA repair 
mechanisms are so effective that almost all spontaneous 
mutations are corrected without producing phenotypic 
changes, keeping the overall mutation rates very low. 
In cancer cells, the accumulation of mutations can be 
accelerated by compromising the surveillance systems 
that normally monitor genomic integrity and force 
genetically damaged cells into either senescence or 
apoptosis. Therefore, they can become more sensitive to 
mutagenic actions or develop DNA repair mechanism 
failure.
2.  Resisting cell death
There are three principal mechanisms through which 
cell death occurs in healthy tissues:
•	 Apoptosis is programmed cell death and is 
frequently found at markedly reduced rates in 
cancers, particularly those of high grade or those 
resistant to treatment. The cellular apoptotic system 
has regulatory elements which sense intrinsic and 
extrinsic pro-apoptotic signals and initiate a cascade 
of proteolysis and cell disassembly with nuclear 
fragmentation, chromosomal condensation, and 
shrinking of the cell with loss of intercellular 
contact, followed by cellular fragmentation and the 
formation of apoptotic bodies that are phagocytosed 
by neighbouring cells. The most important regulator 
of apoptosis is the TP53 tumour suppressor gene, 
often described as the ‘guardian of the genome’,  
as it is able to induce apoptosis in response to 
sufficient levels of genomic damage. The largest 
initiator of apoptosis via TP53 is cellular injury, 
particularly due to DNA damage from 
chemotherapy, oxidative damage and ultraviolet 
(UV) radiation.
•	 Autophagy is a catabolic process during which 
cellular constituents are degraded by lysosomal 
machinery within the cell. It is an important 
physiological mechanism, which usually occurs at 
low levels in cells but can be induced in response to 
environmental stresses, particularly radiotherapy 
and cytotoxic chemotherapy, which induce elevated 
levels of autophagy that are cytoprotective for 
malignant cells, thus impeding rather than 
perpetuating the killing actions of these stress 
situations. Severely stressed cancer cells have been 
shown to shrink via autophagy to a state of 
reversible dormancy.
•	 Necrosis is the premature death of cells and is 
characterised by the release of cellular contents into 
the local tissue microenvironment, in marked 
contrast to apoptosis, where cells are disassembled 
in a step-by-step fashion and the resulting cellular 
fragments phagocytosed. Necrotic cell death results 
in the recruitment of inflammatory immune cells, 
promotion of angiogenesis, cellular proliferation 
and tissue invasion. Necrotic cells also release 
stimulatory factors, which promote proliferation of 
neighbouring cells and can promote rather than 
inhibit carcinogenesis.
The ten hallmarks of cancer
11
263
Fig. 11.2  The cell cycle and sites of action of chemotherapeutic agents. (Rb = retinoblastoma gene; CDK = cyclin-dependent kinase) 
Quiescent
DNA replication
G2
Mitosis
Terminal
differentiation
Apoptosis
G2 checkpoint for
  DNA damage
  DNA replication
  incomplete
Prophase → telophase
Nuclear and cellular division
Terminal differentiation
Apoptosis
Further growth
or DNA repair
S
M
G1
Cell
growth
G0
G1 checkpoint for
  Damaged DNA
  Rb blocks
  p53 → CDKs blocked
Restriction point
(regulated by growth 
factors)
Antimetabolites
Mitotic spindle poisons
Topoisomerase
inhibitors
Antibiotics and
alkylating agents
(act on entire cycle)
Cyclin A
CDK2
Cyclin B
CDK1
Cyclin D
CDK4, 6
Cell growth
Cyclin E
CDK2
3.  Sustaining proliferative 
signalling
Cancer cells can sustain proliferation beyond what 
would be expected for normal cells; this is typically due 
to growth factors, which are able to bind to cell surface-
bound receptors that activate an intracellular tyrosine 
kinase-mediated signalling cascade, ultimately leading 
to changes in gene expression and promoting cellular 
proliferation and growth. Sustained proliferative capac-
ity can result from over-production of growth factor 
ligands or receptors and production of structurally 
altered receptors, which can signal in the absence of 
ligand binding and activation of intracellular signalling 
pathway components so that signalling is no longer 
ligand-dependent.
The cell cycle
The cell cycle is comprised of four ordered, strictly regu-
lated phases referred to as G1 (gap 1), S (DNA synthesis), 
G2 (gap 2) and M (mitosis) (Fig. 11.2). Normal cells 
grown in culture will stop proliferating and enter a 
quiescent state called G0 once they become confluent 
or are deprived of serum or growth factors. The first 
gap phase (G1) prior to the initiation of DNA synthesis 
represents the period of commitment that separates M 
and S phases as cells prepare for DNA duplication. Cells 
in G0 and G1 are receptive to growth signals, but once 
they have passed a restriction point, they are committed 
to enter DNA synthesis (S phase). Cells demonstrate 
arrest at different points in G1 in response to different 
inhibitory growth signals. Mitogenic signals promote 
progression through G1 to S phase, utilising phosphor-
ylation of the retinoblastoma gene product (pRb). Fol-
lowing DNA synthesis, there is a second gap phase (G2) 
prior to mitosis (M), allowing cells to repair errors that 
have occurred during DNA replication and thus 
preventing propagation of these errors to daughter cells. 
Although the duration of individual phases may vary, 
depending on cell and tissue type, most adult cells are 
in a G0 state at any one time.
Cell cycle regulation
The cell cycle is orchestrated by a number of molecular 
mechanisms, most importantly by cyclins and cyclin-
dependent kinases (CDKs). Cyclins bind to CDKs, and 
are regulated by both activating and inactivating phos-
phorylation, with two main checkpoints at G1/S and 
G2/M transition. The genes that inhibit progression play 
an important part in tumour prevention and are referred 
to as tumour suppressor genes (e.g. TP53, TP21, TP16 
genes). The products of these genes deactivate the 
cyclin–CDK complexes and are thus able to halt the cell 
cycle. The complexity of cell cycle control is susceptible 
to dysregulation, which may produce a malignant 
phenotype.
Stimulation of the cell cycle
Many cancer cells produce growth factors, which drive 
their own proliferation by a positive feedback known as 
autocrine stimulation. Examples include transforming 
growth factor-alpha (TGF-α) and platelet-derived 
growth factor (PDGF). Other cancer cells express growth 
factor receptors at increased levels due to gene amplifi-
cation or express abnormal receptors that are perma-
nently activated. This results in abnormal cell growth in 
response to physiological growth factor stimulation or 
even in the absence of growth factor stimulation (ligand-
independent signalling). The epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) is often over-expressed in lung and gas-
trointestinal tumours and the HER2/neu receptor is fre-
quently over-expressed in breast cancer. Both receptors 
activate the Ras–Raf–MAP kinase pathway, causing cell 
proliferation.
Oncology
11
264
4.  Evading growth suppressors
In healthy tissues, cell-to-cell contact in dense cell popu-
lations acts as an inhibitory factor on proliferation. This 
contact inhibition is typically absent in many cancer cell 
populations. Growth-inhibitory factors can modulate 
the cell cycle regulators and produce activation of the 
CDK inhibitors, causing inhibition of the CDKs. Muta-
tions within inhibitory proteins are common in cancer. 
Loss of restriction by disruption of pRb regulation can 
be found in human tumours, which produces a loss of 
restraint on transition from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle. 
Disruption of p53 function will have downstream effects 
on p21 that alter the coordination of DNA repair with 
cycle arrest and that result in the affected cell accumulat-
ing genomic defects. Down-regulation of p21 and p27, 
which can be found in tumours with normal p53 func-
tion, correlates notably with high tumour grade and 
poor prognosis.
5.  Enabling replicative immortality
For cancer cells to evolve into macroscopic tumours, 
they need to acquire the ability for unlimited prolifera-
tion. Telomeric DNA sequences, which protect and sta-
bilise chromosomal ends, play a central role in conferring 
this limitless replicative potential. During replication of 
normal cells, telomeres shorten progressively as small 
fragments of telomeric DNA are lost with successive 
cycles of replication. This shortening process is thought 
to represent a mitotic clock and eventually prevents the 
cell from dividing further. Telomerase, a specialised 
polymerase enzyme, adds nucleotides to telomeres, 
Fig. 11.3  Oncogenesis. The multistep origin of cancer, showing events implicated in cancer initiation, progression, invasion and metastasis. 
Basal lamina
First mutation
Inherited or acquired
gain of oncogene
Loss of tumour
suppressor gene
Normal
epithelium
Blood vessel
Connective
tissue
Lymphatic
First mutation
Initial proliferation
Small adenoma
Further mutation
Further mutation; subset
selected for rapid growth
Carcinoma
Further mutation 
→ invasion or metastasis
Blood spread
Lymphatic
spread
Ectopic
growth factor
production and
autostimulation
Failed apoptosis
(e.g. p53 mutation)
Local invasion
through basal
lamina
↑ Angiogenesis
   to support
   tumour growth
 (see Fig. 11.4)
Breakdown of connective tissue
via tumour production of
  e.g. collagenase
         tissue metalloproteinases
Loss of cell adhesion molecules
  e.g. E-cadherin
allowing continued cell division and thus preventing 
premature arrest of cellular replication. The telomerase 
enzyme is almost absent in normal cells but is expressed 
at significant levels in many human cancers.
6.  Inducing angiogenesis
All cancers require a functional vascular network to 
ensure continued growth and will be unable to grow 
beyond 1 mm3 without stimulating the development of 
a vascular supply. Tumours require sustenance in the 
form of nutrients and oxygen, as well as an ability to 
evacuate metabolic waste products and carbon dioxide. 
This entails the development of new blood vessels, 
which is termed angiogenesis (Figs 11.3 and 11.4).
Angiogenesis is dependent on the production of 
angio­genic growth factors, of which vascular endothe-
lial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet-derived endothe-
lial growth factor (PDGF) are the best characterised. 
During tumour progression, an angiogenic switch is 
activated and remains on, causing normally quiescent 
vasculature to sprout new vessels continually that help 
sustain expanding tumour growth. Angiogenesis is 
governed by a balance of pro-angiogenic stimuli and 
angiogenesis inhibitors, such as thrombospondin (TSP)-
1, which binds to transmembrane receptors on endothe-
lial cells and evokes suppressive signals.
A number of cells can contribute to the maintenance 
of a functional tumour vasculature and therefore sustain 
angiogenesis. These include pericytes and a variety of 
bone marrow-derived cells such as macrophages, neu-
trophils, mast cells and myeloid progenitors.
The ten hallmarks of cancer
11
265
Fig. 11.4  Angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis.  A For 
any cancer to grow beyond 1 mm3 it must evoke a blood supply.
 B New vessel formation results from the release of angiogenic 
factors by the tumour cells and loss of inhibition of the 
endothelial cells.  C The loss of cellular adhesion and disruption 
of the extracellular matrix allow cells to extravasate into the 
blood stream and metastasise to distant sites. 
Inhibition
Loss of
inhibition
Viable tumour cell
Apoptoptic
tumour cell
Angiogenic
factors
VEGF
VEGF
receptor
Tissue
factor
αvβ3 integrin
Plasminogen
Coagulation factor
Coagulation
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
Cell adhesion
Urokinase
Urokinase
receptor
Proteolysis
Plasmin
A
B
C
7.  Activating invasion  
and metastasis
Invasion and metastasis are complex processes involv-
ing multiple discrete steps; it begins with local tissue 
invasion, followed by infiltration of nearby blood and 
lymphatic vessels by cancer cells. Malignant cells are 
eventually transported through haematogenous and 
lymphatic spread to distant sites within the body, where 
they form micrometastases that will eventually grow 
into macroscopic metastatic lesions (see Fig. 11.3).
Cadherin-1 (CDH1) is a calcium-dependent cell–cell 
adhesion glycoprotein that facilitates assembly of organ-
ised cell sheets in tissues, and increased expression is 
recognised as an antagonist of invasion and metastasis. 
In situ tumours usually retain cadherin-1 production, 
whereas loss of cadherin-1 production due to down-
regulation or occasional mutational inactivation of 
CDH1 has been observed in human cancers, supporting 
the theory that CDH1 plays a key role in suppression of 
invasion and metastasis.
Cross-talk between cancer cells and cells of the sur-
rounding stromal tissue is involved in the acquired 
capability for invasive growth and metastasis. Mesen-
chymal stem cells in tumour stroma have been found to 
secrete CCL5, a protein chemokine that helps recruit 
leucocytes into inflammatory sites. With the help of par-
ticular T-cell-derived cytokines (interleukin (IL)-2 and 
interferon (IFN)-γ), CCL5 induces proliferation and acti-
vation of natural killer cells and then acts reciprocally 
on cancer cells to stimulate invasive behaviour. Macro-
phages at the tumour periphery can foster local invasion 
by supplying matrix-degrading enzymes such as metallo­
proteinases and cysteine cathepsin proteases.
8.  Reprogramming energy 
metabolism
Under aerobic conditions, oxidative phosphorylation 
functions as the main metabolic pathway for energy 
production; cells process glucose, first to pyruvate via 
glycolysis and thereafter to carbon dioxide in the 
mitochondria. Whilst under anaerobic conditions, glyco-
lysis is favoured to produce adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP). Cancer cells can reprogramme their glucose 
metabolism to limit energy production to glycolysis, 
even in the presence of oxygen. This has been termed 
‘aerobic glycolysis’. Up-regulation of glucose transport-
ers, such as GLUT1, is the main mechanism through 
which aerobic glycolysis is achieved.
This reprogramming of energy metabolism appears 
paradoxical, as overall energy production from glyco­
lysis is significantly lower (18-fold) than that from oxida-
tive phosphorylation. One explanation may be that the 
increased production of glycolytic intermediates can be 
fed into various biosynthetic pathways, including those 
that generate the nucleosides and amino acids, neces-
sary for the production of new cells.
9.  Tumour-promoting inflammation
Almost all tumours show infiltration with immune 
cells on pathological investigation and historically this 
finding was thought to represent an attempt of the 
immune system to eradicate the cancer. It is now clear 
that tumour-associated inflammatory responses promote 
tumour formation and cancer progression.
Cytokines are able to alter blood vessels to permit 
migration of leucocytes (mainly neutrophils), in order to 
permeate from the blood vessels into the tissue, a process 
known as extravasation. Migration across the endothe-
lium occurs via the process of diapedesis, where chemo­
kine gradients stimulate adhered leucocytes to move 
between endothelial cells and pass through the base-
ment membrane into the surrounding tissues. Once 
within the tissue interstitium, leucocytes bind to extra-
cellular matrix proteins via integrins and CD44 to 
prevent their loss from the site.
As well as cell-derived mediators, several acellular 
biochemical cascade systems consisting of pre-formed 
plasma proteins act in parallel to initiate and propa-
gate the inflammatory response. These include the 
Oncology
11
266
disabling components of the immune system. This is 
done through recruitment of inflammatory cells, includ-
ing regulatory T cells and myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells, both actively immunosuppressive against the 
actions of cytotoxic lymphocytes (see Fig. 4.6, p. 80).
Cancers develop and progress when there is loss of 
recognition by the immune system, lack of susceptibility 
due to escape from immune cell action and induction of 
immune dysfunction, often via inflammatory mediators.
ENVIRONMENTAL AND GENETIC 
DETERMINANTS OF CANCER
The majority of cancers do not have a single cause but 
rather are the result of a complex interaction between 
genetic factors and exposure to environmental carcino-
gens. These are often tumour type-specific but some 
general principles do apply.
Environmental factors
Environmental triggers for cancer have mainly been 
identified through epidemiological studies that examine 
patterns of distribution of cancers in patients in whom 
age, sex, presence of other illnesses, social class, geog­
raphy and so on differ. Sometimes, these give strong 
complement system activated by bacteria, and the 
coagu­lation and fibrinolytic systems activated by necro-
sis, and also in burns and trauma, as well as cancer. 
Other bioactive molecules, such as growth factors and 
pro-angiogenic factors, may be released by inflamma-
tory immune cells into the surrounding tumour micro-
environment. In particular, the release of reactive oxygen 
species, which are actively mutagenic, will accelerate the 
genetic evolution of surrounding cancer cells, enhancing 
growth and contributing to cancer progression.
10.  Evading immune destruction
The immune system operates as a significant barrier to 
tumour formation and progression, and the ability to 
escape from immunity is a hallmark of cancer develop-
ment. Cancer cells continuously shed surface antigens 
into the circulatory system, prompting an immune 
response that includes cytotoxic T cell, natural killer 
cell and macrophage production. The immune system 
is thought to provide continuous surveillance, with 
resultant elimination of cells that undergo malignant 
transformation.
However, deficiencies in the development or function 
of CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes, CD4+ Th1 helper T 
cells, or natural killer cells can each lead to a demonstra-
ble increase in cancer incidence. Also, highly immuno-
genic cancer cells may evade immune destruction by 
Environmental aetiology
Processes
Diseases
Occupational exposure (see 
also ultraviolet and radiation)
Dye and rubber manufacturing (aromatic amines)
Bladder cancer
Asbestos mining, construction work, shipbuilding 
(asbestos)
Lung cancer and mesothelioma
Vinyl chloride (PVC) manufacturing
Liver angiosarcoma
Petroleum industry (benzene)
Acute leukaemia
Chemicals
Chemotherapy (e.g. melphalan, cyclophosphamide)
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Cigarette smoking
Exposure to carcinogens from inhaled smoke
Lung and bladder cancer
Viral infection
Epstein–Barr virus
Burkitt’s lymphoma and nasopharyngeal cancer
Human papillomavirus
Cervical cancer
Hepatitis B and C viruses
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Bacterial infection
Helicobacter pylori
Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT) lymphomas, gastric cancer
Parasitic infection
Liver fluke (Opisthorchis sinensis)
Cholangiocarcinoma
Schistosoma haematobium
Squamous cell bladder cancer
Dietary factors
Low-roughage/high-fat content diet
Colonic cancer
High nitrosamine intake
Gastric cancer
Aflatoxin from contamination of Aspergillus flavus
Hepatocellular cancer
Radiation
Ultraviolet (UV) exposure
Basal cell carcinoma
Melanoma
Non-melanocytic skin cancer
Nuclear fallout following explosion (e.g. Hiroshima)
Leukaemia
Solid tumours, e.g. thyroid
Diagnostic exposure (e.g. computed tomography (CT))
Cholangiocarcinoma following thorotrast usage
Occupational exposure (e.g. beryllium and strontium 
mining)
Lung cancer
Therapeutic radiotherapy
Medullary thyroid cancer
Sarcoma
Inflammatory diseases
Ulcerative colitis
Colon cancer
Hormonal
Use of diethylstilbestrol
Vaginal cancer
Oestrogens
Endometrial cancer
Breast cancer
11.1  Environmental factors that predispose to cancer
Environmental and genetic determinants of cancer
11
267
fat and/or dairy products), reproductive patterns (later 
onset of first pregnancy) and lifestyle (increased use of 
artificial light and shift in diurnal rhythm).
Genetic factors
A number of inherited cancer syndromes are recognised 
that account for 5–10% of all cancers (Box 11.2). Their 
molecular basis is discussed in Chapter 3, but in general 
they result from inherited mutations in genes that regu-
late cell growth, cell death and apoptosis. Examples 
include the BRCA1, BRCA2 and AT (ataxia telangiecta-
sia) genes that cause breast and some other cancers, the 
FAP gene that causes bowel cancer, and the Rb gene that 
causes retinoblastoma. Although carriers of these gene 
mutations have a greatly elevated risk of cancer, none 
has 100% penetrance and additional modulating factors, 
both genetic and environmental, are likely to be opera-
tive. Exploration of a possible genetic contribution is a 
key part of cancer management, especially with regard 
to ascertaining the risk for an affected patient’s 
offspring.
pointers to the molecular or cellular causes of the disease, 
such as the association between aflatoxin production 
within contaminated food supplies and hepatocellular 
carcinomas. However, for many solid cancers, such as 
breast and colorectal, there is evidence of a multifacto-
rial pathogenesis, even when there is a principal envi-
ronmental cause (Box 11.1).
Smoking is now established beyond all doubt as 
a major cause of lung cancer, but there are obviously 
additional predisposing factors since not all smokers 
develop cancer. Similarly, most carcinomas of the 
cervix are related to infection with human papilloma­
virus (HPV subtypes 16 and 18). For carcinomas of the 
bowel and breast, there is strong evidence of an environ-
mental component. For example, the risk of breast cancer 
in women of Far Eastern origin remains relatively low 
when they first migrate to a country with a Western 
lifestyle, but rises in subsequent generations to approach 
that of the resident population of the host country. The 
precise environmental factor that causes this change is 
unclear, but may include diet (higher intake of saturated 
Syndrome
Malignancies
Inheritance
Gene
Ataxia telangiectasia
Leukaemia, lymphoma, ovarian, gastric, brain, colon
AR
AT
Breast/ovarian
Breast, ovarian, colonic, prostatic, pancreatic
AD
BRCA1, BRCA2
Bloom’s syndrome
Leukaemia, tongue, oesophageal, colonic, Wilms’ 
tumour
AR
BLM
Cowden’s syndrome
Breast, thyroid, gastrointestinal tract, pancreatic
AD
PTEN
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Colonic, upper gastrointestinal tract
AD
APC, MUTYH
Fanconi anaemia
Leukaemia, oesophageal, skin, hepatoma
AR
FACA, FACC, FACD
Gorlin’s syndrome
Basal cell skin, brain
AD
PTCH
Hereditary non-polyposis colon 
cancer (HNPCC)
Colonic, endometrial, ovarian, pancreatic, gastric
AD
MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, 
PMS1, PMS2
Li–Fraumeni syndrome
Sarcoma, breast, osteosarcoma, leukaemia, glioma, 
adrenocortical
AD
TP53
Melanoma
Melanoma
AD
CDK2 (TP16)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN)-1
Pancreatic islet cell, pituitary adenoma, parathyroid 
adenoma and hyperplasia
AD
MEN1
MEN-2
Medullary thyroid, phaeochromocytoma, parathyroid 
hyperplasia
AD
RET
Neurofibromatosis 1
Neurofibrosarcoma, phaeochromocytoma, optic 
glioma
AD
NF1
Neurofibromatosis 2
Vestibular schwannoma
AD
NF2
Papillary renal cell cancer 
syndrome
Renal cell cancer
AD
MET
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome
Colonic, ileal, breast, ovarian
AD
STK11
Prostate cancer
Prostate
AD
HPC1
Retinoblastoma
Retinoblastoma, osteosarcoma
AD
RB1
von Hippel–Lindau syndrome
Haemangioblastoma of retina and CNS, renal cell, 
phaeochromocytoma
AD
VHL
Wilms’ tumour
Nephroblastoma, neuroblastoma, hepatoblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma
AD
WT1
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Skin, leukaemia, melanoma
AR
XPA, XPC, XPD 
(ERCC2), XPF
(AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive)
11.2  Inherited cancer predisposition syndromes
Oncology
11
268
INVESTIGATIONS
When a patient is suspected of having cancer, a full 
history should be taken; specific questions should be 
included as to potential risk factors such as smoking and 
occupational exposures. A thorough clinical examina-
tion is also essential to identify sites of metastases, and 
to discover any other conditions that may have a bearing 
on the management plan. In order to make a diagnosis 
and to plan the most appropriate management, informa-
tion is needed on:
•	 the type of tumour
•	 the extent of disease, as assessed by staging 
investigations
•	 the patient’s general condition and any comorbidity.
The overall fitness of a patient is often assessed by the 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) perform-
ance scale (Box 11.3). The outcome for patients with a 
performance status of 3 or 4 is worse in almost all malig-
nancies than for those with a status of 0–2, and this has 
a strong influence on the approach to treatment in the 
individual patient.
The process of staging determines the extent of the 
tumour; it entails clinical examination, imaging and in 
some cases surgery, to establish the extent of disease 
involvement. The outcome is recorded using a standard 
staging classification that allows comparisons to be 
made between different groups of patients. Therapeutic 
decisions and prognostic predictions can then be made 
using the evidence base for the disease. One of the most 
commonly used systems is the T (tumour), N (regional 
lymph nodes), M (metastatic sites) approach of the Inter-
national Union against Cancer (UICC, Box 11.4). For 
some tumours, such as colon cancer, the Dukes system 
(p. 914) is used rather than the UICC classification.
Histology
Histological analysis of a biopsy or resected specimen is 
pivotal in clinching the diagnosis and in deciding on the 
best form of management. The results of histological 
analysis are most informative when combined with 
knowledge of the clinical picture; therefore biopsy 
results should be reviewed and discussed within the 
context of a multidisciplinary team meeting.
Light microscopy
Examination of tumour samples by light microscopy 
remains the core method of cancer diagnosis and, in 
cases where the primary site is unclear, may also give 
clues to the origin of the tumour:
•	 Signet-ring cells favour a gastric primary.
•	 Presence of melanin favours melanoma.
•	 Mucin is common in gut/lung/breast/endometrial 
cancers, but particularly common in ovarian cancer 
and rare in renal cell or thyroid cancers.
•	 Psammoma bodies are a feature of ovarian cancer 
(mucin +) and thyroid cancer (mucin −).
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for tumour 
markers can provide useful diagnostic information 
and can help with treatment decisions. Commonly used 
examples of IHC in clinical practice include:
•	 Oestrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptors. 
Positive results indicate that the tumour may be 
sensitive to hormonal manipulation.
•	 Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic 
gonadotrophin (hCG) ± placental alkaline phosphatase 
(PLAP). These favour germ-cell tumours.
•	 Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and prostatic acid 
phosphatase (PAP). These favour prostate cancer.
•	 Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cytokeratin and 
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). These favour 
carcinomas.
•	 HER2 receptor. Breast cancers that have high levels 
of expression of HER2 indicate that the tumour may 
respond to trastuzumab (herceptin), an antibody 
directed against the HER2 receptor.
The pattern of immunoglobulin, T-cell receptor and 
cluster designation (CD) antigen expression on the 
surface is also helpful in the diagnosis and classification 
of lymphomas. This can be achieved by IHC staining of 
biopsy samples or flow cytometry.
0
Fully active, able to carry on all usual activities without 
restriction and without the aid of analgesics
1
Restricted in strenuous activity but ambulatory and 
able to carry out light work or pursue a sedentary 
occupation. This group also contains patients who are 
fully active, as in grade 0, but only with the aid of 
analgesics
2
Ambulatory and capable of all self-care but unable to 
work. Up and about more than 50% of waking hours
3
Capable of only limited self-care, confined to bed or 
chair more than 50% of waking hours
4
Completely disabled, unable to carry out any self-care 
and confined totally to bed or chair
11.3  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
performance status scale
11.4  TNM classification
Presenting problems in oncology
11
269
Electron microscopy
Electron microscopy (EM) can sometimes be of diagnos-
tic value. Examples include the visualisation of melano-
somes in amelanotic melanoma and dense core granules 
in neuro-endocrine tumours. EM may also help to dis-
tinguish adenocarcinoma from mesothelioma, as the 
ultrastructural properties of these two diseases are dif-
ferent (mesothelioma appears to have long, narrow, 
branching microvilli while adenocarcinomas appear to 
have short, stubby microvilli). EM is also useful for dif-
ferentiating spindle-cell tumours (sarcomas, melano-
mas, squamous cell cancers) from small round-cell 
tumours, again due to their ultra-structural differences.
Cytogenetic analysis
Some tumours demonstrate typical chromosomal 
changes that help in diagnosis. The utilisation of fluores-
cent in situ hybridisation (FISH) techniques can be 
useful in Ewing’s sarcoma and peripheral neuroectoder-
mal tumours where there is a translocation between 
chromosome 11 and 22–t(11; 22)(q24; q12). In some 
cases, gene amplification can also be detected via FISH 
(e.g. determining over-expression of HER2/neu).
Imaging
Imaging plays a critical role in oncology, not only in 
locating the primary tumour, but also in staging the 
disease. The imaging modality employed depends pri-
marily on the site of the disease and likely patterns of 
spread, but usually more than one modality is required.
Radiography
Plain radiographs remain part of the initial workup, but 
have a limited role in defining disease extent and have 
been superseded by more sophisticated techniques.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is useful in characterising lesions within the 
liver, kidney, pancreas and reproductive organs. It can 
be used for guiding biopsies of tumours in breast and 
liver. Endoscopic ultrasound is helpful in staging upper 
gastrointestinal and pancreatic cancers; it involves a 
special endoscope with an ultrasound probe attached.
Computerised tomography
Computerised tomography (CT) is a key investigation 
in cancer patients and is particularly useful in imaging 
the thorax and abdomen. With some modern scanners it 
is possible to visualise the bowel, and sometimes detec-
tion of colorectal adenomas and cancer is feasible.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has a high resolution 
and because of this is the preferred technique for brain 
imaging. It is also used to image structures within the 
pelvis and is widely employed for staging of rectal, cer-
vical and prostate cancers.
Positron emission tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) visualises meta-
bolic activity of tumour cells and is widely used, often 
in combination with CT (PET-CT), to evaluate patients 
with various cancers, including lung cancer and lym-
phoma (Fig. 11.5). It can accurately assess the severity 
and spread of cancer by detecting tumour metabolic 
activity following injection of small amounts of radio­
active tracers such as fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). In 
addition to having a role in diagnosis, PET can also be 
used in some patients to assess treatment response.
Biochemical markers
Many tumours produce substances called tumour 
markers, which can be used in diagnosis and surveil-
lance. Some are useful in population screening, diagno-
sis, prognostication, treatment monitoring, detection of 
relapse and imaging of metastasis. Unfortunately, most 
tumour markers are not sufficiently sensitive or specific 
to be used in isolation and need to be interpreted in the 
context of the other clinical features. However, some can 
be used for antibody-directed therapy or imaging, where 
they have a greater role in diagnosis. Tumour markers 
in routine use are outlined in Box 11.5.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN ONCOLOGY
In the early stages of cancer development, the number 
of malignant cells is small and the patient is usually 
asymptomatic. With tumour progression, localised signs 
or symptoms develop due to mass effects and/or inva-
sion of local tissues. With further progression, symp-
toms may occur at distant sites as a result of metastatic 
disease or from non-metastatic manifestations due to 
Fig. 11.5  PET-CT images.  A There is a neoplastic lesion in the left 
axilla, evidenced by the increased uptake of FDG traces.  B Imaging after 
chemotherapy, demonstrating that the abnormal uptake has disappeared 
and Indicating a response to treatment. 
A
B
Oncology
11
270
Palpable mass
A palpable mass detected by the patient or physician 
may be the first sign of cancer. Primary tumours of the 
thyroid, breast, testis and skin are often detected in this 
way, whereas palpable lymph nodes in the neck, groin 
production of biologically active hormones by the 
tumour or as the result of an immune response to the 
tumour. The possible presentations are summarised in 
Boxes 11.6 and 11.7, and common presenting features 
discussed below. Although the incidence of cancer 
increases with patient age, the approach to investigation 
and management is similar at all ages (Box 11.8).
Name
Natural occurrence
Tumours
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)
Glycoprotein found in yolk sac and fetal liver tissue. 
Transient elevation in liver diseases. Has a role in 
screening during pregnancy for the detection of neural 
tube defects and Down’s syndrome
Ovarian non-seminomatous germ cell 
tumours (80%), testicular teratoma (80%), 
hepatocellular cancer (50%)
Calcitonin
32 amino acid peptide from C cells of thyroid. Used to 
screen for MEN-2
Medullary cell carcinoma of thyroid
Cancer antigen 125 
(CA-125)
Differentiation antigen of coelomic epithelium (Muller’s 
duct). Raised in any cause of ascites, pleural effusion or 
heart failure. Can be raised in inflammatory conditions
Ovarian epithelial cancer (75%), 
gastrointestinal cancer (10%), lung cancer 
(5%) and breast cancer (5%)
CA-19.9
A mucin found in epithelium of fetal stomach, intestine 
and pancreas. It is eliminated exclusively via bile and so 
any degree of cholestasis can cause levels to rise
Pancreatic cancer (80%), mucinous tumour 
of the ovary (65%), gastric cancer (30%), 
colon cancer (30%)
Carcinoembryonic 
antigen (CEA)
Glycoprotein found in intestinal mucosa during embryonic 
and fetal life. Elevated in smokers, cirrhosis, chronic 
hepatitis, ulcerative colitis, pneumonia
Colorectal cancer, particularly with liver 
metastasis, gastric cancer, breast cancer, 
lung cancer, mucinous cancer of the ovary
Human chorionic 
gonadotrophin (hCG)
Glycoprotein hormone, 14KD α subunit and 24KD β 
subunit from placental syncytiotrophoblasts. Used for 
disease monitoring in hydatidiform mole and as the  
basis of a pregnancy test
Choriocarcinoma (100%), hydatidiform moles 
(97%), ovarian non-seminomatous germ cell 
tumours (50–80%), seminoma (15%)
Placental alkaline 
phosphatase (PLAP)
Isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase
Seminoma (40%), ovarian  
dysgerminoma (50%)
Prostate-specific 
antigen (PSA)
Glycoprotein member of human kallikrein gene family. 
PSA is a serine protease that liquefies semen in excretory 
ducts of prostate. Can be elevated in benign prostatic 
hypertrophy and prostatitis
Prostate cancer (95%)
Thyroglobulin
Matrix protein for thyroid hormone synthesis in normal 
thyroid follicles
Papillary and follicular thyroid cancer
β-2-microglobulin
A human leucocyte antigen (HLA) common fragment 
present on surface of lymphocytes, macrophages and 
some epithelial cells. Can be elevated in autoimmune 
disease and renal glomerular disease
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, myeloma
11.5  Commonly used serum tumour markers
Symptom
Typical site or possible tumour
Haemorrhage
Stomach, colon, bronchus, endometrium, bladder, kidney
Lump
Breast, lymph node (any site), testicle
Bone pain or fracture
Bone (primary sarcoma, secondary metastasis from breast, prostate, 
bronchus, thyroid, kidney)
Skin abnormality
Melanoma, basal cell carcinoma (rodent ulcer)
Ulcer
Oesophagus, stomach, anus, skin
Dysphagia
Oesophagus, bronchus, gastric
Increasing constipation, abdominal discomfort or pain
Colon, rectum, ovary
Airway obstruction, stridor, cough, recurrent infection
Bronchus, thyroid
Odynophagia, early satiety, vomiting
Bronchus, stomach, oesophagus, colon, rectum
Abdominal swelling (ascites)
Ovary, stomach, pancreas
11.6  Local features of malignant disease
Presenting problems in oncology
11
271
or axilla may indicate secondary spread of tumour. 
Hepatomegaly may be the first sign of primary liver 
cancer or tumour metastasis, whereas skin cancer may 
present as an enlarging or changing pigmented lesion.
Weight loss and fever
Unintentional weight loss is a characteristic feature of 
advanced cancer, but can be due to other causes such 
as thyrotoxicosis, chronic inflammatory disease and 
chronic infective disorders. Fever can occur in any 
cancer secondary to infection, but may be a primary 
feature in Hodgkin’s disease, lymphoma, leukaemia, 
renal cancer and liver cancer. The presence of unex-
plained weight loss or fever warrants investigation to 
exclude the presence of occult malignancy.
Finger clubbing
Finger clubbing is a characteristic feature of lung cancer, 
and especially non-small cell lung cancer, although 
benign causes are recognised. It is often part of the wider 
process of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in which there 
is periosteal new bone formation and arthritis due to 
increased levels of prostaglandin E. The diagnosis is 
primarily clinical, but X-rays show periosteal reaction 
and an isotope bone scan shows increased tracer update 
in the affected digits.
Ectopic hormone production
In some cases, the first presentation of cancer is with a 
metabolic abnormality due to ectopic production of hor-
mones by tumour cells, including insulin, ACTH, ADH, 
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 23, erythropoietin and 
parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP). This can 
result in a wide variety of presentations, as summarised 
in Box 11.9. Further details on presentation and manage-
ment of ACTH- and ADH-producing tumours are given 
on page 776, and of FGF23-producing tumours on page 
1128. The management of hypercalcaemia associated 
with malignancy is discussed on page 273.
Feature
Common cancer  
site associations
Weight loss and anorexia
Lung, gastrointestinal tract
Fatigue
Any
Hypercalcaemia
Myeloma, breast, kidney
Prothrombotic tendency
Ovary, pancreas, 
gastrointestinal tract
SIADH
Ectopic ACTH
Small cell lung cancer
Lambert–Eaton myasthenia-
like syndrome
Small cell lung cancer
Subacute cerebellar 
degeneration
Small cell lung cancer, ovarian 
cancer
Acanthosis nigricans
Stomach, oesophagus
Dermatomyositis/
polymyositis
Stomach, lung
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; SIADH = syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone secretion)
11.7  Non-metastatic manifestations of 
malignant disease
• Incidence: around 50% of cancers occur in the 15% of the 
population aged over 65 years.
• Screening: women aged over 65 in the UK are not invited to 
breast cancer screening but can request it. Uptake is low 
despite increasing incidence with age.
• Presentation: may be later for some cancers. When 
symptoms are non-specific, patients (and their doctors) may 
initially attribute them to age alone.
• Life expectancy: an 80-year-old woman can expect to live 
8 years, so cancer may still shorten life and an active 
approach remains appropriate.
• Prognosis: histology, stage at presentation and observation 
for a brief period are better guides to outcome than age.
• Rate of progression: malignancy may have a more indolent 
course. This is poorly understood but may be due to reduced 
effectiveness of angiogenesis with age, inhibiting the 
development of metastases.
• Response to treatment: equivalent to that in younger 
people – well documented for a range of cancers and for 
surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and hormonal therapy.
• Treatment selection: chronological age is of minor 
importance compared to comorbid illness and patient choice. 
Although older patients can be treated effectively and safely, 
aggressive intervention is not appropriate for all. Symptom 
control may be all that is possible or desired by the patient.
11.8  Cancer in old age
Hormone
Consequence
Tumours
ADH
Hyponatraemia
SCLC
ACTH
Cushing’s syndrome
SCLC
FGF-23
Hypophosphataemic 
osteomalacia
Mesenchymal 
tumours
Insulin
Hypoglycaemia
Insulinoma
Erythropoietin
Polycythaemia
Kidney, hepatoma, 
cerebellar 
haemangioblastoma, 
uterine fibroids
PTHrP
Hypercalcaemia
NSCLC (squamous 
cell), breast, kidney
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; ADH = antidiuretic hormone; 
FGF = fibroblast growth factor; NSCLC = non-small cell lung cancer; 
PTHrP = parathyroid hormone-related protein; SCLC = small cell lung 
cancer)
11.9  Ectopic hormone production by tumours
Neurological paraneoplastic syndromes
These form a group of conditions associated with cancer 
thought to be due to an immunological response to the 
tumour that results in damage to the nervous system or 
muscle. The cancers most commonly implicated are 
Oncology
11
272
those of the lung (small cell and non-small cell), pan-
creas, breast, prostate, ovary and lymphoma.
•	 Peripheral neuropathy results from axonal 
degeneration or demyelination.
•	 Encephalomyelitis can present with diverse 
symptoms, depending on which region of the brain 
is involved. Lumbar puncture shows raised protein 
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and a pleocytosis, 
predominantly that of lymphocytes. In some 
centres, flow cytometry of the CSF is also used to 
detect carcinomatous cells. MRI shows meningeal 
enhancement, particularly at the level of the brain 
stem, and anti-Hu antibodies may be detectable in 
serum. Encephalomyelitis is due to perivascular 
inflammation and selective neuronal degeneration. 
Most cases are caused by small cell lung  
cancer (75%).
•	 Cerebellar degeneration may be the presenting feature 
of an underlying malignancy and presents with 
rapid onset of cerebellar ataxia. Diagnosis is by MRI 
or CT, which may show cerebellar atrophy. Patients 
with these neurological paraneoplastic syndromes 
may be found to have circulating anti-Yo, Tr and 
Hu antibodies, but these are not completely specific 
and negative results do not exclude the diagnosis.
•	 Retinopathy is a rare complication of cancer and 
presents with blurred vision, episodic visual loss 
and impaired colour vision. If left untreated, it  
may lead to blindness. The diagnosis should be 
suspected if the electroretinogram is abnormal and 
anti-retinal antibodies are detected.
•	 Lambert–Eaton syndrome (LEMS) is due to 
underlying cancer in about 60% of cases. It presents 
with proximal muscle weakness that improves on 
exercise and is caused by the development of 
antibodies to pre-synaptic calcium channels (p. 1227). 
The diagnosis is made by electromyelogram (EMG), 
which shows a low-amplitude compound muscle 
action potential that enhances to near normal 
following exercise.
•	 Dermatomyositis or polymyositis may be the first 
presentation of some cancers. Clinical features and 
management of these conditions are discussed on 
page 1114.
Cutaneous manifestations of cancer
Many cancers can present with skin manifestations that 
are not due to metastases:
•	 Pruritus may be a presenting feature of lymphoma, 
leukaemia and CNS tumours.
•	 Acanthosis nigricans may precede cancers by many 
years and is particularly associated with gastric 
cancer.
•	 Vitiligo may be associated with malignant 
melanoma, and is possibly due to an immune 
response to melanocytes.
•	 Pemphigus may occur in lymphoma, Kaposi’s 
sarcoma and thymic tumours.
•	 Dermatitis herpetiformis associated with coeliac disease 
may precede tumour development by many years, 
and is associated with gastrointestinal lymphoma.
The clinical features and management of these skin con-
ditions is discussed in Chapter 28.
EMERGENCY COMPLICATIONS  
OF CANCER
Spinal cord compression
Spinal cord compression complicates 5% of cancers and 
is most common in myeloma, prostate, breast and lung 
cancers that involve bone. Cord compression often 
results from posterior extension of a vertebral body 
mass but intrathecal spinal cord metastases can cause 
similar signs and symptoms.
Clinical features
The earliest sign is back pain, particularly on coughing 
and lying flat. Subsequently, sensory changes develop 
in dermatomes below the level of compression and 
motor weakness distal to the block occurs. Finally, 
sphincter disturbance, causing urinary retention and 
bowel incontinence, is observed. Involvement of the 
lumbar spine may cause conus medullaris or cauda 
equina compression (Box 11.10). Physical examination 
reveals findings consistent with an upper motor neuron 
lesion, but lower motor neuron findings may predomi-
nate early on or in cases of nerve root compression.
Management
Spinal cord compression is a medical emergency and 
should be treated with analgesia and high-dose steroid 
therapy (Box 11.11). Neurosurgical treatment produces 
superior outcome and survival compared to radio­
therapy alone, and should be considered first for all 
patients. Radiotherapy is used for the remaining patients 
and selected tumour types when the cancer is likely to 
be radiosensitive. The prognosis varies considerably, 
depending on tumour type, but the degree of neurologi-
cal dysfunction at presentation is the strongest predictor 
of outcome irrespective of the underlying diagnosis. 
Clinical feature
Spinal cord
Conus medullaris
Cauda equina
Weakness
Symmetrical and profound
Symmetrical and variable
Asymmetrical, may be mild
Reflexes
Increased (or absent) knee and ankle 
reflexes with extensor plantar reflex
Increased knee reflex, decreased 
ankle reflex, extensor plantar reflex
Decreased knee and ankle reflexes 
with flexor plantar reflex
Sensory loss
Symmetrical, sensory level
Symmetrical, saddle distribution
Asymmetrical, radicular pattern
Sphincters
Late loss
Early loss
Often spared
Progression
Rapid
Variable
Variable
11.10  Comparison of features of neurological deficit
Emergency complications of cancer 
11
273
chemotherapy, such as germ cell tumours and lym-
phoma, can be treated with chemotherapy alone, but 
for most other tumours mediastinal radiotherapy is 
required. This relieves symptoms within 2 weeks in 
50–90% of patients. In most centres, stenting is now 
increasingly favoured over radiotherapy, as it produces 
rapid results and can be repeated with reasonable 
effectiveness. This technique is particularly useful 
when dealing with tumours that are relatively chemo- 
or radio-resistant, such as non-small cell lung cancer or 
carcinoma of unknown primary. Where possible, these 
measures should be followed by treatment of the 
primary tumour, as long-term outcome is strongly 
dependent on the prognosis of the underlying cancer.
Hypercalcaemia
Hypercalcaemia is the most common metabolic disorder 
in patients with cancer and has a prevalence of 15–20 
cases per 100 000 persons. The incidence is highest in 
myeloma and breast cancer (approximately 40%), inter-
mediate in non-small cell lung cancer, and uncommon 
in colon, prostate and small cell lung carcinomas. It is 
most commonly due to over-production of PTHrP, 
which binds to the PTH receptor and elevates serum 
calcium by stimulating osteoclastic bone resorption and 
increasing renal tubular reabsorption of calcium.
Clinical features
The symptoms of hypercalcaemia are often non-specific 
and may mimic those of the underlying malignancy. 
They include drowsiness, confusion, nausea and vomit-
ing, constipation, polyuria, polydipsia and dehydration.
Investigations and management
The diagnosis is made by measuring serum total calcium 
and adjusting for albumin. It is especially important to 
correct for albumin in cancer because hypoalbumin­
aemia is common and total calcium values underesti-
mate the level of ionised calcium. The principles of 
management are outlined in Box 11.13.
Patients should initially be treated with intravenous 
0.9% saline to improve renal function and increase 
urinary calcium excretion. This alone often results 
in clinical improvement. Concurrently, intravenous 
bisphosphonates should be given to inhibit bone resorp-
tion. Calcitonin acts rapidly to increase calcium excre-
tion and to reduce bone resorption and can be combined 
with fluid and bisphosphonate therapy for the first 
24–48 hours in patients with life-threatening hypercal-
caemia. Bisphosphonates will usually reduce the 
serum calcium levels to normal within 5 days, but if not, 
treatment can be repeated. The duration of action 
is up to 4 weeks and repeated therapy can be given at 
3–4-weekly intervals as an outpatient. Hypercalcaemia 
is frequently a sign of tumour progression and the 
patient requires further investigation to establish disease 
status and review of the anti-cancer therapy.
Ambulation can be preserved in more than 80% of 
patients who are ambulatory at presentation, but neuro-
logical function is seldom regained in patients with 
established deficits such as paraplegia.
Superior vena cava obstruction
Superior vena cava obstruction (SVCO) is a common 
complication of cancer that can occur through extrinsic 
compression or intravascular blockage. The most 
common causes of extrinsic compression are lung 
cancer, lymphoma and metastatic tumours. Patients 
with cancer can also develop SVCO due to intravas­
cular blockage in association with a central catheter or 
thrombophilia secondary to the tumour.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with oedema of the arms and 
face, distended neck and arm veins and dusky skin col-
oration over the chest, arms and face. Collaterals may 
develop over a period of weeks and the flow of blood in 
the collaterals helps to confirm the diagnosis. Headache 
secondary to cerebral oedema arising from the backflow 
pressure may also occur and tends to be aggravated by 
bending forward, stooping or lying down. The severity 
of symptoms is related to the rate of obstruction and the 
development of a venous collateral circulation. Accord-
ingly, symptoms may develop rapidly or gradually. 
Clinical features are summarised in Box 11.12.
Investigations and management
The investigation of choice is CT of the thorax since 
it can clinch the diagnosis and distinguish between 
extra- and intravascular causes. A biopsy should be 
obtained when the tumour type is unknown because 
tumour type has a major influence on treatment. CT of 
the brain may be indicated if cerebral oedema is 
suspected. Tumours that are exquisitely sensitive to 
• Confirm diagnosis with urgent MRI scan
• Administer high-dose steroids
Dexamethasone 16 mg IV stat
Dexamethasone 8 mg twice daily orally
• Ensure adequate analgesia
• Refer for surgical decompression or urgent radiotherapy
11.11  Management of suspected 
spinal cord compression
Symptoms
• Dyspnoea (63%)
• Facial swelling and head 
fullness (50%)
• Cough (24%)
• Arm swelling (18%)
• Chest pain (15%)
• Dysphagia (9%)
Physical findings
• Venous distension of  
neck (66%)
• Venous distension of chest 
wall (54%)
• Facial oedema (46%)
• Cyanosis (20%)
• Plethora of face (19%)
• Oedema of arms (14%)
*Percentage of patients affected.
11.12  Common symptoms and physical findings 
in superior vena cava obstruction*
• IV 0.9% saline 2–4 L/day
• Zoledronic acid 4 mg IV or pamidronate 60–90 mg IV
• IM/SC calcitonin 100 U 3 times daily for first 24–48 hours in 
life-threatening hypercalcaemia
11.13  Medical management of 
severe hypercalcaemia
Oncology
11
274
with more advanced brain metastases. In these cases, 
median survival without treatment is approximately 
1 month. Steroids can increase survival to 2–3 months 
and whole-brain radiotherapy improves survival to 
3–6 months, but the true efficacy of these interventions 
has not been proven adequately in a randomised trial 
setting. Patients with brain metastases as the only mani-
festation of an undetected primary tumour have a more 
favourable prognosis, with an overall median survival 
of 13.4 months. Tumour type also influences prognosis; 
breast cancer patients have a better prognosis than those 
with other types of tumour, and those with colorectal 
carcinoma tend to have a poorer prognosis.
Clinical features
Presentation is with headaches (40–50%), focal neuro-
logical dysfunction (20–40%), cognitive dysfunction 
(35%), seizures (10–20%) and papilloedema (< 10%).
Investigations and management
The diagnosis can be confirmed by CT or contrast-
enhanced MRI. Treatment options include high-dose 
steroids (dexamethasone 4 mg 4 times daily) for tumour-
associated oedema, anticonvulsants for seizures, whole-
brain radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. Surgery may be 
considered for single sites of disease and can be curative; 
stereotactic radiotherapy may also be considered for 
solitary site involvement where surgery is not possible.
Lung metastases
These are common in breast cancer, colon cancer and 
tumours of the head and neck. The presentation is 
usually with a lesion on chest X-ray or CT. Solitary 
lesions require investigation, as single metastases can be 
difficult to distinguish from a primary lung tumour. 
Patients with two or more pulmonary nodules can be 
assumed to have metastases. The approach to treatment 
depends on the extent of disease in the lung and else-
where. For solitary lesions, surgery should be consid-
ered with a generous wedge resection. Radiotherapy, 
chemotherapy or endocrine therapy can be used as sys-
temic treatment and is dependent on the underlying 
primary cancer diagnosis.
Liver metastases
Metastatic cancer in the liver can represent the sole 
or life-limiting component of disease for many with 
colorectal cancer, ocular melanoma, neuro-endocrine 
tumours and, less commonly, other tumour types. The 
most common clinical presentations are with right upper 
quadrant pain due to stretching of the liver capsule, 
Neutropenic fever
Neutropenia is a common complication of malignancy. 
It is usually secondary to chemotherapy but may occur 
with radiotherapy if large amounts of bone marrow are 
irradiated; it may also be a component of pancytopenia 
due to malignant infiltration of the bone marrow. Neu-
tropenic fever is defined as a pyrexia of 38°C for over 
1 hour in a patient with a neutrophil count < 1.0 × 109/L. 
The risk of sepsis is related to the severity and duration 
of neutropenia and the presence of other risk factors 
such as intravenous or bladder catheters. Neutropenic 
fever is an emergency in cancer patients as, if left 
untreated, it can result in septicaemia with a high mor-
tality rate.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with high fever and affected 
patients are often non-specifically unwell. Examination 
is usually unhelpful in defining a primary source of the 
infection. Hypotension is an adverse prognostic feature 
and may progress to systemic circulatory shutdown and 
organ failure.
Investigations and management
An infection screen should be performed to include 
blood cultures (both peripheral and from central lines), 
urine culture, chest X-ray, and swabs for culture (throat, 
central line, wound). High-dose intra­venous antibiotics 
should then be commenced, pend­ing the results of 
cultures. Typical first-line empirical therapy consists of 
an anti-pseudomonal β-lactam (ceftazidime, cefotaxime 
or meropenem), or a combi­nation of an aminoglycoside 
and a broad-spectrum penicillin with anti-pseudomonal 
activity (gentamicin and piperacillin), but this may need 
adjusting on the basis of local hospital policy and anti-
biotic resistance patterns. Metronidazole should be 
added if anaerobic infection is suspected, and flucloxa-
cillin or vancomycin or teicoplanin where Gram-positive 
infection is suspected (for example, in patients with 
central lines). If there is no response after 36–48 hours, 
treatment with amphotericin B or voriconazole should 
be considered to cover fungal infection. Antibiotics 
should be adjusted according to culture results, though 
these are often negative. Other supportive therapy, 
including intravenous fluids, inotrope therapy, ventila-
tion or haemofiltration, may be required.
METASTATIC DISEASE
Metastatic disease is the major cause of death in cancer 
patients and the principal cause of morbidity. For the 
majority, the aim of treatment is palliative, but treatment 
of a solitary metastasis can occasionally be curative.
Brain metastases
Brain metastases occur in 10–30% of adults and 6–10% 
of children with cancer, and are an increasingly impor-
tant cause of morbidity. Tumours that typically metas-
tasise to the brain are shown in Box 11.14. Most involve 
the brain parenchyma but can also affect the cranial 
nerves, the blood vessels and other intracranial struc-
tures. In cases of solitary metastasis to the brain, the use 
of surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy has been shown 
to increase survival. However, practices vary for patients 
Primary tumour
Patients (%)
Lung
48
Breast
15
Melanoma
9
Colon
5
Other known primary
13
Unknown primary
11
11.14  Primary tumour sites that metastasise 
to brain
Metastatic disease
11
275
posterior spinal column fracture) or an impending frac-
ture (e.g. large lytic lesion on a weight-bearing bone 
with more than 50% cortical involvement). Intravenous 
bisphosphonates (pamidronate, zoledronic acid or iban-
dronate) are widely used for bone metastases and are 
effective at improving pain and in reducing further skel-
etal related events, such as fractures and hypercalcaemia 
(Box 11.15). In certain types of cancer, such as breast and 
prostate, hormonal therapy may be effective. Radio­
therapy, in the form of external beam therapy or sys-
temic radio­nucleotides (strontium treatment), can also 
be useful for these patients. In some settings (e.g. breast 
carcinoma), chemotherapy may also be used in the man-
agement of bony metastases.
Malignant pleural effusion
This is a common complication of cancer and 40% of all 
pleural effusions are due to malignancy. The most 
common causes are lung and breast cancers, and the 
presence of an effusion indicates advanced and incura-
ble disease. The presentation may be with dyspnoea, 
cough or chest discomfort, which can be dull or pleuritic 
in nature. Diagnosis and management of ascites is dis-
cussed on p. 938.
Investigations and management
Pleural aspirate is the key investigation and may show 
the presence of malignant cells. Malignant effusions are 
commonly blood-stained and are exudates with a raised 
fluid to serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) ratio (> 0.6) 
and a raised fluid to serum protein ratio (> 0.5). Treat-
ment should focus on palliation of symptoms and be 
tailored to the patient’s physical condition and progno-
sis. Aspiration alone may be an appropriate treatment 
in frail patients with a limited life expectancy (Box 
11.16). Those who present with malignant pleural effu-
sion as the initial manifestation of breast cancer, small 
cell lung cancer, germ cell tumours or lymphoma should 
jaundice, deranged liver function tests or an abnormality 
detected on imaging. In selected cases, resection of the 
metastasis can be contemplated. In colorectal cancer, 
successful resection of a metastasis improves 5-year sur-
vival from 3% to 30–40%. Other techniques, such as 
chemoembolisation or radio­frequency ablation, can also 
be used, provided the number and size of metastases 
remain small. If these are not feasible, symptoms may 
respond to systemic chemotherapy.
Bone metastases
Bone is the third most common organ involved by 
metastasis, after lung and liver. Bone metastases are a 
major clinical problem in patients with myeloma and 
breast or prostate cancers, but other tumours that com-
monly metastasise to bone include those of the kidney 
and thyroid. Bone metastases are an increasing manage-
ment problem in other tumour types that do not classi-
cally target bone, due to the prolonged survival of 
patients generally. Accordingly, effective management 
of bony metastases has become a focus in the treatment 
of patients with many incurable cancers.
Clinical features
The main presentations are with pain, pathological frac-
tures and spinal cord compression (p. 272). The pain 
tends to be progressive and worst at night, and may be 
partially relieved by activity, but subsequently becomes 
more constant in nature and is exacerbated by move-
ment. Most pathological fractures occur in metastatic 
breast cancer (53%); other tumour types associated with 
fracture include the kidney (11%), lung (8%), thyroid 
(5%), lymphoma (5%) and prostate (3%).
Investigations and management
The most sensitive way of detecting bone metastases is 
by isotope bone scan. This can have false-positive results 
in healing bone, particularly as a flare response follow-
ing treatment and false-negative results occur in multi-
ple myeloma due to suppression of osteoblast activity. 
Therefore plain X-ray films are preferred for any sites of 
bone pain, as lytic lesions may not be detected by a bone 
scan. In patients with a single lesion, it is especially 
important to perform a biopsy to obtain a tissue diagno-
sis, since primary bone tumours may look very similar 
to metastases on X-ray.
The main goals of management are:
•	 pain relief
•	 preservation and restoration of function
•	 skeletal stabilisation
•	 local tumour control (e.g. relief of tumour 
impingement on normal structure).
Surgical intervention may be warranted where there 
is evidence of skeletal instability (e.g. anterior or 
‘The use of bisphosphonates in cancer patients with bony 
metastases results in decreased pain and a decrease in 
skeletal-related events.’
• Dennis K, et al. J Rad Oncol; epub 17 July 2012; 1(1): DOI: 10.1007/
s13566-012-0058-3.
• Dror Michaelson M, Smith MR. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23(32): 8219–8224.
11.15  Use of bisphosphonates in 
bony metastases
• Ask the patient to sit up and lean forward slightly.
• Identify a suitable site for aspiration. Typically, this should be 
in the mid-scapular line, below the top of the fluid level and 
above the diaphragm.
• Confirm that the site is below the fluid level by reviewing the 
chest X-ray and percussing the chest.
• Infiltrate the skin and the intercostal space immediately 
above the rib below with 1% lidocaine.
• As you advance the needle, aspirate at each step prior to 
injecting the local anaesthetic.
• On reaching the pleural cavity, you should be able to aspirate 
pleural fluid; when you do, note the depth of the needle.
• Insert a thoracentesis needle into the pleural space by 
advancing it along the same track as was used for the local 
anaesthetic and connect it to a three-way tap and container 
to collect the fluid.
• Drain the pleural effusion, to a maximum of 1.5 L. If the 
effusion is larger than this, repeat the procedure on further 
occasions as necessary.
• Consider using ultrasound-guided placement of a drainage 
catheter if the effusion proves difficult to drain.
• Permanent drains can be useful for some patients with 
recurrent effusions where pleurodesis is not possible.
11.16  How to aspirate a malignant 
pleural effusion
Oncology
11
276
breast and lung cancer, cure rates are high with surgery. 
There is increasing evidence that outcome is related to 
surgical expertise, and most multidisciplinary teams 
include surgeons experienced in the management of a 
particular cancer. There are some cancers for which 
surgery is one of two or more options for primary man-
agement, and the role of the multidisciplinary team is to 
recommend appropriate treatment for a specific patient. 
Examples include prostate and transitional cell carci-
noma of the bladder, in which radiotherapy and surgery 
may be equally effective.
Palliation
Surgical procedures are often the quickest and most 
effective way of palliating symptoms. Examples include 
the treatment of faecal incontinence with a defunction-
ing colostomy; fixation of pathological fractures and 
decompression of spinal cord compression; and the 
treatment of fungating skin lesions by ‘toilet’ surgery. A 
more specialist role for surgery is in resection of residual 
masses after chemotherapy and, in very selected cases, 
resection of metastases.
Systemic chemotherapy
Chemotherapeutic drugs are classified by their mode of 
action. They have the greatest activity in proliferating 
cells and this provides the rationale for their use in the 
treatment of cancer. Chemotherapeutic agents are not 
specific for cancer cells, however, and the side-effects 
of treatment are a result of their anti-proliferative 
actions in normal tissues such as the bone marrow, skin 
and gut.
Combination therapy
In order to overcome drug resistance and to limit the 
side-effects of different drugs, chemotherapy is most 
commonly given as a combination of agents. Combina-
tions usually include drugs from different classes, with 
the aim of targeting several pathways and gaining 
maximum therapeutic effect. Drugs are conventionally 
given by intravenous injection every 3–4 weeks, allow-
ing enough time for the patient to recover from short-
term toxic effects before the next dose. Between four and 
eight such cycles of treatment are usually given in total. 
More recently, other strategies have been developed. For 
example, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), which has a very short 
half-life, has increased efficacy when given by continu-
ous intravenous infusion, using a semi-permanent 
in-dwelling intravenous catheter. However, the use of 
such catheters is not without risk and the potential of 
oral 5-FU is now being explored, using precursors such 
as capecitabine. Schedules of administration at weekly 
or 2-weekly intervals have also found their place in the 
management of both solid and haematological malig-
nancies. Each tumour type has specific regimens that are 
used at various stages of the disease.
Mode of administration
Most drugs have to be given intravenously, and many 
are vesicant or locally irritant if there is an extravasation. 
Chemotherapy should be administered into a vein in 
which the infusion is free-flowing to minimise the risk 
of extravasation. A few patients require central venous 
have the fluid aspirated and should be given systemic 
chemotherapy to try to treat disease in the pleural 
space. Treatment options for patients with recurrent 
pleural effusion include pleurodesis, pleurectomy and 
pleuro­peritoneal shunt. Ideally, pleurodesis should be 
attempted once effusions recur after initial drainage.
THERAPEUTICS IN ONCOLOGY
Anti-cancer therapy may be either curative or pallia­
tive, and this distinction influences the approach to man-
agement of individual patients. The goal of treatment 
should be recorded in the medical notes.
•	 Palliative chemotherapy is the most common 
treatment and is primarily used to treat patients 
with metastasis. The goal is an improvement in 
symptoms with a focus on improving quality of life, 
and any survival increments are secondary. As a 
result, the treatment should be well tolerated and 
should aim to minimise adverse effects.
•	 Adjuvant chemotherapy is given after an initial 
intervention that is designed to cyto-reduce the 
tumour bulk and remove all macroscopic disease. 
Chemotherapy is then given with the intention of 
eradicating the micrometastatic disease that 
remains. The focus is on achieving an improvement 
in disease-free and overall survival.
•	 Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary medical 
therapy is where chemotherapy is administered first 
before a planned cyto-reductive procedure. This can 
result in a reduced requirement for surgery, 
increase the likelihood of successful debulking, 
reduce the duration of hospitalisation and improve 
the fitness of the patient prior to interval debulking. 
This approach has the same goals as adjuvant 
treatment but creates an opportunity for 
translational research to measure responses to 
treatment and correlate with subsequent specimens 
removed at the time of surgery.
•	 Chemoprevention is the use of pharmacological 
agents to prevent cancer developing in patients 
identified as being at particular risk. Therefore the 
agents used aim to modify risk and, as such, should 
not have significant adverse effects.
Surgical treatment
Surgery has a pivotal role in the management of 
cancer. There are three main situations in which it is 
necessary.
Biopsy
In the vast majority of cases, a histological or cytological 
diagnosis of cancer is necessary, and tissue will also 
provide important information such as tumour type and 
differentiation, to assist subsequent management. Cytol-
ogy can be obtained with fine needle aspiration but a 
biopsy is usually preferred. This can be a core biopsy, 
an image-guided biopsy or an excision biopsy.
Excision
The main curative management of most solid cancers is 
surgical excision. In early, localised cases of colorectal, 
Therapeutics in oncology
11
277
the re-population of myeloid precursor cells. The most 
commonly employed is granulocyte–colony-stimulating 
factor (G–CSF), which is widely used in conjunction 
with chemotherapy regimens that induce a high rate of 
neutropenia. More recently, it has also been used to 
‘accelerate’ the administration of chemotherapy, ena-
bling standard doses to be given at shorter intervals 
where the rate-limiting factor has been the time taken 
for the peripheral neutrophil count to recover. Acceler-
ated chemotherapy regimens have now been demon-
strated to offer therapeutic advantages in small cell lung 
cancer, lymphoma and possibly breast cancer.
Radiation therapy
Radiation therapy (radiotherapy) involves treating the 
cancer with ionising radiation; for certain localised 
cancers it may be curative. Ionising radiation can be 
delivered by radiation emitted from the decay of radio-
active isotopes or by high-energy radiation beams, 
usually X-rays. Three methods are usually employed:
•	 Teletherapy: application from a distance by a linear 
accelerator.
•	 Brachytherapy: direct application of a radioactive 
source on to or into a tumour. This allows the 
delivery of a very high, localised dose of radiation 
and is integral to the management of localised 
catheters due to the nature of their treatment or poor 
vascular access. Patients who receive chemotherapy 
through a peripheral line must be carefully observed, 
and the chemotherapy stopped at the first sign of any 
extravasation. Chemotherapy is potentially dangerous 
to the person giving the therapy, because cytotoxics are 
carcinogenic and teratogenic. In view of this, policies 
must be in place for the use of gloves and aprons and 
for the safe disposal of syringes containing cytotoxics. 
Other oral chemotherapeutic agents have been devel-
oped over the past 30 years, although not many have 
replaced their intravenous counterparts.
Adverse effects
Most cytotoxics have a narrow therapeutic window 
or index and can have significant adverse effects, as 
shown in Figure 11.6. Considerable supportive therapy 
is often required to enable patients to tolerate therapy 
and achieve benefit. Nausea and vomiting are common, 
but with modern antiemetics, regimens such as the 
combination of dexamethasone and highly selective 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT3) receptor antagonists like 
ondansetron, most patients now receive chemotherapy 
without any significant problems. Myelosuppression is 
common to almost all cytotoxics. This not only limits 
the dose of drug, but also can cause life-threatening 
complications. The risk of neutropenia can be reduced 
with the use of specific growth factors that accelerate 
Fig. 11.6  Adverse effects of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Acute effects are shown in pink and late effects in blue. 
Alopecia
Hair follicles
Mucositis
Oral mucosa
Mucositis
Oesophagus
Fibrosis
Lung
Heart
Upper GI tract
Nausea and vomiting
Breast tissue
Bowel
Mucositis, diarrhoea
Small bowel
Skin
Sensory neuropathy
Neural tissue
Kidneys
Renal impairment
Fertility
Thrombocytopenia
Bone marrow
Any organs
Children
Alopecia
Mucositis
Mucositis
Cough
↑ Risk breast cancer
Nausea, diarrhoea
Premature gonadal failure
Increased risk of malignancy
Reduced growth
Xerostomia
Strictures
↑ Risk ischaemic heart disease
Fibrosis
Fibrosis and perforation
Erythema and desquamation
Telangiectasia, thinning of the skin
Neutropenia, anaemia
↓ Haemoglobin, platelet count
Neutropenia
Arrhythmias
Heart failure
Motor neuropathy
Nerve deafness
Amenorrhoea
Premature gonadal failure
Chemotherapy
(often drug-specific)
Radiotherapy
Erythema
Oncology
11
278
Hormone therapy
Hormone therapy is most commonly used in the treat-
ment of breast cancer and prostate cancer. Breast 
tumours that are positive for expression of the oestrogen 
receptor (ER) respond well to anti-oestrogen therapy, 
and assessment of ER status is now standard in the 
diagnosis of breast cancer. Several drugs are now avail-
able that reduce oestrogen levels or block the effects of 
oestrogen on the receptor. When targeted appropriately, 
adjuvant hormone therapy reduces the risk of relapse 
and death at least as much as chemotherapy, and 
in advanced cases can induce stable disease and remis-
sions that may last months to years, with acceptable 
toxicity. Hormonal manipulation may be effective in 
other cancers. In prostate cancer, hormonal therapy 
(e.g. luteinising hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) 
analogues such as goserelin and/or anti-androgens 
such as bicalutamide) aimed at reducing androgen 
levels can provide good long-term control of advanced 
disease, but there is no convincing evidence that it is an 
effective therapy following potentially curative surgery. 
Progestogens are active in the treatment of endometrial 
and breast cancer. In the metastatic setting, progestogen 
use (e.g. megestrol acetate) is associated with response 
rates of 20–40% in endometrial cancer. In breast cancer, 
progestogens are used in patients whose disease has 
progressed with conventional anti-oestrogen therapy. 
Their exact mechanism in this setting is not fully 
understood.
Immunotherapy
A profound stimulus to the patient’s immune system 
can sometimes alter the natural history of a malignancy, 
and the discovery of interferons was the impetus for 
much research. Although solid tumours show little 
benefit, interferons are active in melanoma and lym-
phoma, and there is evidence that they are benefi­
cial as adjuvants (after surgery and chemotherapy 
respectively) to delay recurrence. Whether interferon-
induced stimulation of the immune system is capable 
of eradicating microscopic disease remains unproven. 
More powerful immune responses can be achieved 
with potent agents like interleukin-2 (IL-2), but the 
accompanying systemic toxicity is a problem still to be 
overcome. The most striking example of successful 
immunotherapy is that with rituximab, an antibody 
against the common B-cell antigen CD20. It increases 
complete response rates and improves survival in 
diffuse large cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma when com-
bined with chemotherapy, and is also effective in palliat-
ing advanced follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
(p. 1043).
Biological therapies
Advances in knowledge about the molecular basis of 
cancer have resulted in the development of a new gen-
eration of treatments to block the signalling pathways 
responsible for the growth of specific tumours. This has 
created the potential to target cancer cells more selec-
tively, with reduced toxicity to normal tissues. Some 
cancers of the head and neck and cancer of the 
cervix and endometrium.
•	 Intravenous injection of a radioisotope: such as 131iodine 
for cancer of the thyroid and 89strontium for the 
treatment of bone metastases from prostate cancer.
The majority of treatments are now delivered by 
linear accelerators; these produce electron or X-ray 
beams of high energy that are used to target tumour 
tissue. Whatever the method of delivery, the biological 
effect of ionising radiation is to cause lethal and 
sublethal damage to DNA. Since normal tissues are 
also radiosensitive, treatment has to be designed to 
maximise exposure of the tumour and minimise expo-
sure of normal tissues. This is now possible with modern 
imaging techniques such as CT and MRI, which allow 
better visualisation of normal and tumour tissue. In 
addition, techniques such as conformal radiotherapy, 
where shaped rather than conventional square or rectan-
gular beams are used, allow much more precise target-
ing of therapy to the tumour, and reduce the volume of 
normal tissue irradiated by up to 40% compared to non-
conformal techniques.
Biological differences between normal and tumour 
tissues are also used to obtain therapeutic gain. Funda-
mental to this is fractionation, which entails delivering 
the radiation as a number of small doses on a daily basis. 
This allows normal cells to recover from irradiation 
damage but recovery occurs to a lesser degree in malig-
nant cells. Fractionation regimens vary from centre to 
centre but radical treatments given with curative intent 
are often delivered in 20–30 fractions given daily, 5 days 
a week over 4–6 weeks. Radiotherapy can also be 
extremely useful for the alleviation of symptoms, and 
for palliative treatments such as this a smaller number 
of fractions (1–5) is usually adequate.
Both normal and malignant tissues vary widely in 
their sensitivity to radiotherapy. Germ cell tumours and 
lymphomas are extremely radiosensitive and relatively 
low doses are adequate for cure, but most cancers 
require doses close to or beyond that which can be toler-
ated by adjacent normal structures. Normal tissue also 
varies in its radiosensitivity, the central nervous system, 
small bowel and lung being amongst the most sensitive. 
The side-effects of radiotherapy (see Fig. 11.6) depend 
on the normal tissues treated, their radiosensitivity and 
the dose delivered.
Adverse effects
An acute inflammatory reaction commonly occurs 
towards the end of most radical treatments and is local-
ised to the area treated. For example, skin reactions are 
common with breast or chest wall radiotherapy, and 
proctitis and cystitis with treatment to the bladder or 
prostate. These acute reactions settle over a period of a 
few weeks after treatment, assuming normal tissue toler-
ance has not been exceeded. Late effects of radiotherapy 
develop 6 weeks or more after treatment and occur in 
5–10% of patients. Examples include brachial nerve 
damage and subcutaneous fibrosis after breast cancer 
treatment, and shrinkage and fibrosis of the bladder 
after treatment for bladder cancer. There is a risk of 
inducing cancer after radiotherapy, which varies 
depending on the site treated and whether the patient 
has had other treatment such as chemotherapy.
Specific cancers
11
279
accounts for most of the remaining cases. DCIS consti-
tutes 20% of breast cancers detected by mammography 
screening. It is multifocal in one-third of women and has 
a high risk of becoming invasive (10% at 5 years follow-
ing excision only). Pure DCIS does not cause lymph 
node metastases, although these are found in 2% of cases 
where nodes are examined, owing to undetected inva-
sive cancer. Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a predis-
posing risk factor for developing cancer in either breast 
(7% at 10 years). The survival for breast cancer by stage 
is outlined in Box 11.18.
Pathogenesis
Both genetic and hormonal factors play a role; about 
5–10% of breast cancers are hereditary and occur in 
patients with mutations of BRCA1, BRCA2, AT or TP53 
genes. Prolonged oestrogen exposure associated with 
early menarche, late menopause and use of hormone 
replacement therapy (HRT) has been associated with an 
increased risk. Other risk factors include obesity, alcohol 
intake, nulliparity and late first pregnancy. There is no 
definite evidence linking use of the contraceptive pill to 
breast cancer.
examples are discussed below, but in the years to come 
many more such agents will come into clinical use, with 
the potential to revolutionise our approach to some 
cancers.
Gefitinib/erlotinib
These agents inhibit the activity of the epidermal 
growth factor receptor, which is over-expressed in many 
solid tumours. However, the drugs’ activity does not 
depend on the amount of receptor over-expression but 
on factors such as gene copy number and mutation 
status.
Imatinib
Imatinib was developed to inhibit the BCR-ABL gene 
product, tyrosine kinase, that is responsible for chronic 
myeloid leukaemia (p. 1039), and it does this extremely 
effectively. It is also active in gastrointestinal stromal 
tumour (GIST), a type of sarcoma that has over-
expression of another cell surface tyrosine kinase, c-kit. 
This agent has good tolerability and is particularly 
useful in GIST, where conventional chemotherapy is less 
effective.
Bevacizumab
This is a humanised monoclonal antibody that inhibits 
vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A), a key 
stimulant of angiogenesis in tumours. This has activity 
in colorectal, lung, breast, renal and ovarian cancers, 
although the licence was subsequently revoked for 
breast cancer; while bevacizumab slows the rate of pro-
gression of metastatic breast cancer, it had little impact 
on survival or improved quality of life.
Trastuzumab
Trastuzumab (herceptin) targets the HER2 receptor, an 
oncogene that is over-expressed in around one-third of 
breast cancers and in a number of other solid tumours. 
It is effective as a single-agent therapy, but also improves 
survival in patients with advanced breast cancer when 
used in conjunction with chemotherapy. Unfortunately, 
trastuzumab can induce cardiac failure by an unknown 
biological mechanism, especially in combination with 
doxorubicin.
SPECIFIC CANCERS
The diagnosis and management of cancers are discussed 
in more detail elsewhere in the book (Box 11.17). Here 
we discuss the clinical features, pathogenesis and man-
agement of common tumours that are not covered 
elsewhere.
Breast cancer
Globally, the incidence of breast cancer is only second 
to that of lung cancer and the disease represents the 
leading cause of cancer-related deaths among women. 
Invasive ductal carcinoma with or without ductal carci-
noma in situ (DCIS) is the most common histology, 
accounting for 70%, whilst invasive lobular carcinoma 
Bladder cancer
p. 516
Colorectal cancer
p. 910
Familial cancer syndromes
p. 66
Gastric cancer
p. 877
Hepatocellular carcinoma
p. 966
Leukaemia
p. 1035
Lung cancer
p. 699
Lymphoma
p. 1041
Mesothelioma
p. 719
Myeloma
p. 1046
Oesophageal cancer
p. 870
Pancreatic cancer
p. 895
Prostate cancer
p. 517
Renal cancer
p. 515
Seminoma
p. 518
Skin cancer
p. 1269
Teratoma
p. 518
Thyroid cancer
p. 754
11.17  Specific cancers covered in other chapters
Tumour 
stage
Stage definition
5-year 
survival (%)
Stage I
Tumour < 2 cm, no lymph nodes
96
Stage II
Tumour 2–5 cm, and/or mobile 
axillary lymph nodes
81
Stage III
Chest wall or skin fixation, and/or 
fixed axillary lymph nodes
52
Stage IV
Metastasis
18
11.18  Five-year survival rates for breast cancer 
by stage
Oncology
11
280
chemotherapy for women with early HER2-positive 
breast cancer.
Metastatic disease management includes radiother-
apy to palliate painful bone metastases and second-line 
endocrine therapy with aromatase inhibitors, which 
inhibit peripheral oestrogen production in adrenal and 
adipose tissues. Advanced ER-negative disease may be 
treated with combination chemotherapy.
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer is the most common gynaecological 
tumour in Western countries. Most ovarian cancers are 
epithelial in origin (90%), and up to 7% of women with 
ovarian cancer have a positive family history. Patients 
often present late in ovarian cancer with vague abdomi-
nal discomfort, low back pain, bloating, altered bowel 
habit and weight loss. Occasionally, peritoneal deposits 
are palpable as an omental ‘cake’ and nodules in the 
umbilicus (Sister Mary Joseph nodules).
Pathogenesis
Genetic and environmental factors play a role. The 
risk of ovarian cancer is increased in patients with 
BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, and Lynch type II families 
(a subtype of hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 
(HNPCC)) have ovarian, endometrial, colorectal and 
gastric tumours due to mutations of mismatch repair 
enzymes. Advanced age, nulliparity, ovarian stimula-
tion and Caucasian descent all increase the risk of 
ovarian cancer, whilst suppressed ovulation appears to 
protect, so pregnancy, prolonged breastfeeding and the 
contraceptive pill have all been shown to reduce the risk 
of ovarian cancer.
Investigations
Initial workup for patients with suspected ovarian 
malignancy includes imaging in the form of ultrasound 
and CT. Serum levels of the tumour marker CA-125 
are often measured. Surgery plays a key role in the 
diagnosis, staging and treatment of ovarian cancer, and 
in early cases, palpation of viscera, intraoperative 
washing and biopsies are generally performed to define 
disease extent.
Management
In early disease, surgery followed by adjuvant chemo-
therapy with carboplatin, or carboplatin plus paclitaxel, 
is the treatment of choice. Surgery should include 
removal of the tumour along with total hysterectomy, 
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy. 
Even in advanced disease, surgery is undertaken to 
debulk the tumour and is followed by adjuvant chemo-
therapy, typically using carboplatin and paclitaxel. 
Bevacizumab is indicated for patients with high-grade 
tumours that are suboptimally debulked or those with 
a more aggressive biological pattern. Monitoring for 
relapse is achieved through a combination of serum 
CA-125 and clinical examination with CT imaging for 
those with suspected relapse. Second-line chemotherapy 
is aimed at improving symptoms and should not be 
used for CA-125 elevation only in the absence of 
symptoms. Treatments can include further platinum/
Clinical features
Breast cancer usually presents as a result of mammo-
graphic screening or as a palpable mass with nipple 
discharge in 10% and pain in 7% of patients. Less 
common presentations include inflammatory carcinoma 
with diffuse induration of the skin of the breast, and this 
confers an adverse prognosis. Around 40% of patients 
will have axillary nodal disease, with likelihood corre-
lating with increasing size of the primary tumour. 
Distant metastases are infrequently present at diagnosis 
and the most common sites of spread are: bone (70%), 
lung (60%), liver (55%), pleura (40%), adrenals (35%), 
skin (30%) and brain (10–20%).
Investigations
Following clinical examination, patients should have 
imaging with mammography or ultrasound evaluation 
and a biopsy using fine needle aspiration for cytology 
or core biopsy for histology. Histological assessment 
should be carried out to assess tumour type and to deter-
mine oestrogen and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) 
status and HER2 status. If distant spread is suspected, 
CT of the thorax and abdomen and an isotope bone scan 
are required.
Management
Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for most patients, 
and this can range from a lumpectomy, where only the 
tumour is removed, to mastectomy, where the whole 
breast is removed. Lymph node sampling is performed 
at the time of surgery. Adjuvant radiotherapy is given 
to reduce the risk of local recurrence to 4–6%. Adjuvant 
hormonal therapy improves disease-free and overall 
survival in pre- and post-menopausal patients who have 
tumours that express ER. Patients at low risk, with 
tumours that are small and ER-positive, only require 
adjuvant hormonal therapy with tamoxifen. Patients 
with tumours that are ER-positive and who are pre-
menopausal should receive an LHRH analogue. Aro-
matase inhibitors also have benefit in this setting and are 
still under investigation.
Adjuvant chemotherapy is considered for patients at 
higher risk of recurrence. Factors that increase the risk 
of recurrence include a tumour of greater than 1 cm, 
tumour that is ER-negative or the presence of involved 
axillary lymph nodes. Such patients should be offered 
adjuvant chemotherapy, which improves disease-free 
and overall survival (Box 11.19). The role of adjuvant 
treatment has been studied by meta-analyses and data 
support the use of adjuvant trastuzumab, a humanised 
monoclonal antibody to HER2, in addition to standard 
‘The use of anthracycline-based chemotherapy reduces the 
annual breast cancer rate from 38% to 20%, while the adjuvant 
use of tamoxifen for 5 years in early breast cancer for patients 
with ER-positive disease reduces the annual breast cancer death 
rate by 31%.’
• Early Breast Cancer Trialists Collaborative Group (EBCTCG). Lancet 4 Feb 2012; 
379(9814):432–444.
11.19  Use of adjuvant chemotherapy and 
endocrine therapy in early breast cancer
Specific cancers
11
281
introduction of programmes to immunise teenagers 
against HPV in an effort to prevent the later develop-
ment of cervical cancer (p. 425).
Investigations
Diagnosis is made by smear or cone biopsy. Dilatation 
and curettage is also used diagnostically, with cystos-
copy and flexible sigmoidoscopy if there are symptoms 
referable to the bladder, colon or rectum. In contrast to 
other gynaecological malignancies, cervical cancer is a 
clinically staged disease. MRI is often used to character-
ise the primary tumour. A routine chest X-ray should be 
obtained to help rule out pulmonary metastasis. CT of 
the abdomen and pelvis is performed to look for metas-
tasis in the liver and lymph nodes and to exclude 
hydronephrosis and hydroureter.
Management
This depends on the stage of disease. Pre-malignant 
disease can be treated with laser ablation or diathermy, 
whereas in microinvasive disease a large loop excision 
of the transformation zone (LLETZ) or a simple hyster-
ectomy is employed. Invasive but localised disease 
requires radical surgery, while chemotherapy and radio-
therapy, including brachytherapy, may be given as 
primary treatment, especially in patients with adverse 
prognostic features such as bulky or locally advanced 
disease, or lymph node or parametrium invasion. In 
metastatic disease, cisplatin-based chemotherapy may 
be beneficial in improving symptoms but does not 
improve survival significantly.
Head and neck tumours
Head and neck cancers are typically squamous tumours 
that arise in the nasopharynx, hypopharynx and larynx. 
They are most common in elderly males, but now 
occur with increasing frequency in a younger cohort, 
as well as in women, especially where oropharyngeal 
cancers are concerned. The rising incidence of oro­
pharyngeal cancers, especially in the developed world, 
is thought to be secondary to HPV infection. Presenta­
tion depends on the location of the primary tumour 
and the extent of disease. For example, early laryngeal 
cancers may present with hoarseness, while more 
extensive local disease may present with pain due to 
invasion of local structures or with a lump in the neck. 
Patients who present late often have pulmonary symp-
toms, as this is the most common site of distant metas-
tases (Box 11.20).
Pathogenesis
The tumours are strongly associated with a history 
of smoking and excess alcohol intake, but other recog-
nised risk factors include Epstein–Barr virus for nasopha-
ryngeal cancer and HPV infection for oropharyngeal 
tumours.
Investigations
Careful inspection of the primary site is required as part 
of the staging process, and most patients will require 
endoscopic evaluation and examination under anaesthe-
sia. Tissue biopsies should be taken from the most acces-
sible site. CT of the primary site and the thorax is the 
paclitaxel combination, liposomal doxorubicin or topo-
tecan. These regimens are associated with a response 
rate of 10–40%. The best responses are observed in 
patients with a treatment-free interval of more than 
12 months.
Endometrial cancer
Endometrial cancer accounts for 4% of all female malig-
nancies, producing a 1 in 73 lifetime risk. The majority 
of patients are post-menopausal, with a peak incidence 
at 50–60 years of age. Mortality from endometrial cancer 
is currently falling. The most common presentation is 
with post-menopausal bleeding, which often results 
in detection of the disease before distant spread has 
occurred.
Pathogenesis
Oestrogen plays an important role in the pathogenesis 
of endometrial cancer, and factors that increase the 
duration of oestrogen exposure, such as nulliparity, 
early menarche, late menopause and unopposed HRT, 
increase the risk. Endometrial cancer is 10 times more 
common in obese women, and this is thought to be due 
to elevated levels of oestrogens.
Investigations
The diagnosis is confirmed by endometrial biopsy.
Management
Surgery is the treatment of choice and is also used 
for staging. A hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy are performed with peritoneal cytology 
and, in some cases, lymph node dissection. Where the 
tumour extends beyond the inner 50% of the myo-
metrium, involves the cervix and local lymph nodes, 
or there is lymphovascular space invasion, adjuvant 
pelvic radiotherapy is recommended. Chemotherapy 
and hormonal therapies have not demonstrated a suffi-
cient survival advantage to be recommended for routine 
use in the adjuvant setting but have a role in recurrent 
disease.
Cervical cancer
This is the second most common gynaecological tumour 
worldwide. The incidence is decreasing in developed 
countries but continues to rise in developing nations. 
Cervical cancer is the leading cause of death from gynae-
cological cancer. The most common presentation is with 
an abnormal smear test, but with locally advanced 
disease the presentation is with vaginal bleeding, dis-
comfort, discharge or symptoms attributable to involve-
ment of adjacent structures, such as bladder, or rectal or 
pelvic wall. Occasionally, patients present with distant 
metastases to bone and lung.
Pathogenesis
There is a strong association between cervical cancer 
and sexual activity that includes sex at a young age and 
multiple sexual partners. Infection with HPV has an 
important causal role, and this has underpinned the 
Oncology
11
282
Investigations
In this situation, there is a temptation to investigate the 
patient endlessly in order to determine the original 
primary site. However, there is a compromise between 
exhaustive investigation and obtaining sufficient infor-
mation to plan appropriate management. For all patients, 
histological examination of an accessible site of metasta-
sis is required. The architecture of the tissue can assist 
the pathologist in determining the likely primary site, 
and therefore it is better to perform a biopsy rather than 
fine needle aspiration. The greater volume of tissue also 
permits the use of immunohistochemistry. Extensive 
imaging to search for the primary is rarely indicated; a 
careful history to identify symptoms and risk factors 
(including familial) will often permit a judicious choice 
of imaging.
Management
Management of the patient will depend on that person’s 
circumstances, as well as on the site(s) involved and the 
likely primary sites. The overriding principle is to ensure 
that a curable diagnosis has not been overlooked. For 
example, lung metastases from a testicular teratoma do 
not preclude cure; nor do one or two liver metastases 
from a colorectal cancer. Early discussion with an oncol-
ogist within a multidisciplinary team is essential and 
avoids unnecessary investigation; for example, a single 
hCG-based pregnancy test in a young man with lung 
metastases might confirm the presence of a teratoma and 
allow rapid administration of potentially curative chem-
otherapy. Treatment should not necessarily wait for a 
definitive diagnosis; appropriate analgesia, radiother-
apy and surgical palliation can all be helpful. Some 
patients remain free of cancer for some years after resec-
tion of a single metastasis of an adenocarcinoma of 
unknown primary, justifying this approach in selected 
patients.
In those with no obvious primary, systemic chemo-
therapy may achieve some reduction in tumour burden 
and alleviation of symptoms, but long-term survival 
is rare.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Cassidy J, Bissett D, Spence R, Payne M. Oxford handbook 
of oncology. 3rd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 
2010.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer: the 
next generation. Cell 2011; 144:646–674.
Tobias J, Hochhauser D. Cancer and its management. 6th 
edn. Wiley–Blackwell; 2010.
Websites
http://info.cancerresearchuk.org/cancerstats/ A wide range 
of cancer statistics that can be sorted by type or geographical 
location.
www.cancer.org American Cancer Society: clinical practice 
guidelines.
investigation of choice for visualising the tumour, while 
MRI may be useful in certain cases.
Management
Generally speaking, the majority of patients with early 
or locally advanced disease are treated with curative 
intent. In localised disease where there is no involve-
ment of the lymph nodes, long-term remission can 
be achieved in up to 90% of patients with surgery or 
radiotherapy. The choice of surgery versus radiotherapy 
often depends on patient preference, as surgical treat-
ment can be mutilating with an adverse cosmetic 
outcome. Patients with lymph node involvement or 
metastasis are treated with a combination of surgery 
and radiotherapy (often with chemotherapy as a radio-
sensitising agent – proven agents include cisplatin or 
cetuximab), and this produces long-term remission in 
approximately 60–70% of patients. Recurrent or meta-
static tumour may be palliated with further surgery or 
radiotherapy to aid local control, and systemic chemo-
therapy has a response rate of around 20–30%. Second 
malignancies are common (3% per year) following suc-
cessful treatment for primary disease, and all patients 
should be encouraged to give up smoking and drinking 
alcohol to lower their risk.
Carcinoma of unknown origin
Some patients are found to have evidence of metastatic 
disease at their initial presentation prior to diagnosis of 
a primary site. In many cases, a subsequent biopsy 
reveals adenocarcinoma but the primary site is not 
always clear.
Hypopharynx
• Dysphagia
• Odynophagia
• Referred otalgia
• Enlarged lymph nodes
Mouth
• Non-healing ulcers
• Ipsilateral otalgia
Nasal cavity and sinuses
• Discharge (bloody) or obstruction
Nasopharynx
• Nasal discharge or 
obstruction
• Conduction deafness
• Atypical facial pain
• Diplopia
• Hoarse voice
• Horner’s syndrome
Oropharynx
• Dysphagia
• Pain
• Otalgia
Salivary gland
• Painless swelling
• Facial nerve palsy
11.20  Common presenting features by location in 
head and neck cancer
283
12 
Principles of palliative care 284
Presenting problems in palliative care 284
Pain 284
Breathlessness 289
Cough 289
Nausea and vomiting 289
Gastrointestinal obstruction 290
Weight loss and general weakness 290
Anxiety and depression 290
Delirium and terminal agitation 290
Palliative care  
and pain
D. Oxenham
Death and dying 290
Talking about and planning towards dying 290
Diagnosing dying 291
Management 291
Ethical issues at the end of life 291
Palliative care and pain 
12 
284
symptoms as cancer, as well as psychological and family 
distress. The ‘palliative phase’ of these illnesses may be 
more difficult to identify because of periods of relative 
stability interspersed with acute episodes of severe 
illness. However, it is still possible to recognise those 
patients whose care may benefit from a palliative 
approach. The challenge is that symptom management 
needs to be delivered at the same time as treatment for 
acute exacerbations. This leads to difficult decisions as 
to the balance between symptom relief and aggressive 
management of the underlying disease. The starting 
point of need for palliative care in these conditions is the 
point at which consideration of comfort and individual 
values becomes important in decision-making, often 
alongside management of the underlying disease.
The third major trajectory is categorised by years 
of poor function and frailty before a relatively short 
terminal period; it is exemplified by dementia, but is 
also increasingly true for patients with many different 
chronic illnesses. As medical advances extend survival, 
this mode of dying is being experienced by increasing 
numbers of people. The main challenge lies in provid-
ing nursing care and ensuring that plans are agreed 
for the time when medical intervention is no longer 
beneficial.
In a situation where death is inevitable and foresee-
able, palliative care balances the ‘standard textbook’ 
approach with the wishes and values of the patient and 
a realistic assessment of the benefits of medical interven-
tions. This often results in a greater focus on comfort, 
symptom control and support for patient and family, 
and may enable withdrawal of interventions that are 
ineffective or burdensome. Commonly, the outcome is 
less certain. In many cases, there is a substantial risk that 
the patient will die but there may be a small chance of 
improvement with further treatment. In these circum-
stances, it is often (but not always) correct and helpful 
to share this information with the patient so that better 
decisions can be made about further care.
The principles of palliative care are being used 
increasingly in many different diseases so that death can 
be managed effectively and compassionately. Palliative 
management of the most common symptoms is dis-
cussed in the next section.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN  
PALLIATIVE CARE
Pain
The International Association for the Study of Pain 
(IASP) has defined pain as ‘an unpleasant sensory and 
emotional experience associated with actual or potential 
tissue damage or described in terms of such damage’. It 
follows that each patient’s experience and expression of 
pain are different, and that severity of pain does not 
correlate with the degree of tissue damage. Effective 
pain treatment facilitates recovery from injury or 
surgery, aids rapid recovery of function, and may mini-
mise chronic pain and disability. Unfortunately, the 
delivery of effective pain relief is often impeded by 
factors such as poor assessment and concerns about the 
use of opioid analgesia.
PRINCIPLES OF PALLIATIVE CARE
Palliative care is the active total care of patients with 
far advanced, rapidly progressive and ultimately fatal 
disease. Its focus is quality of life rather than cure, and 
it encompasses a distinct body of knowledge and skills 
that all good physicians must possess to allow them to 
care effectively for patients at the end of life. In palliative 
care, there is a fundamental change of emphasis in 
decision-making away from a focus on prolonging life 
towards decisions that balance comfort and the indi-
vidual’s wishes with treatments that might prolong life. 
There is a growing recognition that the principles of, and 
some specific interventions developed in the palliative 
care of patients with cancer are equally applicable to 
other conditions. The principles of palliative care may 
therefore be applied not only to cancer but also to any 
chronic disease state.
Palliative care is often seen as a means of managing 
distress and symptoms in patients with cancer, where 
metastatic disease has been diagnosed and death is seen 
as inevitable. In other illnesses, the challenge is recognis-
ing when patients have entered this phase of their 
illness, as there are fewer clear markers and the course 
of the illness is much more variable.
Different chronic disease states progress at different 
rates, allowing some general trajectories of illness or 
dying to be defined (Fig. 12.1). These trajectories are 
useful in helping decision-making in individual patients 
and also in planning services.
Traditionally, palliative care has been associated with 
cancer because the latter is typified by a progressive 
decline in function which was more predictable than 
in many other diseases. This ‘rapid decline’ trajectory 
is the best-recognised pattern need for palliative 
care and many traditional hospice services are designed 
to meet the needs of people on this trajectory: for 
example, motor neuron disease, or AIDS where anti­
retroviral therapy (ART) is not available. With the 
improvements in management of malignant disease, this 
is no longer so true for all patients with cancer, whose 
illness may follow an erratic or intermittent decline 
trajectory.
Many chronic diseases, such as advanced chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and intractable 
congestive heart failure, carry as high a burden of 
Fig. 12.1  Archetypal trajectories of dying. From Murray, et al. 2005 
– see p. 292.
High
Death
Cancer
Organ failure
Physical and cognitive frailty
Function
Low
Time
Presenting problems in palliative care 
12 
285
as agitation and withdrawn posture, to assess levels 
of pain. Commonly used scales include Abbey and 
Dolorplus. Changes in behavioural rating pain 
scores can indicate whether drug measures have 
been successful.
Regular recording of formal pain assessment and 
patient-rated pain scores improves pain management 
and reduces the time taken to achieve pain control.
Psychological aspects of chronic pain
Perception of pain is influenced by many factors other 
than the painful stimulus, and pain cannot therefore be 
easily classified as wholly physical or psychogenic in 
any individual (Fig. 12.2). Patients who suffer chronic 
pain will be affected emotionally and, conversely, emo-
tional distress can exacerbate physical pain (p. 240). Full 
assessment for symptoms of anxiety and depression is 
essential to effective pain management.
Examination
This should include careful assessment of the painful 
area, looking for signs of neuropathic pain (see Box 12.1) 
or bony tenderness suggestive of bone metastases. In 
Pain classification  
and mechanisms
Pain can be classified into two types:
•	 Nociceptive: due to direct stimulation of peripheral 
nerve endings by a noxious stimulus such as 
trauma, burns or ischaemia.
•	 Neuropathic: due to dysfunction of the pain 
perception system within the peripheral or central 
nervous system as a result of injury, disease or 
surgical damage, such as continuing pain 
experienced from a limb which has been amputated 
(phantom limb pain). This should be identified 
early (Box 12.1) because it is more difficult to treat 
once established.
The pain perception system (p. 1147) is not a simple 
hard-wired circuit of nerves connecting tissue pain 
receptors to the brain, but a dynamic system in which a 
continuing pain stimulus can cause central changes that 
lead to an increase in pain perception. This plasticity 
(changeability) applies to all the peripheral and central 
components of the pain pathway. Early and appropriate 
treatment of pain reduces the potential for chronic unde-
sirable changes to develop.
Assessment and measurement  
of pain
Accurate assessment of the patient is the first step in 
providing good analgesia.
History and measurement of pain
A full pain history should be taken, to establish its 
causes and the underlying diagnoses. Patients may have 
more than one pain; for example, bone and neuropathic 
pain may both arise from skeletal metastases (Box 12.2).
A diagram of the body on which the patient can mark 
the pain site can be helpful. When asked to score pain, 
patients consistently rate it higher than health profes-
sionals and should, if able, always be asked to rate pain 
themselves. Methods include:
•	 Verbal rating scale. Different verbal descriptions are 
used to rate pain – ’no pain’, ‘mild pain’, ‘moderate 
pain’ and ‘severe pain’.
•	 Visual analogue scale. A question is used, such as 
‘Over the past 24 hours, how would you rate your 
pain, if 0 is no pain and 10 is the worst pain you 
could imagine?’
•	 Behavioural rating scale. It can be particularly difficult 
to decide whether a patient with cognitive 
impairment is suffering pain. A variety of measures 
are available which use observed behaviours, such 
Type of pain
Features
Management 
options
Bone pain
Tender area over bone 
Possible pain on 
movement
Non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs)
Bisphosphonates
Radiotherapy
Increased 
intracranial 
pressure
Headache, worse in the 
morning, associated 
with vomiting and 
occasionally confusion
Corticosteroids
Radiotherapy
Codeine
Abdominal 
colic
Intermittent, severe, 
spasmodic, associated 
with nausea or vomiting
Antispasmodics
Hyoscine 
butylbromide
Liver 
capsule 
pain
Right upper quadrant 
abdominal pain, often 
associated with tender 
enlarged liver
Responds poorly to 
opioids
Corticosteroids
Neuropathic 
pain
See Box 12.1
Anticonvulsants:
Gabapentin
Pregabalin
Carbamazepine
Antidepressants
Amitriptyline
Duloxetine
Ketamine
Ischaemic 
pain
Diffuse severe aching 
pain associated with 
evidence of poor 
perfusion
Responds poorly to 
opioids
NSAIDs
Ketamine
Incident 
pain
Episodic pain usually 
related to movement or 
bowel spasm
Intermittent 
short-acting opioids 
Nerve block
12.2  Types of pain
•	 Burning, stabbing or pulsing pain
•	 Spontaneous pain, without ongoing tissue damage
•	 Pain in an area of sensory loss
•	 Presence of a major neurological deficit
•	 Pain in response to non-painful stimuli: ‘allodynia’
•	 Increased pain in response to painful stimuli: ‘hyperalgesia’
•	 Unpleasant abnormal sensations: ‘dysaesthesias’
•	 Poor relief from opioids alone
12.1  Features of neuropathic pain
Palliative care and pain 
12 
286
Nearly all types of pain respond to morphine to 
some degree. Some are completely opioid-responsive 
but others, such as neuropathic and ischaemic pain, are 
relatively unresponsive. Opioid-unresponsive or poorly 
responsive pain will only be relieved by opioids at a 
dose which causes significant side-effects. In these situ-
ations, effective pain relief may only be achieved with 
the use of adjuvant analgesics (see below).
Pharmacological treatments
Non-opioids
•	 Paracetamol. This is often effective for mild to 
moderate pain. For severe pain, it is inadequate 
alone, but is a useful and well-tolerated adjunct.
•	 NSAIDs. These are effective in the treatment of mild 
to moderate pain, and are also useful adjuncts in 
the treatment of severe pain. Adverse effects may 
be serious, especially in the elderly (p. 175).
Weak opioids
Codeine and dihydrocodeine are weak opioids. They 
have lower analgesic efficacy than strong opioids 
and a ceiling dose. They are effective for mild to 
moderate pain.
Strong opioids
Immediate-release (IR) oral morphine takes about 
20 minutes to have an effect and usually provides pain 
relief for 4 hours. Most patients with continuous pain 
should be prescribed IR oral morphine every 4 hours 
initially, as this will provide continuous pain relief over 
the whole 24-hour period. Controlled-release (CR) mor-
phine lasts for 12 or 24 hours but takes longer to provide 
analgesia.
The WHO analgesic ladder
The basic principle of the WHO ladder (Fig. 12.3) is that 
analgesia which is appropriate for the degree of pain 
should be prescribed. If pain is severe or remains poorly 
controlled, strong opioids should be prescribed and 
increased as indicated by the patient’s need for addi-
tional analgesia (opioid titration).
A patient with mild pain is started on a non-opioid 
analgesic drug, such as paracetamol 1 g 4 times daily 
(step 1). If the maximum recommended dose is not 
patients with cancer, it should not be assumed that all 
pains are due to the cancer or its metastases.
Appropriate investigations
Investigations should be directed towards diagnosis of 
an underlying cause, remembering that treatable condi-
tions are possible even in patients with advanced 
disease. Imaging may be indicated, such as plain X-ray 
for fracture or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for 
spinal cord compression.
Management of pain
Many of the principles of pain management apply to any 
painful condition. There are, however, distinct differ-
ences between management of acute, chronic and pallia-
tive pain. Acute pain post-surgery or following trauma 
should be controlled with medication without causing 
unnecessary side-effects or risk to the patient. Chronic, 
non-malignant pain is more difficult and it may be 
impossible to relieve completely. In the management of 
chronic pain there is a greater emphasis on non-
pharmacological treatments and on enabling the patient 
to live with pain. Strong opioids may help chronic pain 
but need to be used with caution after full assessment. 
They are used more readily in patients with a poorer 
prognosis.
Two-thirds of patients with cancer experience moder-
ate or severe pain, and a quarter will have three or more 
different pains. Many of these are of mixed aetiology 
and 50% of pain from cancer has a neuropathic element. 
Careful evaluation to identify the likely pain mechanism 
facilitates appropriate treatment (see Box 12.2). It is vital 
that the patient’s concerns about opioids are explored. 
Patients should be reassured that, when they are used 
for pain, psychological dependence and tolerance are 
extremely rare (Box 12.3).
Fig. 12.2  Components of pain. 
PAIN
Psychological factors
Fear of:
 • pain
 • hospital
 • the future
 • dying
Anger:
 • delay in diagnosis
 • treatment failure
 • unavailable doctors
 • bureaucratic bungles
Depression
Biological factors
Pain from:
 • cancer
 • treatments
 • other disorders
Debility
Social factors
Loss of:
 • job/income
 • role in family
 • social position
 • friends
 • independence
Myth
Fact
Pain is inevitable in cancer 
and many other diseases
Pain can usually be controlled
Opioids should be avoided 
because of dangerous 
side-effects
Opioids can cause side-effects 
and sometimes the therapeutic 
window is narrow. However, 
side-effects are treatable and 
reversible
The use of opioids 
commonly leads to 
addiction
Addiction is very rare in 
patients who have pain and no 
previous history of addiction
Taking opioids leads to 
more rapid decline and 
earlier death
Opioids do not cause organ 
damage or other serious harm 
when used appropriately
12.3  Opioid myths
Presenting problems in palliative care 
12 
287
Common side-effects of opioids are shown in Box 
12.4. Nausea and vomiting occur initially but usually 
settle after a few days. Confusion and drowsiness are 
dose-related and reversible. In acute dosing, respiratory 
depression can occur but this is rare in those on regular 
opioids.
Opioid toxicity
All patients will develop dose-related side-effects, such 
as nausea, drowsiness, confusion or myoclonus; this is 
termed opiate toxicity. The dose at which this occurs 
varies from 10 to 5000 mg of morphine, depending on 
the patient and the type of pain. When opiates are being 
titrated, side-effects should be assessed regularly. The 
earliest side-effects are often visual hallucinations (often 
a sense of movement at the periphery of vision) and a 
distinct myoclonic movement. Pain should be re-assessed 
to ensure that appropriate adjuvants are being used. 
Parenteral rehydration is often helpful to speed up 
excretion of active metabolites of morphine. The dose of 
opioid may need to be reduced or changed to an alterna-
tive strong opiate.
Different opioids have different side-effect profiles 
in different people. If a patient develops side-effects, 
switching to an alternative strong opioid may be help-
ful. Options include oxycodone, transdermal fentanyl, 
alfentanil, hydromorphone and occasionally metha-
done, any of which may produce a better balance of 
benefit against side-effects. Fentanyl and alfentanil 
have no renally excreted active metabolites and may 
be particularly useful in patients with renal failure. 
Pethidine is used in acute pain management but not 
for chronic or cancer pain because of its short half-life 
and ceiling dose.
It is important to be very careful when switching 
opiates, as it is easy to make calculation mistakes and 
prescribe too much or too little.
sufficient or the patient has moderate pain, a weak 
opioid, such as codeine 60 mg 4 times daily, should be 
added (step 2). If adequate pain relief is still not achieved 
with the maximum recommended dosages or if the 
patient has severe pain, a strong opioid is substituted 
for the weak opioid (step 3). It is important not to 
move ‘sideways’ (change from one drug to another of 
equal potency) on a particular step of the ladder. All 
patients with severe pain should receive a full trial of 
strong opioids with appropriate adjuvant analgesia, as 
described below.
In addition to the regular dose, an extra dose of IR 
morphine should be prescribed ‘as required’ for when 
the patient has pain that is not controlled by the regular 
prescription (breakthrough pain). This should be one-
sixth of the total 24-hour dose of opiate. The frequency 
of breakthrough doses should be dictated by their effi-
cacy and any side-effects, rather than by a fixed time 
interval. A patient may require breakthrough analgesia 
as frequently as hourly if pain is severe, but this should 
lead to early review of the regular prescription. The 
patient and/or carer should note the timing of any 
breakthrough doses and the reason for them. These 
should be reviewed daily and the regular 4-hourly dose 
increased for the next 24 hours on the basis of:
•	 frequency of and reasons for breakthrough 
analgesia
•	 degree and acceptability of side-effects.
The regular dose should be increased by adding the 
total of the breakthrough doses over the previous 
24 hours, unless there are significant problems with 
unacceptable side-effects. When the correct dose has 
been established, a CR preparation can be prescribed, 
usually twice daily.
Worldwide, the most effective and appropriate route 
of administration is oral, though transdermal prepara-
tions of strong opioids (usually fentanyl) are useful in 
certain situations, such as in patients with dysphagia or 
those who are reluctant to take tablets on a regular basis. 
Diamorphine is a highly soluble strong opioid used for 
subcutaneous infusions, particularly in the last few days 
of life, but is only available in certain countries.
Fig. 12.3  The WHO analgesic ladder. From WHO 1996 – see p. 292.
Opioid for moderate
to severe pain
  ± non-opioid
  ± adjuvant
Opioid for mild to
moderate pain
  ± non-opioid
  ± adjuvant
Non-opioid
± adjuvant
Pain persisting
or increasing
Pain persisting
or increasing
Freedom from
cancer pain
Pain
Side-effect
Management
Constipation
Regular laxative, such as co-danthramer or 
co-danthrusate (starting dose 2 capsules daily 
and titrate as needed)
Opiates can be co-prescribed with oral  
naloxone
Dry mouth
Frequent sips of iced water, soft white paraffin 
to lips, chlorhexidine mouthwashes twice daily, 
sugar-free gum, water or saliva sprays
Nausea/
vomiting
Oral haloperidol 0.5–1 mg at night, oral 
metoclopramide 10 mg 3 times daily or oral 
domperidone 10 mg 3 times daily
If constant, haloperidol or levomepromazine 
may be given parenterally to break the nausea 
cycle
Sedation
Explanation very important
Symptoms usually settle in a few days
Avoid other sedating medication where  
possible
Ensure appropriate use of adjuvant analgesics 
which can have an opioid-sparing effect
May require alternative opioid
12.4  Opioid side-effects
Palliative care and pain 
12 
288
Adjuvant analgesics
An adjuvant analgesic is a drug with a primary indica-
tion other than pain but which provides analgesia in 
some painful conditions and may enhance the effect of 
the primary analgesic. At each step of the WHO analge-
sic ladder, an adjuvant analgesic should be considered, 
the choice depending on the type of pain (Boxes 12.5  
and 12.6).
Non-pharmacological and  
complementary treatments
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy can improve pain from bone metastases 
and may be considered for cancer in other sites (see 
Box 12.2).
Physiotherapy
This helps to alleviate pain and restore function, through 
active mobilisation and specific physiotherapy tech-
niques, such as spinal manipulation, massage, applica-
tion of heat or cold, and exercise. Immediate application 
of cold with ice packs can reduce subsequent swelling 
and inflammation after a direct injury.
Psychological techniques
These include simple relaxation, hypnosis, cognitive 
behavioural therapies and biofeedback (pp. 240–241), 
which train the patient to use coping strategies and 
behavioural techniques. This is often more relevant in 
chronic non-malignant pain than in cancer pain.
Fig. 12.4  Acupuncture. 
‘Tricyclic antidepressants, a variety of anticonvulsants,  
and gabapentin are effective treatments for neuropathic  
pain.’
•	 Guideline 106. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; 2008.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk
12.5  Treatment of neuropathic pain
Stimulation therapies
Acupuncture (Fig. 12.4) has been used successfully in 
Eastern medicine for centuries. It causes release of 
endogenous analgesics (endorphins) within the spinal 
cord. It can be particularly effective in pain related to 
muscle spasm. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimula-
tion (TENS) may have a similar mechanism of action 
to acupuncture and can be used in both acute and 
chronic pain.
Herbal medicine and homeopathy
These are widely used for pain, but often with little 
evidence for efficacy (p. 15). Safety regulations for these 
treatments are limited, compared with conventional 
drugs, and the doctor should be wary of unrecognised 
side-effects which may result.
Drug
Example
Indications
Side-effects*
NSAIDs
Diclofenac
Bone metastases, soft tissue 
infiltration, liver pain, 
inflammatory pain
Gastric irritation and bleeding, fluid retention, 
headache; caution in renal impairment
Corticosteroids
Dexamethasone 8–16 mg 
per day, titrated to lowest 
dose that controls pain
Raised intracranial pressure, 
nerve compression, soft tissue 
infiltration, liver pain
Gastric irritation if used together with NSAID, fluid 
retention, confusion, Cushingoid appearance, 
candidiasis, hyperglycaemia
Anticonvulsants
Evidence strongest for:
Gabapentin
Pregabalin
Duloxetine
Neuropathic pain of any 
aetiology
Mild sedation, tremor, confusion
Tricyclic 
antidepressants
Amitriptyline
Neuropathic pain of any 
aetiology
Sedation, dizziness, confusion, dry mouth, constipation, 
urinary retention; avoid in cardiac disease
NMDA blockers
Ketamine
Severe neuropathic pain (only 
under specialist supervision)
Confusion, anxiety, agitation, hypertension
(NMDA = N-methyl-D-aspartate)
12.6  Adjuvant analgesics
*In old age, all drugs can cause confusion.
Presenting problems in palliative care 
12 
289
Cough
Cough can be a troubling symptom in cancer and other 
illnesses such as motor neuron disease, cardiac failure 
and COPD. There are many possible causes (p. 654). 
Management should focus on treating the underlying 
condition if possible. If this fails to bring about the 
desired response, antitussives, such as codeine linctus, 
are sometimes effective, particularly for cough at night.
Nausea and vomiting
The presentation of nausea and vomiting differs, 
depending on the underlying cause, of which there are 
many (p. 853). Large-volume vomiting with little nausea 
is common in intestinal obstruction, whereas constant 
nausea with little or no vomiting is often due to meta-
bolic abnormalities or drugs. Vomiting related to raised 
intracranial pressure is worse in the morning.
Different receptors are activated, depending on the 
cause or causes of the nausea (Fig. 12.5). For example, 
dopamine receptors in the chemotactic trigger zone in 
the fourth ventricle are stimulated by metabolic and 
drug causes of nausea, whereas gastric irritation stimu-
lates histamine receptors in the vomiting centre via the 
vagus nerve.
Breathlessness
The sensation of breathlessness is the result of a complex 
interaction between different factors at the levels of 
production (the pathophysiological cause), perception 
(the severity of breathlessness perceived by the patient) 
and expression (the symptoms expressed by an indi-
vidual patient). A patient’s perception and expression of 
breathlessness can be significantly improved, even if 
there is no reversible ‘cause’ (Box 12.7). Assessment and 
treatment should therefore be targeted at modifying 
these factors, particularly when there is no reversible 
pathophysiology.
Clearly reversible causes of breathlessness (p. 655) 
should be identified and managed, but investigation and 
treatment should be appropriate to the prognosis and 
stage of disease. A therapeutic trial of corticosteroids 
(dexamethasone 8 mg for 5 days) and/or nebulised sal­
butamol may be helpful.
Breathlessness may be worsened by specific anxieties 
and beliefs; these should be explored. Many people with 
heart failure are concerned that exertional breathless-
ness will lead to worsening of their heart condition. 
Patients with advanced disease have specific panic–
breathlessness cycles in which breathlessness leads to 
panic, which leads to worsening breathlessness and 
worsening panic. These should be identified and 
explained to the patient. Many fear that they will die 
during one of these episodes, and explanation of the 
panic cycle can be very reassuring. Another frequently 
expressed fear is that breathlessness will continue to 
worsen until it is continuous and unbearable, leading to 
a distressing and undignified death. Reassurance should 
again be given that this is uncommon and can be effec-
tively managed with opioids and benzodiazepines.
A rapidly acting benzodiazepine, such as sublingual 
lorazepam, or non-drug measures, such as relaxation 
techniques, may help panic–breathlessness cycles. 
Attention to energy conservation (thinking clearly about 
using limited energy reserves sensibly) and pacing of 
activity is also extremely helpful. Physiotherapists are 
good at this and should be involved in developing an 
individual plan for each patient.
Perception of breathlessness may also be improved 
by night-time or regular morphine, or by regular 
benzodiazepines.
Oxygen does not help breathlessness unless the 
patient is hypoxic. An electric fan, piped air or an open 
window can be as effective as oxygen in patients who 
are breathless but not hypoxic. The patient’s, family’s or 
even professional beliefs about the benefits and need for 
oxygen may be the main reason for its apparent efficacy 
in non-hypoxic patients who feel less breathless when 
using oxygen.
Fig. 12.5  Mechanisms of nausea. (ACh = acetylcholine; D2 = 
dopamine; 5-HT = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin; H1 = histamine) 
Higher centres
Vestibular input
Vomiting centre
H1, ACh, 5-HT
Chemo trigger zone
D2, 5-HT
Vagal
afferents
Metabolic
toxins
Chemoreceptors
Mechanoreceptors
Retroperistalsis
Gastric pyloric
contraction
Abdominal and
thoracic wall
contraction
Peripheral
circulation
‘Interventions based on psychosocial support, breathing control 
and coping strategies can help patients to cope with the 
symptom of breathlessness and reduce physical and emotional 
distress.’
•	 Bredin M, et al. BMJ 1999; 318:901.
12.7  Palliative treatment of breathlessness
Palliative care and pain 
12 
290
Anxiety and depression
Depression is common in palliative care but diagnosis is 
more difficult, as the physical symptoms of depression 
are similar to those of advanced disease. Anxiety and 
depression may still respond to treatment with a com­
bination of drugs and psychotherapeutic approaches 
(p. 243). Citalopram and mirtazapine are better tolerated 
in patients with advanced disease. It should not be 
assumed that depression is an ‘understandable’ conse-
quence of the patient’s situation.
Delirium and terminal agitation
Many patients become confused or agitated in the last 
days of life. It is important to identify and treat poten-
tially reversible causes (pp. 173 and 280), unless the 
patient is too close to death for this to be feasible. Early 
diagnosis and effective management of delirium are 
extremely important. As in other palliative situations, it 
may not be possible to identify and treat the underlying 
cause, and the focus of management may be to ensure 
comfort. It is important to distinguish between behav-
ioural change due to pain and that due to delirium, as 
opioids will improve one and worsen the other.
The management of delirium is detailed on page 174. 
It is important, even in palliative care to treat delirium 
with antipsychotic medicines such as haloperidol rather 
than regard it as distress or anxiety and use benzo­
diazepines only.
DEATH AND DYING
Talking about and planning  
towards dying
There have been dramatic improvements in medical 
treatment and care of patients with cancer and other 
illnesses over recent years, but the inescapable fact 
remains that everyone will die at some time. Planning 
for death is not required for people who die suddenly 
but should be actively considered in patients with 
chronic diseases when the death is considered to be fore-
seeable or inevitable. Doctors rarely know exactly when 
a patient will die but we are often aware that the risk of 
dying is increasing and that medical interventions are 
unlikely to prolong life or improve function. Many 
people wish their doctors to be honest about this situa-
tion to allow them time to think ahead, make plans and 
address practical issues. A smaller number do not wish 
to discuss future deterioration or death; this avoidance 
of discussion should be respected.
For doctors, it is helpful to understand an individu-
al’s wishes and values about medical interventions at 
this time, as this can help guide decisions about ceilings 
of intervention. Some interventions will not work in 
patients with far advanced disease. It is useful to distin-
guish between those that will not work (a medical deci-
sion) and those that do not confer sufficient benefit to be 
worthwhile (a decision that can only be reached with a 
patient’s involvement and consent). A common example 
Reversible causes, such as hypercalcaemia and con-
stipation, should be treated appropriately. Drug-induced 
causes should be considered and the offending drugs 
stopped if possible. As different classes of antiemetic 
drug act at different receptors, antiemetic therapy should 
be based on a careful assessment of the probable causes 
and a rational decision to use a particular class of drug 
(Box 12.8). The subcutaneous route is often required ini-
tially to overcome gastric stasis and poor absorption of 
oral medicines.
Gastrointestinal obstruction
Gastrointestinal obstruction is a frequent complication 
of intra-abdominal cancer. Patients may have multiple 
levels of obstruction and symptoms may vary greatly in 
nature and severity. Surgical mortality is high in patients 
with advanced disease and obstruction should normally 
be managed without surgery.
The key to effective management is to address the 
presenting symptoms – colic, abdominal pain, nausea, 
vomiting, intestinal secretions – individually or in com-
bination, using drugs which do not cause or worsen 
other symptoms. This can be problematic when a spe-
cific treatment worsens another symptom. Cyclizine 
improves nausea and colic responds well to anticholin-
ergic agents, such as hyoscine butylbromide, but both 
slow gut motility. Nausea will improve with metoclo-
pramide, although this is contraindicated in the pres-
ence of colic because of its prokinetic effect. There is 
some evidence that corticosteroids (dexamethasone 
8 mg) can shorten the length of obstructive episodes. 
Somatostatin analogues, such as octreotide, will reduce 
intestinal secretions and therefore large-volume vomits. 
Occasionally, a nasogastric tube is required to reduce 
gaseous or fluid distension.
Weight loss and general weakness
Patients with cancer lose weight due to an alteration of 
metabolism by the tumour known as the cancer cachexia 
syndrome. NSAIDs and megestrol may be helpful in 
early-stage disease but are unlikely to be effective in 
advanced cancer. Corticosteroids can temporarily boost 
appetite and general well-being, but may cause false 
weight gain by promoting fluid retention. Their benefits 
need to be weighed against the risk of side-effects.
Area
Receptors
Drugs
Chemo trigger zone
Dopamine2
5-HT
Haloperidol
Metoclopramide
Vomiting centre
Histamine1
Acetylcholine
Cyclizine
Levomepromazine
Hyoscine
Gut (gastric stasis)
Metoclopramide
Gut distension (vagal 
stimulation)
Histamine1
Cyclizine
Gut (chemoreceptors)
5-HT
Levomepromazine
12.8  Receptor site activity of antiemetic drugs
Death and dying
12 
291
shift in management (Box 12.9). Symptom control, relief 
of distress and care for the family become the most 
important elements of care. Medication and investiga-
tion are only justifiable if they contribute to these ends. 
When patients can no longer drink because they are 
dying, intravenous fluids are usually not necessary and 
may cause worsening of bronchial secretions. Medicines 
should always be prescribed for the relief of symptoms. 
For example, morphine or diamorphine may be used 
to control pain, levomepromazine to control nausea, 
haloperidol to treat confusion, diazepam or midazolam 
to treat distress, and hyoscine hydrobromide to reduce 
respiratory secretions. Side-effects, such as drowsiness, 
may be acceptable if the principal aim of relieving dis-
tress is achieved. It is important to discuss and agree the 
aims of care with the patient’s family.
Ethical issues at the end of life
In Europe, between 25 and 50% of all deaths are associ-
ated with some form of decision which may affect the 
length of a patient’s life. The most common form of deci-
sion involves withdrawing or withholding further treat-
ment: for example, not treating a chest infection in a 
patient who is clearly dying from advanced cancer. It is 
important to have a framework for considering such 
decisions (such as the four ethical principles: autonomy, 
beneficence, non-maleficence and justice, p. 10), which 
balances degrees of importance when there is conflict: 
for example, when a patient wishes to receive treatment 
which a doctor believes will be ineffective or which may 
cause harm. A decision has to be taken as to which 
principle is most important: whether it is better to 
respect a patient’s wishes, even if it causes harm, or to 
reduce the risk of harm but not accede to those wishes.
A futile treatment is one which has no chance of 
achieving worthwhile benefit: that is, the treatment 
cannot achieve a result that the patient would consider, 
now or in the future, to be worthwhile. Doctors are not 
required to institute futile treatments, such as resuscita-
tion, in the event of cardiac arrest in a patient with ter-
minal cancer.
Incapacity and advance directives
Patients’ wishes are very important in Western medical 
ethics, although other cultures emphasise the views of 
the family. If a patient is unable to express his or her 
view because of communication or cognitive impair-
ment, that person lacks ‘capacity’. In order to decide 
what the patient would have wished, as much informa-
tion as possible should be gained about any previously 
expressed wishes, along with the views of relatives and 
other health professionals.
An advance directive is a previously recorded, 
written document of a patient’s wishes (p. 171). It should 
carry the same weight in decision-making as a patient’s 
contemporaneously expressed wishes, but may not be 
sufficiently specific to be used in a particular clinical 
situation. The legal framework for decision-making 
varies in different countries.
Hydration
Deciding whether to give intravenous fluids can be dif-
ficult when a patient is very unwell and the prognosis 
of this would be decisions about not attempting cardio­
pulmonary resuscitation.
In general, people wish for a dignified and peaceful 
death and most prefer to die at home. Families also are 
grateful for the chance to prepare themselves for the 
death of a relative, by timely and gentle discussion 
with their doctor or other health professionals. Early 
discussion and effective planning improve the chances 
that an individual’s wishes will be achieved.
Diagnosing dying
When patients with cancer become bed-bound, semi-
comatose, unable to take tablets and only able to take 
sips of water, with no reversible cause, they are likely to 
be dying and many will have died within 2 days. Patients 
with other conditions also reach a stage where death is 
predictable and imminent. Doctors are sometimes poor 
at recognising this, and should be alert to the views of 
other members of the multidisciplinary team. A clear 
decision that the patient is dying should be agreed and 
recorded.
Management
Once the conclusion has been reached that a patient is 
going to die in the next few days, there is a significant 
Patient and family awareness
•	 Assess patient’s and family’s awareness of the situation
•	 Ensure family understands plan of care
Medical interventions
•	 Stop non-essential medications that do not contribute to 
symptom control
•	 Stop inappropriate investigations and interventions, including 
routine observations
Resuscitation
•	 Complete Do Not Attempt Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
(DNACPR) form
•	 Deactivate implantable defibrillator
Symptom control
•	 Ensure availability of parenteral medication for symptom 
relief
Support for family
•	 Make sure you have contact details for family, that you know 
when they want to be contacted and that they are aware of 
the facilities available to them
Religious and spiritual needs
•	 Make sure any particular wishes are identified and followed
Ongoing assessment
•	 Family’s awareness of condition
•	 Management of symptoms
•	 Need for parenteral hydration
Care after death
•	 Make sure family know what they have to do
•	 Notify other appropriate health professionals
12.9  How to manage a patient who is dying
Palliative care and pain 
12 
292
in many others; public ethical and legal debate over this 
issue is likely to continue.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.anaesthetist.com/ Information on pain physiology and 
acute management of pain.
www.helpthehospices.org.uk/clip/index.htm Useful online 
tutorials on all aspects of palliative symptom control.
www.palliativecareguidelines.scot.nhs.uk Regularly reviewed, 
evidence-based clinical guidelines.
www.palliativedrugs.co.uk Information for health professionals 
about the use of drugs in palliative care. It highlights drugs 
given for unlicensed indications or by unlicensed routes, and 
the administration of multiple drugs by continuous 
subcutaneous infusion.
Figure acknowledgements
Fig. 12.1 Reproduced from Murray SA, Kendall M, Boyd K, 
et al. Illness trajectories and palliative care. BMJ 2005; 
330:7498; reproduced with permission from the BMJ 
Publishing Group.
Fig. 12.3 WHO. Cancer pain relief. 2nd edn. Geneva: WHO; 
1996.
is uncertain. If a patient is clearly dying and has a prog-
nosis of a few days, rehydration may cause harm by 
increasing bronchial secretions, and will not benefit 
the patient by prolonging life. A patient with a major 
stroke, who is unable to swallow but expected to survive 
the event, will develop renal impairment and thirst if 
not given fluids and should be hydrated. Each decision 
should be individual and discussed with the patient’s 
family.
Euthanasia
In the UK and Europe, between 3 and 6% of dying 
patients ask a doctor to end their life. Many of these 
requests are transient; some are associated with poor 
control of physical symptoms or a depressive illness. All 
expressions of a wish to die are an opportunity to help 
the patient discuss and address unresolved issues and 
problems.
Reversible causes, such as pain or depression, should 
be treated. Sometimes, patients may choose to discon-
tinue life-prolonging treatments, such as diuretics or 
anticoagulation, following discussion and the provision 
of adequate alternative symptom control. However, 
there remain a small number of patients who have a 
sustained, competent wish to end their lives, despite 
good control of physical symptoms. Euthanasia is now 
permitted or legal in some countries but remains illegal 
293
13 
Clinical examination of patients with 
infectious disease 294
Presenting problems in infectious  
diseases 296
Fever 296
Positive blood culture 303
Sepsis 304
Acute diarrhoea and vomiting 306
Infections acquired in the tropics 308
Infections in adolescence 313
Infections in pregnancy 313
Viral infections 314
Systemic viral infections with exanthem 314
Systemic viral infections without  
exanthem 319
Viral infections of the skin 325
Gastrointestinal viral infections 327
Respiratory viral infections 328
Viral infections with neurological  
involvement 328
Viral infections with rheumatological 
involvement 329
Infectious disease
Infections caused by helminths 369
Intestinal human nematodes 369
Tissue-dwelling human nematodes 372
Zoonotic nematodes 375
Trematodes (flukes) 376
Cestodes (tapeworms) 378
Ectoparasites 381
Fungal infections 381
Superficial mycoses 381
Subcutaneous mycoses 381
Systemic mycoses 383
D.H. Dockrell
S. Sundar
B.J. Angus
R.P. Hobson
Prion diseases 329
Bacterial infections 329
Bacterial infections of the skin, soft tissues 
and bones 329
Systemic bacterial infections 333
Gastrointestinal bacterial infections 341
Respiratory bacterial infections 345
Bacterial infections with neurological 
involvement 347
Mycobacterial infections 347
Rickettsial and related intracellular bacterial 
infections 350
Chlamydial infections 353
Protozoal infections 353
Systemic protozoal infections 353
Leishmaniasis 362
Gastrointestinal protozoal infections 367
Infectious disease
294
Heart and lungs
Tachycardia, hypotension
Murmurs or prosthetic heart sounds
Pericardial rub
Signs of consolidation
Pleural or pericardial effusion
6
Skin
Generalised erythema
Rash (see opposite)
IV injection track marks
Surgical scars
Prosthetic devices, e.g. central
venous catheters
Tattoos
1
Oropharynx
Dental caries
Tonsillar enlargement or exudate
Candidiasis
3
2
Hands and nails
Finger clubbing
Splinter haemorrhages
Janeway lesions
Signs of chronic liver disease
Vasculitis lesions
Head and neck
Lymphadenopathy
Parotidomegaly
Abnormal tympanic membranes
4
5
Chest X-ray consolidation
in pneumonia
Roth’s spots in
endocarditis
Testicular swelling
in adult mumps
9
Musculoskeletal
Joint swelling, erythema
or tenderness
Localised tender spine suggestive
of epidural abscesses or discitis
Draining sinus of chronic
osteomyelitis
Eyes
Conjunctival petechiae
Painful red eye in uveitis
Loss of red reflex in endophthalmitis
Roth’s spots in infective endocarditis
Haemorrhages and exudates
of cytomegalovirus retinitis
Choroidal lesions of tuberculosis
Streptococcal tonsillitis
Splinter haemorrhages
in endocarditis
7
8
Abdomen
Hepatosplenomegaly
Ascites
Renal angle tenderness
Mass lesions
Surgical drains
Neurological
Neck stiffness
Photophobia
Delirium
Focal neurological signs
10 Genitalia and rectum
Ulceration or discharge
Testicular swelling or nodules
Inguinal lymphadenopathy
Prostatic tenderness
Rectal fluctuance
Observation
• Temperature
• Sweating
• Weight loss
• Respiratory distress
• Altered consciousness
• Pallor
• Jaundice
 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF PATIENTS WITH INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Clinical examination of patients with infectious disease
295
Fever
• Documentation of fever. ‘Feeling 
hot’ or sweaty does not 
necessarily signify fever.  
Fever is diagnosed only when  
a body temperature of over 
38.0°C has been recorded. 
Axillary and aural measurement 
is less accurate than oral or 
rectal. Outpatients may be 
trained to keep a temperature 
chart.
• Rigors. Shivering (followed by 
excessive sweating) occurs with 
a rapid rise in body temperature 
from any cause.
• Night sweats. These are 
associated with particular 
infections (e.g. tuberculosis, 
infective endocarditis), but 
sweating from any cause is 
worse at night.
• Excessive sweating. Alcohol, 
anxiety, thyrotoxicosis, diabetes 
mellitus, acromegaly, lymphoma 
and excessive environmental 
heat all cause sweating without 
temperature elevation.
• Recurrent fever. There are various 
causes, e.g. Borrelia recurrentis, 
bacterial abscess.
• Accompanying features. 
HEADACHE. Severe headache and 
photophobia, although 
characteristic of meningitis, may 
accompany other infections. 
DELIRIUM. Mental confusion 
during fever is more common in 
young children or the elderly. 
MUSCLE PAIN. Myalgia may occur 
with viral infections, such as 
influenza, and with septicaemia, 
including meningococcal sepsis. 
SHOCK. Shock may accompany 
severe infections and sepsis  
(Ch. 8).
Presenting complaint
• Diverse manifestations of infectious 
disease make accurate assessment of 
features and duration critical; e.g. fever 
and cough lasting 2 days imply an acute 
respiratory tract infection but suggest TB if 
they last 2 months
Review of systems
• Must be comprehensive
Past medical history
• Define the ‘host’ and likelihood of 
infection(s)
• Include surgical and dental procedures 
involving prosthetic materials
• Document previous infections
Medication history
• Include non-prescription drugs, use of 
antimicrobials and immunosuppressive 
drugs
• Identify medicines which interact with 
antimicrobials
Allergy history
• Esp. to antimicrobials, noting allergic 
manifestation (e.g. rash versus anaphylaxis)
Family and contact history
• Note infections and their time course
• Sensitively explore exposure to key 
infections, e.g. TB and HIV-1
Travel history
• Include countries visited and where 
previously resident (relevant to exposure 
and likely vaccination history, e.g. 
likelihood of BCG vaccination in childhood)
Occupation
• e.g. Anthrax in leather tannery workers
Recreational pursuits
• e.g. Leptospirosis in canoeists and 
windsurfers
Animal exposures
• Include pets, e.g. dog exposure and 
hydatid disease
Dietary history
• Consider undercooked meats, shellfish, 
unpasteurised dairy products or well water
• Establish who else was exposed, e.g. to 
food-borne pathogens
History of intravenous drug injection or 
receipt of blood products
• Risks for blood-borne viruses, e.g. HIV-1, 
and HBV and HCV
Sexual history
• Explore in a confidential and non-threatening 
way (Ch. 15); remember that the most 
common mechanism of HIV-1 transmission 
is heterosexual contact (Ch. 14)
Vaccination history and use of 
prophylactic medicines
• Consider occupation- or age-related 
vaccines
• In a traveller or infection-predisposed 
patient, establish compliance with 
prophylactic treatments
History-taking in suspected infectious disease*
*Always consider non-infectious aetiologies in the differential diagnosis.
(HBV/HCV = hepatitis B/C virus; HIV-1 = human immunodeficiency virus-1; TB = tuberculosis)
1  Skin lesions in infectious diseases
• Diffuse erythema, e.g.   A
• Migrating erythema, e.g. 
enlarging rash of erythema 
migrans in Lyme disease 
(see Fig. 13.20, p. 335)
• Purpuric or petechial rashes, 
e.g.   B
• Macular or papular rashes, 
e.g. primary infection with 
HIV (Box 14.8, p. 395)
• Vesicular or blistering rash, 
e.g.  C
• Erythema multiforme  
(Fig. 28.48 and Box 28.41, 
p. 1302)
• Nodules or plaques, e.g. 
Kaposi’s sarcoma (p. 384)
• Erythema nodosum (  D and 
Box 28.42, p. 1303)
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome 
A
Meningococcal sepsis 
B
Shingles 
C
Erythema nodosum 
D
Infectious disease
13
296
• chest X-ray and electrocardiogram (ECG)
• urinalysis and urine culture
• blood culture (p. 140)
• throat swab for culture
• other specimens, as indicated by history and 
examination, e.g. wound swab; sputum culture; 
stool culture, microscopy for ova and parasites, and 
Clostridium difficile toxin assay; if relevant, malaria 
films on 3 consecutive days or a malaria rapid 
diagnostic test (antigen detection, p. 355).
Subsequent investigations in patients with HIV-
related (p. 396), immune-deficient (p. 301), nosocomial 
or travel-related (p. 309) pyrexia and in individuals with 
associated symptoms or signs of involvement of the res-
piratory, gastrointestinal or neurological systems are 
described elsewhere.
Management
Fever and its associated systemic symptoms can be 
treated with paracetamol, and by tepid sponging to cool 
the skin. Replacement of salt and water is important in 
patients with drenching sweats. Further management is 
focused on the underlying cause.
Fever with localising symptoms  
or signs
In most patients, the site of infection is apparent after 
clinical evaluation (p. 294), and the likelihood of infec-
tion is reinforced by investigation results (e.g. neu-
trophilia with raised ESR and CRP in bacterial infections). 
Not all apparently localising symptoms are reliable, 
however; headache, breathlessness and diarrhoea can 
occur in sepsis without localised infection in the central 
nervous system (CNS), respiratory tract or gastrointes-
tinal tract. Careful interpretation of the clinical features 
is vital (e.g. severe headache associated with photopho-
bia, rash and neck stiffness suggests meningitis, whereas 
moderate headache with cough and rhinorrhoea is con-
sistent with a viral upper respiratory tract infection).
Common infections that present with fever are shown 
in Figure 13.1. Further investigation and management 
are specific to the cause, but may include empirical anti-
microbial therapy (p. 149) pending confirmation of the 
microbiological diagnosis.
Pyrexia of unknown origin
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) is defined as a tem-
perature persistently above 38.0°C for more than 
3 weeks, without diagnosis, despite initial investigation 
during 3 days of inpatient care or after more than two 
outpatient visits. Subsets of PUO are described by 
medical setting: HIV-1 related, immune-deficient or 
nosocomial. Up to one-third of cases of PUO remain 
undiagnosed.
Clinical assessment
Major causes of PUO are outlined in Box 13.2. Rare 
causes, such as periodic fever syndromes (p. 85), should 
be considered in those with a positive family history. 
Children and younger adults are more likely to have 
infectious causes – in particular, viral infections. Older 
adults are more likely to have certain infectious and 
non-infectious causes (see Box 13.1). Detailed history 
and examination should be repeated at regular intervals 
The principles of infection and its investigation and 
therapy are described in Chapter 6. This chapter and the 
following ones on human immunodeficiency virus/
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) 
and sexually transmitted infection (STI) describe the 
approach to patients with potential infectious disease, 
the individual infections and the resulting syndromes.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN 
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Infectious diseases present with myriad clinical manifes-
tations. Many of these are described either in other chap-
ters of this book or below.
Fever
‘Fever’ implies an elevated core body temperature of 
more than 38.0°C (p. 138). Fever is a response to cytokines 
and acute phase proteins (pp. 74 and 82) and occurs in 
infections and in non-infectious conditions.
Clinical assessment
The differential diagnosis is very broad so clinical fea-
tures are used to guide the most appropriate investiga-
tions. The systematic approach described on pages 
294–295 should be followed. Box 13.1 describes the 
assessment of elderly patients.
Investigations
If the clinical features do not suggest a specific infection, 
then initial investigations should include:
• a full blood count (FBC) with differential, including 
eosinophil count
• urea and electrolytes, liver function tests (LFTs), 
blood glucose and muscle enzymes
• inflammatory markers, erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP)
• a test for antibodies to HIV-1 (p. 392)
• autoantibodies, including antinuclear antibodies 
(ANA)
• Temperature measurement: fever may be missed because 
oral temperatures are unreliable. Rectal measurement may 
be needed but core temperature is increasingly measured 
using eardrum reflectance.
• Acute confusion: common with fever, especially in those 
with underlying cerebrovascular disease or dementia.
• Prominent causes of pyrexia of unknown origin: include 
tuberculosis and intra-abdominal abscesses, complicated 
urinary tract infection and infective endocarditis. Non-
infective causes include polymyalgia rheumatica/temporal 
arteritis and tumours. A smaller fraction of cases remain 
undiagnosed than in young people.
• Pitfalls in the elderly: conditions such as cerebrovascular 
accident or thromboembolic disease can cause fever but 
every effort must be made to exclude concomitant infection.
• Common infectious diseases in the very frail (e.g. nursing 
home residents): pneumonia, urinary infection, soft tissue 
infection and gastroenteritis.
13.1  Fever in old age
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
297
Meningitis
Endophthalmitis
Encephalitis
Brain abscess
Neurosurgical
infection
MRI with enhancement of
the temporal lobe in herpes
simplex encephalitis
Chest X-ray from
a patient with
pulmonary
tuberculosis
CT thorax in
empyema
Cellulitis of
the leg
Tuberculous
osteomyelitis
of the lower tibia
CT abdomen
showing a
pyogenic
liver abscess
CT abdomen
showing a
diverticular
abscess
Liver abscess
Pancreatic abscess
Hepatitis
Biliary infection
Pyelonephritis
Diverticulitis
Peritonitis
Tubulo-ovarian
abscess
Appendiceal
abscess
Cellulitis
Impetigo
Erysipelas
Subcutaneous fat
Deeper fascial
planes
Necrotising fasciitis
Muscle
Epidermis
Dermis
Pyomyositis
Bone
Osteomyelitis
Colitis
Sinusitis
Pharyngitis
Tuberculosis
Pneumonia
Empyema
Lung abscess
Fig. 13.1  Common infectious syndromes presenting with fever and localised features. Major causes are grouped by approximate anatomical 
location and include central nervous system infection; respiratory tract infections; abdominal, pelvic or urinary tract infections; and skin and soft tissue 
infections (SSTI) or osteomyelitis. For each site of infection, particular syndromes and their common causes are described elsewhere in the book. The 
causative organisms vary, depending on host factors, which include whether the patient has lived or resided in a tropical country or particular geographical 
location, has acquired the infection in a health-care environment or is immunocompromised. 
Infectious disease
13
298
• A patient who looks well
• Bizarre temperature chart with absence of diurnal variation 
and/or temperature-related changes in pulse rate
• Temperature > 41°C
• Absence of sweating during defervescence
• Normal ESR and CRP despite high fever
• Evidence of self-injection or self-harm
• Normal temperature during supervised (observed) 
measurement
13.3  Clues to the diagnosis of factitious fever
Infections (~30%)
Specific locations
• Abscesses: hepatobiliary*, diverticular*, urinary tract* (including 
prostate), pulmonary, CNS
• Infections of oral cavity (including dental), head and neck 
(including sinuses)
• Bone and joint infections
• Infective endocarditis*
Specific organisms
• Tuberculosis (particularly extrapulmonary)*
• HIV-1 infection
• Other viral infections (cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr 
virus (EBV) )
• Fungal infections (e.g. Aspergillus spp., Candida spp. or 
dimorphic fungi)
• Infections with fastidious organisms (e.g. Bartonella spp., 
Tropheryma whipplei)
Specific patient groups
• Imported infections
Malaria, dengue, rickettsial infections, Brucella spp., amoebic 
liver abscess, enteric fevers, Leishmania spp. (southern 
Europe, India, Africa and Latin America), Burkholderia 
pseudomallei (South-east Asia), HIV and respiratory tract 
infections
• Nosocomial infections
Infections related to prosthetic materials and surgical 
procedures
• HIV-positive individuals
Acute retroviral syndrome
AIDS-defining infections (disseminated Mycobacterium avium 
complex (DMAC), Pneumocystis jirovecii (carinii) pneumonia, 
CMV and others)
Malignancy (~20%)
Haematological malignancy
• Lymphoma*, leukaemia and myeloma
Solid tumours
• Renal, liver, colon, stomach, pancreas, kidney
Connective tissue disorders (~15%)
Older adults
• Temporal arteritis/polymyalgia rheumatica*
Younger adults
• Still’s disease (juvenile rheumatoid arthritis)*
• Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
• Vasculitic disorders (including polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid 
disease with vasculitis and granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(also known as Wegener’s granulomatosis))
• Polymyositis
• Behçet’s disease
Geographically restricted
• Rheumatic fever
Miscellaneous (~20%)
Cardiovascular
• Atrial myxoma, aortitis, aortic dissection
Respiratory
• Sarcoidosis, pulmonary embolism and other thromboembolic 
disease, extrinsic allergic alveolitis
Gastrointestinal
• Inflammatory bowel disease, granulomatous hepatitis, alcoholic 
liver disease, pancreatitis
Endocrine/metabolic
• Thyrotoxicosis, thyroiditis, hypothalamic lesions, 
phaeochromocytoma, adrenal insufficiency, 
hypertriglyceridaemia
Haematological
• Haemolytic anaemia, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, myeloproliferative 
disorders, Castleman’s disease, graft-versus-host disease 
(after allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation)
Inherited
• Familial Mediterranean fever and periodic fever syndromes
Drug reactions*
• e.g. Antibiotic fever, drug hypersensitivity reactions etc.
Factitious fever
Idiopathic (~15%)
*Most common causes within each group.
13.2  Aetiology of pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO)
to detect emerging features (e.g. rashes, signs of infective 
endocarditis (p. 625) or features of vasculitis). In men, 
the prostate should be considered as a potential source 
of infection.
Clinicians should be alert to the possibility of facti-
tious fever, in which high temperature recordings are 
engineered by the patient (Box 13.3).
Investigations
If initial investigation of fever (see above) is negative, a 
series of further microbiological and non-microbiological 
investigations should be considered (Boxes 13.4 and 
13.5). These will usually include:
• induced sputum or other specimens for 
mycobacterial stains and culture
• serological tests
• imaging of the abdomen by ultrasonography or 
computed tomography (CT)
• echocardiography.
Lesions identified on imaging should usually be 
biopsied in order to seek evidence of relevant pathogens 
by culture, histopathology or nucleic acid detection. The 
chance of a successful diagnosis is greatest if procedures 
for obtaining and transporting the correct samples in 
the appropriate media are carefully planned in advance; 
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
299
Serological tests for connective tissue disorders
• Autoantibody screen
• Complement levels
• Immunoglobulins
• Cryoglobulins
Echocardiography
Ultrasound of abdomen
CT/MRI of thorax, abdomen and/or brain
Imaging of the skeletal system
• Plain X-rays
• CT/MRI spine
• Isotope bone scan
Labelled white cell scan
Positron emission tomography (PET)/single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT)
Biopsy
• Bronchoscopy and lavage ± transbronchial biopsy
• Lymph node aspirate or biopsy
• Biopsy of radiological lesion
• Biopsy of liver
• Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy
• Lumbar puncture
• Laparoscopy and biopsy
• Temporal artery biopsy
13.5  Additional investigations in PUO
Microscopy
• Blood for atypical lymphocytes (EBV, CMV, HIV-1, hepatitis 
viruses or Toxoplasma gondii), trypanosomiasis, malaria, 
Borrelia spp.
• Respiratory samples for mycobacteria, fungi
• Stool for ova, cysts and parasites
• Biopsy for light microscopy (bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, 
Leishmania and other parasites) and/or electron microscopy 
(viruses, protozoa (e.g. microsporidia) and other fastidious 
organisms (e.g. T. whipplei) )
• Urine for white or red blood cells, schistosome ova, 
mycobacteria (early morning urine × 3)
Culture
• Aspirates and biopsies (e.g. joint, deep abscess, debrided 
tissues)
• Blood, including prolonged culture and special media 
conditions
• Sputum for mycobacteria
• Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
• Gastric aspirate for mycobacteria
• Stool
• Swabs
• Urine ± prostatic massage in older men
Antigen detection
• Blood, e.g. HIV p24 antigen, cryptococcal antigen, 
Histoplasma antigen (restricted availability) and Aspergillus 
galactomannan enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
• CSF for cryptococcal antigen
• Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid for Aspergillus galactomannan
• Nasopharyngeal aspirate/throat swab for respiratory viruses
• Urine, e.g. for Legionella antigen
Nucleic acid detection
• Blood for Bartonella spp. and viruses
• CSF for viruses and key bacteria (meningococcus, 
pneumococcus)
• Nasopharyngeal aspirate/throat swab for respiratory viruses
• Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, e.g. for respiratory viruses
• Tissue specimens, e.g. for Tropheryma whipplei
• Urine, e.g. for Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae
• Stool, e.g. for norovirus, rotavirus
Immunological tests
• Serology (antibody detection) for viruses, dimorphic fungi and 
some bacteria and protozoa
• Interferon-γ release assay for diagnosis of tuberculosis
Note This list does not apply to every patient with a PUO. Appropriate tests 
should be selected in a stepwise manner, according to specific 
predisposing factors, epidemiological exposures and local availability, and 
should be discussed with a microbiologist.
13.4  Microbiological investigation of PUO
this requires discussion between the clinical team, 
the radiologist or surgeon performing the procedure, 
and the local microbiologist and histopathologist. 
Liver biopsy may be justified, e.g. to identify idiopathic 
granulomatous hepatitis, if there are biochemical or 
radiological abnormalities. Bone marrow biopsies have 
a diagnostic yield of up to 15%, most often revealing 
haematological malignancy, myelodysplasia or tubercu-
losis, and also identifying brucellosis, typhoid fever or 
visceral leishmaniasis. Bone marrow should be sent for 
culture, as well as microscopy. Laparoscopy is occasion-
ally undertaken with biopsy of abnormal tissues. Splenic 
aspiration in specialist centres is the diagnostic test of 
choice for suspected visceral leishmaniasis. Temporal 
artery biopsy should be considered in patients over the 
age of 50 years, even in the absence of physical signs or 
a raised ESR. ‘Blind’ biopsy of other structures in the 
absence of localising signs, or laboratory or radiology 
results is unhelpful.
Prognosis
The overall mortality of PUO is 30–40%, mainly attribut-
able to malignancy in older patients. If no cause is found, 
the long-term mortality is low and fever often settles 
spontaneously.
Fever in the injection drug-user
Intravenous injection of recreational drugs is wide-
spread in many parts of the world (p. 240). Infective 
organisms are introduced by non-sterile (often shared) 
injection equipment (Fig. 13.2), and infection is facili-
tated by immunodeficiency due to malnutrition or the 
toxic effects of drugs. The risks increase with prolonged 
drug use and injection into large veins of the groin and 
neck because of progressive thrombosis of superficial 
peripheral veins. The most common causes of fever are 
soft tissue or respiratory infections.
Clinical assessment
The history should address the following risk factors:
• Site of injection. Femoral vein injection is associated 
with vascular complications such as deep venous 
thrombosis (50% of which are septic) and accidental 
arterial injection with false aneurysm formation or a 
compartment syndrome due to swelling within the 
fascial sheath. Local complications include ilio-
psoas abscess, and septic arthritis of the hip joint or 
sacroiliac joint. Injection of the jugular vein can be 
Infectious disease
13
300
organisms (e.g. anaerobic streptococci, Fusobacterium 
spp. and Prevotella spp). Contamination of 
commercially available lemon juice, used to dissolve 
heroin before injection, has been associated with 
blood-stream infection with Candida spp.
• Substances injected. Injection of cocaine is associated 
with a variety of vascular complications. Certain 
formulations of heroin have been linked with 
particular infections, e.g. wound botulism with 
black tar heroin. Drugs are often mixed with other 
substances, e.g. talc.
• Blood-borne virus status. Results of previous HIV-1 
and hepatitis virus tests or vaccinations for hepatitis 
viruses should be recorded.
associated with cerebrovascular complications. 
Subcutaneous and intramuscular injection has been 
related to infection by clostridial species, the spores 
of which contaminate heroin. Clostridium novyi 
causes a local lesion with significant toxin 
production, leading to shock and multi-organ 
failure. Tetanus, wound botulism and gas gangrene 
also occur.
• Technical details of injection. Sharing of needles and 
other injecting paraphernalia (including spoons and 
filters) greatly increases the risk of blood-borne 
virus infection (e.g. HIV-1, hepatitis B or C virus). 
Some users lubricate their needles by licking them 
prior to injection, thus introducing mouth 
Fig. 13.2  Fever in the injection drug-user: key features of clinical examination. Full examination (p. 294) is required but features most common 
amongst injection drug-users are shown here. (DVT = deep venous thrombosis; JVP = jugular venous pulse) 
1
4
2
3
5
11
10
9
8
6
7
12
Hands and nails
Splinter haemorrhages
Signs of chronic liver disease
Oropharynx
Dental infections
Oropharyngeal candidiasis or
other signs of HIV-1 infection
Skin and soft tissues (any site)
Cellulitis
Purulent drainage
Abscesses
Ulcers
Bullae or extreme pain suggestive
of necrotising fasciitis
Optic fundi
Roth’s spots
Candidal cotton wool spots
Nervous system
Signs of drug intoxication
Encephalopathy
Signs of meningitis
Focal neurological features or
seizures in septic embolism/
mycotic aneurysm/abscess
Cranial nerve palsies of botulism
Trismus, muscle rigidity or
spasms in tetanus
Localised pain over vertebrae with
epidural abscess
Cardiovascular system
Systolic ‘V’ waves in JVP of
tricuspid regurgitation
Regurgitant murmurs in endocarditis
Respiratory system
Consolidation in pneumonia
Upper lobe signs in tuberculosis
Pleural rub with septic pulmonary
emboli
Abdomen
Jaundice ± tender liver edge
with hepatitis
Pain in left upper quadrant with
splenic abscess
Bone and joints
Osteomyelitis
Septic arthritis
Injection sites
Abscesses
Fistula
Haematoma
Pseudoaneurysm
Femoral stretch test
Passive extension of the hip joint
causes pain and reflex muscle
spasm in ilio-psoas abscess
Legs
Signs of DVT
Vasculitis or ischaemic signs of
septic emboli, endocarditis or
vasospasm
Compartment syndrome
Hip flexor spasm in an injection
drug-user with ilio-psoas abscess
Skin abscesses in an
injection drug-user
Sharing injecting
equipment may transmit
blood-borne viruses
Observation
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
301
• Surreptitious use of antimicrobials. Addicts may use 
antimicrobials to self-treat infections, masking initial 
blood culture results.
Key findings on clinical examination are shown in 
Figure 13.2. It can be difficult to distinguish the effects 
of infection from the effects of drugs or drug withdrawal 
(excitement, tachycardia, sweating, marked myalgia, 
confusion). Stupor and delirium may result from drug 
administration but may also indicate meningitis or 
encephalitis. Non-infected venous thromboembolism is 
also common in this group.
Investigations
The initial investigations are as for any fever (see above), 
including a chest X-ray and blood cultures. Since blood 
sampling may be difficult, contamination is often a 
problem. Echocardiography to detect infective endocar-
ditis should be performed in all injection drug-users 
with: bacteraemia due to Staphylococcus aureus or other 
organisms associated with endocarditis (Fig. 13.3A); 
thromboembolic phenomena; or a new or previously 
undocumented murmur. Endovascular infection should 
also be suspected if lung abscesses or pneumatocoeles 
are detected radiologically. Additional imaging should 
be focused on sites of injection or of localising symptoms 
and signs (Fig. 13.3B). Any pathological fluid collections 
should be sampled.
Urinary toxicology tests may suggest a non-infectious 
cause of the presenting complaint. While being investi-
gated, all injection drug-users should be offered testing 
for infection with hepatitis B and C virus and HIV-1.
Microbiological results are crucial in guiding therapy. 
Injection drug-users may have more than one infection. 
Skin and soft tissue infections are most often due to 
Staph. aureus or streptococci, and sometimes to Clostrid-
ium spp. or anaerobes. Pulmonary infections are most 
often due to the common pathogens causing community-
acquired pneumonia, tuberculosis or septic emboli 
(Fig. 13.3C). Endocarditis with septic emboli commonly 
involves Staph. aureus and viridans streptococci, but 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida spp. are also 
encountered.
Management
Empirical therapy of fever in the injection drug-user 
includes an antistaphylococcal penicillin (e.g. flucloxa-
cillin) or, if meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus (MRSA) is 
prevalent in the community, a glycopeptide (e.g. vanco-
mycin). Once a particular pathogen is identified, specific 
therapy is commenced, with modification when anti­
microbial susceptibility is available. In injection drug-
users, right-sided endocarditis due to Staph. aureus is 
customarily treated with high-dose intravenous flu-
cloxacillin. In left-sided Staph. aureus endocarditis, 
aminoglycoside therapy may be added. Right-sided 
endocarditis caused by MRSA is usually treated with 
4 weeks of vancomycin plus gentamicin for the first 
week. Specialist advice should be sought.
For localised infections of the skin and soft tissues, 
oral therapy with agents active against staphylococci, 
streptococci and anaerobes is appropriate (e.g. flucloxa-
cillin plus co-amoxiclav or clindamycin). Non-adherence 
with prescribed antimicrobial regimens leads to a high 
rate of relapse for all infections in this patient group.
Fig. 13.3  Causes of fever in injection drug-users.  A Endocarditis: 
large vegetation on the tricuspid valve (arrow).  B Septic arthritis of the 
left sternoclavicular joint (arrow A) (note the erosion of the bony surfaces  
at the sternoclavicular joint) with overlying soft tissue collection (arrow B). 
 C CT of the thorax showing Staph. aureus endocarditis of the tricuspid 
valve and haemoptysis, showing multiple embolic lesions with cavitatlon 
(arrows). 
A
B
A
B
C
Fever in the immunocompromised 
host
Immunocompromised hosts include those with congeni-
tal immunodeficiency (p. 78), HIV infection (Ch. 14) 
and iatrogenic immunosuppression induced by chemo­
therapy (p. 276), transplantation (p. 95) or immunosup-
pressant medicines, including high-dose corticosteroids. 
Metabolic abnormalities, such as under-nutrition or 
hyperglycaemia, may also contribute. Multiple elements 
of the immune system are potentially compromised. A 
patient may have impaired neutrophil function from 
chemotherapy, impaired T-cell and/or B-cell responses 
due to underlying malignancy, T-cell and phagocytosis 
defects due to corticosteroids, mucositis from chemo-
therapy and an impaired skin barrier due to insertion of 
a central venous catheter.
Fever may result from infectious or from non-
infectious causes, including drugs, vasculitis, neoplasm, 
organising pneumonitis, lymphoproliferative disease, 
Infectious disease
13
302
organisms are the most common pathogens, particularly 
in association with in-dwelling catheters.
Empirical broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy is 
commenced as soon as neutropenic fever occurs and 
cultures have been obtained. The most common 
regimens for neutropenic sepsis are broad-spectrum 
penicillins, such as piperacillin–tazobactam IV. Although 
aminoglycosides are commonly used in combination, 
routine use is not supported by trial data (Box 13.6). If 
fever has not resolved after 3–5 days, empirical antifun-
gal therapy (e.g. caspofungin) is added (p. 159). An alter-
native antifungal strategy is to use azole prophylaxis in 
high-risk patients and markers of early fungal infection, 
such as galactomannan antigen, to guide initiation of 
antifungal treatment (a ‘pre-emptive approach’).
Post-transplantation fever
Fever in transplant recipients may be due to infection, 
episodes of graft rejection in solid organ transplant 
recipients, or graft-versus-host disease following hae-
matopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT; p. 1017).
Infections in solid transplant recipients are grouped 
according to the time of onset (Box 13.7). Those in the 
first month are related to the underlying condition or 
surgical complications. Those occurring 1–6 months 
after transplantation are characteristic of impaired 
T-cell function. Risk factors for CMV infection have 
graft-versus-host disease (in recipients of haematopoi-
etic stem cell transplants; p. 1017) or Sweet’s syndrome 
(reddish nodules or plaques with fever and leucocytosis, 
in association with haematological malignancy).
Clinical assessment
The following should be addressed in the history:
• Identification of the immunosuppressant factors, 
and nature of the immune defect.
• Any past infections and their treatment. Infections 
may recur and antimicrobial resistance may have 
been acquired in response to prior therapy.
• Exposure to infections, including opportunistic 
infections that would not cause disease in an 
immunocompetent host.
• Prophylactic medicines and vaccinations 
administered.
Examination should include inspection of the normal 
physical barriers provided by skin and mucosal surfaces 
and, in particular, central venous catheters, the mouth, 
sinuses, ears and perianal area (digital rectal examina-
tion should be avoided). Disseminated infections can 
manifest as cutaneous lesions. The areas around finger-
nails and toenails should also be inspected closely.
Investigations
Initial screening tests are as described above (p. 296). 
Immunocompromised hosts often have decreased 
inflammatory responses leading to attenuation of physi-
cal signs, such as neck stiffness with meningitis, radio-
logical features and laboratory findings, such as 
leucocytosis. Chest CT scan should be considered in 
addition to chest X-ray when respiratory symptoms 
occur. Abdominal imaging may also be warranted, par-
ticularly if there is right lower quadrant pain, which may 
indicate typhlitis (inflammation of the caecum) in neu-
tropenic patients. Blood cultures from a central venous 
catheter, urine cultures, and stool cultures if diarrhoea 
is present are also recommended.
Nasopharyngeal aspirates are sometimes diagnostic, 
as immunocompromised hosts may shed respiratory 
viruses for prolonged periods. Skin lesions should be 
biopsied if nodules are present, and investigation should 
include fungal stains. Useful molecular techniques 
include polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for CMV and 
Aspergillus spp. DNA, and antigen assays (e.g. crypto-
coccal antigen (CrAg) for Cryptococcus neoformans, and 
galactomannan for Aspergillus spp. in blood or Legionella 
pneumophila type 1 in urine). Antibody detection is rarely 
useful in immunocompromised patients. Patients with 
respiratory signs or symptoms should be considered for 
bronchoscopy in order to obtain bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluid to detect pathogens, including Pneumocystis jirovecii 
(carinii), as well as bacteria, fungi and viruses.
Neutropenic fever
Neutropenic fever is strictly defined as a neutrophil 
count of less than 0.5 × 109/L (p. 1004) and a single axil-
lary temperature above 38.5°C or three recordings above 
38.0°C over a 12-hour period, although the infection risk 
increases progressively as the neutrophil count drops 
below 1.0 × 109/L. Patients with neutropenia are particu-
larly prone to bacterial or fungal infection. Gram-positive 
‘Broad spectrum β-lactam monotherapy is as effective as 
β-lactam-aminoglycoside combination therapy for neutropenic 
fever in many settings.’
• Paul M, et al. BMJ 2003; 326:1111.
• Del Favero A, et al. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:1295–1301.
13.6  Treatment of neutropenic fever
13.7  Infections in transplant recipients
Time post-
transplantation
Infections
Solid organ recipients
0–1 mth
Bacterial or fungal infections related to the 
underlying condition or surgical 
complications
1–6 mths
CMV, other opportunistic infections (e.g. 
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia)
> 6 mths
Bacterial pneumonia, other bacterial 
community-acquired infections, shingles, 
cryptococcal infection, PTLD
Myeloablative haematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients
Pre-engraftment 
(typically 0–4 wks)
Bacterial and fungal infections, respiratory 
viruses or HSV reactivation
Post-engraftment
Early (< 100 days)
CMV, Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 
moulds or other opportunistic infections
Late (> 100 days)
Community-acquired bacterial infections, 
shingles, CMV, PTLD
(CMV = cytomegalovirus; HSV = herpes simplex virus; PTLD = post-
transplant lymphoproliferative disorder)
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
303
incidental transient bacteraemia or contamination, but 
certain species (e.g. C. septicum) may be genuine 
pathogens.
Further investigations are influenced by the causative 
organism and setting. Initial screening tests are similar 
to those for fever (p. 296) and should include chest X-ray, 
urine culture and, in many cases, ultrasound or other 
imaging of the abdomen. Imaging should also include 
any areas of bone or joint pain and any prosthetic 
material, e.g. a prosthetic joint or an aortic graft.
Echocardiography should be considered for those 
patients with BSI who have valvular heart disease or 
clinical features of endocarditis (p. 625), those whose 
cultures reveal an organism that is a common cause of 
endocarditis (e.g. Staph. aureus, viridans streptococci or 
enterococci), those in whom multiple blood cultures are 
positive for the same organism, and those with rapid 
positive result on culture. The sensitivities of trans­
thoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transoesophageal 
echocardiography (TOE) for the detection of vegeta-
tions are 50–90% and over 95%, respectively. Therefore, 
if TTE is negative, TOE should be performed (Box 18.115, 
p. 627).
Certain rare causes of BSI have specific associations 
that warrant further investigation. Strep. bovis (biotype 
I, Strep. gallolyticus) endocarditis and C. septicum BSI are 
both associated with colonic carcinoma and their isola-
tion is an indication for colonoscopy.
Management
BSI requires antimicrobial therapy and attention to the 
source of infection, including surgical drainage if appro-
priate. Two weeks of therapy may be sufficient for Staph. 
aureus BSI from central and peripheral venous catheter 
infections when the source is identified and removed, 
for uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections, and for 
uncomplicated right-sided infective endocarditis. Other 
Staph. aureus BSIs are usually treated for 4–6 weeks.
Central venous catheter infections
Infections of central venous catheters typically involve 
the catheter lumen and are associated with fever, 
positive blood cultures and, in some cases, signs of 
purulence or exudate at the site of insertion. Infection is 
more common in temporary catheters inserted into the 
groin or jugular vein than those in the subclavian vein. 
Tunnelled catheters, e.g. Hickman catheters, may also 
develop tunnel site infections.
Staphylococci account for 70–90% of catheter infec-
tions, with coagulase-negative staphylococci more 
been identified and patients commonly receive either 
prophylaxis or intensive monitoring involving regular 
testing for CMV DNA by PCR and early initiation of 
anti-CMV therapy using intravenous ganciclovir or oral 
val­ganciclovir if tests become positive.
Following HSCT, infections in the first 4 weeks are 
more common in patients receiving a myeloablative con-
ditioning regimen (see Box 13.7). Later infections are 
more common if an allogeneic procedure is performed.
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) 
is an Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphoma 
that can complicate transplantation, particularly when 
primary EBV infection occurs after transplantation.
Positive blood culture
Blood-stream infection (BSI) or bacteraemia is a frequent 
presentation of infection. This can be community-
acquired or may arise in hospital (‘nosocomial’). The 
most common causes are shown in Box 13.8. In immuno­
compromised hosts, a wider range of microorganisms 
may be isolated, e.g. fungi in neutropenic hosts.
Primary bacteraemia refers to cases in which the site 
of infection is unknown; this applies in approximately 
10% of community-acquired cases and approximately 
30% of nosocomial cases, and is more common in 
Staph. aureus bacteraemias. In community-acquired 
Staph. aureus bacteraemia, 20–30% of cases are associated 
with infectious endocarditis and up to 10% are due to 
osteomyelitis. Peripheral and central venous catheters 
are an important source of nosocomial BSI.
BSI has an associated mortality of 15–40%, depending 
on the setting, host and microbial factors.
Clinical assessment
The history should determine the setting in which BSI 
has occurred. Host factors predisposing to infection 
include skin disease, diabetes mellitus, injection drug 
use, the presence of a central venous, urinary or haemo-
dialysis catheter, and surgical procedures, especially 
those involving the implantation of prosthetic materials 
(in particular, endovascular prostheses).
Physical examination should focus on signs of endo-
carditis (p. 625), evidence of bone or joint infection (ten-
derness or restriction of movement), and abdominal or 
flank tenderness. Central venous catheters should be 
examined for erythema or purulence at the exit site. 
Particularly in cases with Candida spp. infection or sus-
pected infectious endocarditis, fundoscopy after pupil 
dilatation should be performed.
Investigations
Positive blood cultures may be caused by contaminants. 
When isolated from only one bottle, or from all bottles 
from one venesection, coagulase-negative staphylococci 
often represent contamination. Repeated isolation of this 
organism, however, should raise suspicion of infective 
endocarditis or, in a patient with any form of prosthetic 
material, prosthesis infection. Viridans streptococci 
occasionally cause transient non-significant bacteraemia 
or blood culture contamination but, in view of their asso-
ciation with infective endocarditis, significant infection 
must always be sought clinically. Bacillus spp. (‘aerobic 
spore bearers’) and Clostridium spp. often represent 
13.8  Common causes of blood-stream infection
Community-acquired
• Staph. aureus, including MRSA
• Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Other streptococci
• Escherichia coli
Nosocomial
• Staph. aureus, including MRSA
• Coagulase-negative 
staphylococci
• Enterococci, including VRE
• Gram-negative bacteria
• Candida spp.
(MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus; VRE = vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci)
Infectious disease
13
304
common than Staph. aureus. Other causes include ente-
rococci and Gram-negative bacilli. Unusual Gram-
negative organisms, such as Citrobacter freundii and 
Pseudomonas fluorescens, cause pseudo-outbreaks and 
raise the possibility of non-sterile infusion equipment or 
infusate. Candida spp. are a common cause of line infec-
tions, particularly in association with total parenteral 
nutrition. Non-tuberculous mycobacteria may cause 
tunnel infections.
Investigations and management
In bacteraemic patients with fever and no other obvious 
source of infection, a catheter infection is likely. Local 
evidence of erythema, purulence or thrombophlebitis 
supports the diagnosis. However, microbiological con-
firmation is essential (p. 140). Catheter-related infection 
is suggested by higher colony counts or shorter time to 
positivity in blood cultures obtained through the cath-
eter than in peripheral blood cultures. If the line is 
removed, a semi-quantitative culture of the tip should 
confirm the presence of 15 or more colony-forming 
units, but this is retrospective and does not detect 
luminal infection.
For coagulase-negative staphylococcal line infections, 
the options are to remove the line or, particularly in the 
case of tunnelled catheters, to treat empirically with a 
glycopeptide antibiotic, e.g. vancomycin, with or without 
the use of antibiotic-containing lock therapy to the cath-
eter for approximately 14 days. For Staph. aureus infec-
tion, the chance of curing an infection with the catheter 
in situ is low and the risks from infection are high. 
Therefore, unless the risks of catheter removal outweigh 
the benefits, treatment involves catheter removal, fol-
lowed by 14 days of antimicrobial therapy; the same 
applies to infections with Candida spp. or Bacillus spp.
Infection prevention is a key component of the man-
agement of vascular catheters. Measures include strict 
attention to hand hygiene, optimal siting, full aseptic 
technique on insertion and subsequent interventions, 
skin antisepsis with chlorhexidine and isopropyl 
alcohol, daily assessment of catheter sites (e.g. with 
visual infusion phlebitis (VIP) score (p. 330) ), and daily 
consideration of the continuing requirement for cathe-
terisation. The use of catheters impregnated with anti-
microbials such as chlorhexidine or silver is advocated 
in some settings.
Sepsis
Sepsis is discussed on page 200. It describes patients 
with evidence of infection and signs of the systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), which entails 
two of: temperature over 38°C or under 36°C; pulse rate 
more than 90 beats per minute; respiratory rate over 20 
breaths per minute or PCO2 below 4.3 kPa (32.5 mmHg); 
and white blood cell count over 12 or below 4 × 109/L 
(Box 8.2, p. 184). Septic shock describes sepsis plus hypo-
tension (systolic blood pressure below 90 mmHg systo-
lic or a fall of more than 40 mmHg from baseline that is 
not responsive to fluid challenge or due to another 
cause). It may be complicated by multi-organ failure and 
requires intensive care unit admission.
Sepsis largely results from host responses to micro-
bial lipopolysaccharide, peptidoglycans, lipoproteins or 
13.9  Causes of sepsis
Infection
Setting
Bacterial
Staph. aureus, 
coagulase-negative 
staphylococci
Bacteraemia may be associated with 
endocarditis, intravascular cannula 
infection, or skin or bone foci
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
Invasive pneumococcal disease, 
usually with pneumonia or  
meningitis
Other streptococci
Invasive streptococcal disease, 
especially necrotising fasciitis
Viridans streptococci in neutropenic 
host with severe mucositis
Staphylococcal or 
streptococcal toxic 
shock syndrome
Toxin-mediated, blood cultures 
negative; clues include erythrodermic 
rash and epidemiological setting
Enterococci
Most often with abdominal focus
Neisseria meningitidis
Sepsis in children or young adults with 
petechial rash and/or meningitis
E. coli, other 
Gram-negative 
bacteria
Urinary or biliary tract infection, or 
other abdominal infections
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, 
multidrug-resistant 
Gram-negative 
bacteraemia
Nosocomial infection
Yersinia pestis
In plague
Burkholderia 
pseudomallei
Endemic in areas of Thailand; more 
likely to involve patients with diabetes 
mellitus or immunocompromised
Capnocytophaga 
canimorsus
Associated with dog bites and asplenic 
individuals
C. difficile
Severe colitis, particularly in the 
elderly
Polymicrobial  
infection with 
Gram-negatives  
and anaerobes
Bowel perforation
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, M. 
avium complex (MAC)
HIV-positive or immunocompromised 
with miliary TB or disseminated MAC
Fungal
Candida spp.
Line infection or post-operative 
complication, nosocomial or 
immunocompromised host
Histoplasma 
capsulatum, other 
dimorphic fungi
Immunocompromised host
Parasitic
Falciparum malaria
Malaria with high-level parasitaemia 
and multi-organ failure or as a 
complication of bacterial superinfection
Babesia microti
Asplenic individual
Strongyloides 
stercoralis 
hyperinfection 
syndrome
Gram-negative infection complicating 
Strongyloides infection in 
immunocompromised host
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
305
• Necrotising fasciitis (primarily confined to subcutaneous 
fascia and fat)
• Clostridial anaerobic cellulitis (confined to skin and 
subcutaneous tissue)
• Non-clostridial anaerobic cellulitis
• Progressive bacterial synergistic gangrene (Staph. aureus + 
micro-aerophilic streptococcus) (‘Meleney’s gangrene’, 
primarily confined to skin)
• Pyomyositis (discrete abscesses within individual muscle 
groups)
• Clostridial myonecrosis (gas gangrene)
• Anaerobic streptococcal myonecrosis (non-clostridial infection 
mimicking gas gangrene)
• Group A streptococcal necrotising myositis
13.10  Severe necrotising soft tissue infections
Fig. 13.4  Excision following necrotising fasciitis in an injection 
drug-user. 
superantigens, and there are many infectious causes 
(Box 13.9). The results of blood cultures and known host 
factors guide initial investigations. Patients who are 
immunocompromised may have a broader range of 
causal pathogens which may be harder to culture, 
including mycobacteria and fungi. In any individual 
who has recently visited the tropics, malaria must also 
be considered.
Severe skin and soft  
tissue infections
Skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs) are an important 
cause of sepsis. Cases can be classified as in Box 13.10, 
according to the clinical features and microbiological 
findings. In some cases, severe systemic features may be 
out of keeping with mild local features.
Necrotising fasciitis
In necrotising fascitis, cutaneous erythema and oedema 
progress to bullae or areas of necrosis. Unlike in celluli-
tis, pain may be disproportionately intense in relation to 
the visible cutaneous features. The infection spreads 
quickly along the fascial plane. Type 1 necrotising fasci­
itis is a mixed infection with Gram-negative bacteria and 
anaerobes, often seen post-operatively in diabetic or 
immunocompromised hosts. Subcutaneous gas may be 
present. Type 2 necrotising fasciitis is caused by group 
A or other streptococci. Approximately 60% of cases are 
associated with streptococcal toxic shock syndrome 
(p. 331).
Necrotising fasciitis is a medical emergency, requir-
ing immediate surgical débridement with inspection of 
the involved muscle groups, in addition to antimicrobial 
therapy (Fig. 13.4). Empiric treatment is with broad-
spectrum agents (e.g. piperacillin–tazobactam plus clin-
damycin and ciprofloxacin; meropenem monotherapy; 
or third-generation cephalosporin plus metronidazole). 
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be considered for poly­
microbial infection. Group A streptococcal infection is 
treated with benzylpenicillin plus clindamycin, and 
often immunoglobulin.
Gas gangrene
Although Clostridium spp. may colonise or contaminate 
wounds, no action is required unless there is evidence 
of spreading infection. Infection may be limited to tissue 
that is already damaged (anaerobic cellulitis) or involve 
healthy muscle (gas gangrene).
In anaerobic cellulitis, usually that due to C. perfrin-
gens or to other strains infecting devitalised tissue fol-
lowing a wound, gas forms locally and extends along 
tissue planes but bacteraemia does not occur. Prompt 
surgical débridement of devitalised tissue and therapy 
with peni­cillin or clindamycin is usually effective.
Gas gangrene (clostridial myonecrosis) is defined as 
acute invasion of healthy living muscle undamaged by 
previous trauma, and is most commonly caused by C. 
perfringens. In at least 70% of cases, it follows deep pen-
etrating injury sufficient to create an anaerobic (ischae-
mic) environment and allow clostridial introduction 
and proliferation. Severe pain at the site of the injury 
progresses rapidly over 18–24 hours. Skin colour changes 
from pallor to bronze/purple discoloration and the skin 
is tense, swollen, oedematous and exquisitely tender. 
Gas in tissues may be obvious, with crepitus on clinical 
examination, or visible on X-ray, CT or ultrasound. Signs 
of systemic toxicity develop rapidly, with high leuco­
cytosis, multi-organ dysfunction, raised creatine kinase 
and evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation 
and haemolysis. Antibiotic therapy with high-dose 
intravenous penicillin and clindamycin is recommended, 
coupled with aggressive surgical débridement of the 
affected tissues. Alternative agents include cephalo­
sporins and metronidazole. Hyperbaric oxygen has a 
putative but controversial role.
Other SSTIs
‘Synergistic gangrene’ is a combined infection with 
anaerobes and other bacteria (Staph. aureus or Gram-
negatives). When this affects the genital/perineal area, 
it is known as ‘Fournier’s gangrene’. Severe gangrenous 
cellulitis in immunocompromised hosts may involve 
Gram-negative bacteria or fungi. Entamoeba histolytica 
can cause soft tissue necrosis following abdominal 
surgery in areas of the world where infection is common. 
Contact with shellfish in tropical areas and regions such 
as the Gulf of Mexico can lead to infection with Vibrio 
vulnificus, which causes soft tissue necrosis and bullae. 
Patients with chronic liver disease are particularly 
susceptible.
Infectious disease
13
306
and invasive disease with systemic features. This is seen 
with Salmonella typhi and S. paratyphi (enteric fever), and, 
in the immunocompromised host, with non-typhoidal 
Salmonella spp.
Clinical assessment
The history should address foods ingested (Box 13.14), 
duration and frequency of diarrhoea, presence of blood 
or steatorrhoea, abdominal pain and tenesmus, and 
whether other people have been affected. Fever and 
bloody diarrhoea suggest an invasive, colitic, dysenteric 
process. An incubation period of less than 18 hours 
suggests toxin-mediated food poisoning, and longer 
than 5 days suggests diarrhoea caused by protozoa or 
helminths. Person-to-person spread suggests certain 
infections, such as shigellosis or cholera.
Examination includes assessment of the degree of 
dehydration by skin turgor, pulse and blood pressure 
measurement. The urine output and ongoing stool losses 
should be monitored.
Acute diarrhoea and vomiting
Acute diarrhoea (p. 857), sometimes with vomiting, is 
the predominant symptom in infective gastroenteritis 
(Box 13.11). Acute diarrhoea may also be a symptom of 
other infectious and non-infectious diseases (Box 13.12). 
Stress, whether psychological or physical, can also 
produce loose stools.
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates 
that there are more than 1000 million cases of acute diar-
rhoea annually in developing countries, with 3–4 million 
deaths, half of these in infants and children. In devel-
oped countries, diarrhoea remains an important problem 
and the elderly are most vulnerable (Box 13.13). The 
majority of episodes are due to infections spread by the 
faecal–oral route and transmitted either on fomites, on 
contaminated hands, or in food or water. Measures such 
as the provision of clean drinking water, appropriate 
disposal of human and animal sewage, and the applica-
tion of simple principles of food hygiene can all limit 
gastroenteritis.
The clinical features of food-borne gastroenteritis 
vary. Some organisms (Bacillus cereus, Staph. aureus and 
Vibrio cholerae) elute exotoxins which cause vomiting 
and/or so-called ‘secretory’ diarrhoea (watery diarrhoea 
without blood or faecal leucocytes, reflecting small 
bowel dysfunction). In general, the time from ingestion 
to the onset of symptoms is short and, other than dehy-
dration, little systemic upset occurs. Other organisms, 
such as Shigella spp., Campylobacter spp. and entero-
haemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), may directly invade the 
mucosa of the small bowel or produce cytotoxins that 
cause mucosal ulceration, typically affecting the termi-
nal small bowel and colon. The incubation period is 
longer and more systemic upset occurs, with prolonged 
bloody diarrhoea. Salmonella spp. are capable of invad-
ing enterocytes, and of causing both a secretory response 
• Incidence: not increased but the impact is greater.
• Mortality: most deaths due to gastroenteritis in the 
developed world are in adults aged over 70. Most are 
presumed to be caused by dehydration leading to organ 
failure.
• C. difficile infection (CDI): more common, especially in 
hospital and nursing home settings, usually following 
antibiotic exposure.
13.13  Infectious diarrhoea in old age
13.11  Causes of infectious gastroenteritis
Toxin in food: < 6 hrs incubation
• Bacillus cereus (p. 341)
• Staph. aureus (p. 341)
• Clostridium spp. 
enterotoxin (p. 342)
Bacterial: 12–72 hrs incubation
• Enterotoxigenic E. coli 
(ETEC, p. 342)
• Shiga toxin-producing E. 
coli (EHEC, p. 343)*
• Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC, 
p. 342)*
• Vibrio cholerae (p. 344)
• Salmonella (p. 342)
• Shigella* (p. 345)
• Campylobacter* (p. 342)
• C. difficile* (p. 343)
Viral: short incubation
• Rotavirus (p. 327)
• Norovirus (p. 327)
Protozoal: long incubation
• Giardiasis (p. 368)
• Cryptosporidium (pp. 369 
and 399)
• Microsporidiosis (p. 399)
• Amoebic dysentery  
(p. 367)*
• Isosporiasis (p. 399)
*Associated with bloody diarrhoea.
13.12  Differential diagnosis of acute diarrhoea 
and vomiting
Infectious causes
• Gastroenteritis
• C. difficile infection (p. 343)
• Acute diverticulitis (p. 916)
• Sepsis (p. 304)
• Pelvic inflammatory disease 
(p. 418)
• Meningococcaemia  
(p. 1201)
• Pneumonia (especially 
‘atypical disease’, p. 682)
• Malaria (p. 353)
Non-infectious causes
Gastrointestinal
• Inflammatory bowel 
disease (p. 897)
• Bowel malignancy (p. 910)
• Overflow from constipation 
(p. 917)
• Enteral tube feeding
Metabolic
• Diabetic ketoacidosis  
(p. 811)
• Thyrotoxicosis (p. 740)
• Uraemia (p. 483)
• Neuroendocrine tumours 
releasing (e.g.) VIP or 5-HT
Drugs and toxins
• NSAIDs
• Cytotoxic agents
• Antibiotics
• Proton pump inhibitors
• Dinoflagellates (p. 308)
• Plant toxins (p. 308)
• Heavy metals (p. 308)
• Ciguatera fish poisoning  
(p. 308)
• Scombrotoxic fish 
poisoning (p. 308)
(5-HT = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin; NSAID = non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs; VIP = vasoactive intestinal peptide)
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
307
effective as intravenous replacement fluid, even in the 
management of cholera. In mild to moderate gastro­
enteritis, adults should be encouraged to drink fluids 
and, if possible, continue normal dietary food intake. If 
this is impossible, e.g. due to vomiting, intravenous fluid 
administration will be required. In very sick patients, or 
those with cardiac or renal disease, monitoring of urine 
output and central venous pressure may be necessary.
The volume of fluid replacement required should be 
estimated based on the following considerations.
• Replacement of established deficit. After 48 hours of 
moderate diarrhoea (6–10 stools per 24 hours), the 
average adult will be 2–4 L depleted from diarrhoea 
alone. Associated vomiting will compound this. 
Adults with this symptomatology should therefore 
be given rapid replacement of 1–1.5 L, either orally 
(ORS) or by intravenous infusion (normal saline), 
within the first 2–4 hours of presentation. Longer 
symptomatology or more persistent/severe 
diarrhoea rapidly produces fluid losses comparable 
to diabetic ketoacidosis and is a metabolic 
emergency requiring active intervention.
• Replacement of ongoing losses. The average adult’s 
diarrhoeal stool accounts for a loss of 200 mL of 
isotonic fluid. Stool losses should be carefully 
charted and an estimate of ongoing replacement 
fluid calculated. Commercially available 
rehydration sachets are conveniently produced to 
provide 200 mL of ORS; one sachet per diarrhoea 
stool is an appropriate estimate of supplementary 
replacement requirements.
• Replacement of normal daily requirement. The average 
adult has a daily requirement of 1–1.5 L of fluid in 
addition to the calculations above. This will be 
increased substantially in fever or a hot 
environment.
Antimicrobial agents
In non-specific gastroenteritis, antibiotics have been 
shown to shorten symptoms by only 1 day in an illness 
usually lasting 1–3 days. This benefit, when related to 
the potential for the development of antimicrobial resist-
ance or side-effects, does not justify treatment, except if 
there is systemic involvement, a host with immunocom-
promise or significant comorbidity.
Evidence suggests that, in EHEC infections, the use 
of antibiotics may make the complication of haemolytic 
uraemic syndrome (HUS; p. 495) more likely due to 
Investigations
These include stool inspection for blood and microscopy 
for leucocytes, and also an examination for ova, cysts 
and parasites if the history indicates former tropical resi-
dence or travel. Stool culture should be performed and 
C. difficile toxin sought. FBC and serum electrolytes indi-
cate the degree of inflammation and dehydration. In a 
malarious area, a blood film for malaria parasites should 
be obtained. Blood and urine cultures and a chest X-ray 
may identify alternative sites of infection, particularly if 
the clinical features suggest a syndrome other than 
gastroenteritis.
Management
All patients with acute, potentially infective diarrhoea 
should be appropriately isolated to minimise person- 
to-person spread of infection. If the history suggests a 
food-borne source, public health measures must be 
implemented to identify the source and to establish 
whether other linked cases exist (p. 147).
Fluid replacement
Replacement of fluid losses in diarrhoeal illness is crucial 
and may be life-saving.
Although normal daily fluid intake in an adult is only 
1–2 L, there is considerable additional fluid movement 
in and out of the gut in secretions (Fig. 22.7, p. 843). 
Altered gut resorption with diarrhoea can result in sub-
stantial fluid loss, e.g. 10–20 L of fluid may be lost in 
24 hours in cholera. The fluid lost in diarrhoea is iso­
tonic, so both water and electrolytes need to be replaced. 
Absorption of electrolytes from the gut is an active 
process requiring energy. Infected mucosa is capable of 
very rapid fluid and electrolyte transport if carbohy-
drate is available as an energy source. Oral rehydration 
solutions (ORS) therefore contain sugars, as well as 
water and electrolytes (Box 13.15). ORS can be just as 
13.14  Foods associated with infectious illness, 
including gastroenteritis
Raw seafood
• Norovirus
• Vibrio spp.
• Hepatitis A
Raw eggs
• Salmonella spp.
Undercooked meat or poultry
• Salmonella spp.
• Campylobacter spp.
• EHEC
• C. perfringens
Unpasteurised milk or juice
• Salmonella spp.
• Campylobacter spp.
• EHEC
• Y. enterocolitica
Unpasteurised soft cheeses
• Salmonella spp.
• Campylobacter spp.
• ETEC
• Y. enterocolitica
• L. monocytogenes
Home-made canned goods
• C. botulinum
Raw hot dogs, pâté
• L. monocytogenes
13.15  Composition of oral rehydration solution 
and other replacement fluids*
*mmol/L for electrolyte and kcal/L for energy components.
Fluid
Na
K
Cl
Energy
WHO
90
20
80
54
Dioralyte
60
20
60
71
Pepsi®
6.5
0.8
–
400
7UP®
7.5
0.2
–
320
Apple juice
0.4
26
–
480
Orange juice
0.2
49
–
400
Breast milk
22
36
28
670
Infectious disease
13
308
there are 50 000 cases per year, with a case fatality of 
0.1%. The gastrointestinal symptoms resolve rapidly but 
the neuropathic features may persist for months.
Scombrotoxic fish poisoning
Under poor storage conditions, histidine in scombroid 
fish – tuna, mackerel, bonito, skipjack and the canned 
dark meat of sardines – may be converted by bacteria to 
histamine and other chemicals. Consumption produces 
symptoms within minutes, with flushing, burning, 
sweating, urticaria, pruritus, headache, colic, nausea and 
vomiting, diarrhoea, bronchospasm and hypotension. 
Management is with salbutamol and antihistamines. 
Occasionally, intravenous fluid replacement is required.
Heavy metals
Thallium and cadmium can cause acute vomiting 
and diarrhoea resembling staphylococcal enterotoxin 
poisoning.
Antimicrobial-associated diarrhoea
Antimicrobial-associated diarrhoea (AAD) is a common 
complication of antimicrobial therapy, especially with 
broad-spectrum agents. It is most common in the elderly 
but can occur at all ages. Although the specific mecha-
nism is unknown in most AAD, C. difficile is implicated 
in 20–25% of cases and is the most common cause 
amongst patients with evidence of colitis. Infection is 
diagnosed by detection of C. difficile toxins and is usually 
treated with metronidazole or vancomycin (p. 343). C. 
perfringens is a rarer cause which usually remains undi-
agnosed, and Klebsiella oxytoca is an occasional cause of 
antibiotic-associated haemorrhagic colitis.
Infections acquired in the tropics
Recent decades have seen unprecedented increases in 
long-distance business and holiday travel, as well as 
extensive migration. Although certain diseases retain 
their relatively fixed geographical distribution, being 
dependent on specific vectors or weather conditions, 
many travel with their human hosts and some may then 
be transmitted to other people. This means that the 
pattern of infectious diseases seen in each country 
changes constantly, and travel history and information 
on countries previously lived in, particularly during 
childhood, are crucial.
In general, the diversity of infectious diseases is 
greater in tropical than in temperate countries, and 
people in temperate countries have immunity to a nar-
rower range of infections, reflecting less exposure in 
childhood and less ongoing boosting of immunity later 
in life, so that the most common travel-associated infec-
tions are those which are acquired by residents of tem-
perate countries during visits to the tropics. In addition, 
those who have lived in tropical areas may lose immu-
nity when they move to temperate countries and become 
susceptible when visiting their homeland.
Most travel-associated infections can be prevented. 
Pre-travel advice is tailored to the destination and the 
traveller (Box 13.16). It includes avoidance of insect bites 
(using at least 20% diethyltoluamide (DEET)), sun pro-
tection (sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 
at least 15), food and water hygiene (‘Boil it, cook it, peel 
increased toxin release. Antibiotics should therefore not 
be used in this condition.
Conversely, antibiotics are indicated in Sh. dysenteriae 
infection and in invasive salmonellosis – in particular, 
typhoid fever. Antibiotics may also be advantageous in 
cholera epidemics, reducing infectivity and controlling 
the spread of infection.
Antidiarrhoeal, antimotility and antisecretory agents
These agents are not usually recommended in acute 
infective diarrhoea. Loperamide, diphenoxylate and 
opiates are potentially dangerous in dysentery in child-
hood, causing intussusception. Antisecretory agents, 
such as bismuth and chlorpromazine, may be effective 
but can cause significant sedation. They do not reduce 
stool fluid losses, although the stools may appear more 
bulky. Adsorbents, such as kaolin or charcoal, have little 
effect.
Non-infectious causes of  
food poisoning
Whilst acute food poisoning and gastroenteritis are most 
frequently caused by bacteria or their toxins, a number 
of non-infectious causes must be considered in the dif-
ferential diagnosis.
Plant toxins
Legumes and beans produce oxidants which are 
toxic to people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogen­
ase (G6PD) deficiency (p. 1029). Consumption produces 
headache, nausea and fever, progressing to potentially 
severe haemolysis, haemoglobinuria and jaundice 
(favism). Red kidney beans, if incompletely cooked, 
cause acute abdominal pain and diarrhoea from their 
lectin content. Adequate cooking abolishes this.
Alkaloids develop in potato tubers exposed to light, 
causing green discoloration. Ingestion induces acute 
vomiting and anticholinesterase-like activity.
Fungi and mushrooms of the Psilocybe spp. produce 
hallucinogens. Many fungal species induce a combina-
tion of gastroenteritis and cholinergic symptoms of 
blurred vision, salivation, sweating and diarrhoea. 
Amanita phalloides (‘death cap’) causes acute abdominal 
cramps and diarrhoea, followed by inexorable hepato­
renal failure, often fatal.
Chemical toxins
Paralytic shellfish toxin
Saxitoxin from dinoflagellates, responsible for ‘red 
tides’, is concentrated in bivalve molluscs, e.g. mussels, 
clams, oysters, cockles and scallops. Consumption pro-
duces gastrointestinal symptoms within 30 minutes, fol-
lowed by perioral paraesthesia and even respiratory 
paralysis. The UK water authorities ban the harvesting 
of molluscs at times of the year associated with excessive 
dinoflagellate numbers.
Ciguatera fish poisoning
Warm-water coral reef fish acquire ciguatoxin from 
dinoflagellates in their food chain. Consumption pro-
duces gastrointestinal symptoms 1–6 hours later, with 
associated paraesthesiae of the lips and extremities, dis-
torted temperature sensation, myalgia and progressive 
flaccid paralysis. Autonomic dysfunction with hypoten-
sion may occur. In the South Pacific and Caribbean, 
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
309
malaria, typhoid fever, viral hepatitis and dengue fever. 
Travellers to West Africa may have viral haemorrhagic 
fevers (VHF), such as Lassa fever, Crimean–Congo haem-
orrhagic fever, Marburg and Ebola (see Box 13.39, p. 325). 
Those to South-east Asia may have avian influenza 
(H5N1), which requires special isolation precautions.
Clinical assessment
The approach to unexplained fever is described above 
and key questions are listed in Box 13.17. Medicines 
purchased in some countries may have reduced efficacy, 
e.g. for malaria prophylaxis. Consult reliable up-to-date 
sources about resistance to anti­malarial drugs in the 
country visited. Vaccinations against yellow fever and 
hepatitis A and B are sufficiently effective to virtually 
exclude these infections. Oral and injectable typhoid 
vaccinations are 70–90% effective.
The differential diagnosis is guided by the clinical 
scenario, presence of specific exposures (Box 13.18) and 
the incubation period (Box 13.19). Falciparum malaria 
*Further information is available at www fitfortravel.nhs.uk/
• Destination
• Personal details, including previous travel experience
• Dates of trip
• Itinerary and purpose of trip
• Personal medical history, including pregnancy, medication 
and allergies (e.g. to eggs, vaccines, antibiotics)
• Past vaccinations
Childhood schedule followed? Diphtheria, tetanus, 
pertussis, polio, N. meningitidis type C, Haemophilus 
influenzae B (HiB)
Travel-related? Typhoid, yellow fever, hepatitis A,  
hepatitis B, meningococcal ACW135Y, rabies, Japanese B 
encephalitis, tick-borne encephalitis
• Malaria prophylaxis: questions influencing the choice of 
antimalarial drugs are destination, past experience with 
antimalarials, history of epilepsy or psychiatric illness
13.16  How to assess health needs in travellers 
before departure*
Questions
Factors to ascertain
Countries visited and 
dates of travel
Relate travel to known outbreaks 
of infection or antimicrobial 
resistance
Determine the 
environment visited
Travel to rural environments, 
forests, rivers or lakes
Clarify where the person 
slept
Sleeping in huts, use of bed nets, 
sleeping on the ground
Establish what he/she 
was doing
Exposure to people with medical 
illness, animals, soil, lakes, rivers
History of insect bites
Type of insect responsible, 
circumstances (location, time of 
day etc.), preventive measures
Dietary history
Ingestion of uncooked foods, 
salads and vegetables, meats 
(especially if undercooked), 
shellfish, molluscs, unpasteurised 
dairy products, unbottled water 
and sites at which food prepared
Sexual history
History of sexual intercourse with 
commercial sex workers, local 
population
Malaria prophylaxis
Type of prophylaxis
Vaccination history
Receipt of pre-travel vaccines and 
appropriateness to area visited
History of any treatments 
received while abroad
Receipt of medicines, local 
remedies, blood transfusions or 
surgical procedures
13.17  How to obtain a history from travellers to 
the tropics with fever
it or forget it!’), how to respond to travellers’ diarrhoea 
(seek medical advice if bloody or lasts more than 
48 hours) and, if relevant, safe sex (condom use).
Fever in travellers recently in  
the tropics
Presentation with unexplained fever is common in travel-
lers who are visiting or have recently travelled to tropical 
areas. Frequent final diagnoses in such patients are 
13.18  Specific exposures and causes of fever in 
the tropics
Exposure
Infection or disease
Mosquito bite
Malaria, dengue fever, Chikungunya, 
filariasis, tularaemia
Tsetse fly bite
African trypanosomiasis
Tick bite
Rickettsial infections, including typhus, 
Lyme disease, tularaemia, Crimean–
Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur 
forest disease, babesiosis, tick-borne 
encephalitis
Louse bite
Typhus
Flea bite
Plague
Sandfly bite
Leishmaniasis, arbovirus infection
Reduviid bug
Chagas’ disease
Animal contact
Q fever, brucellosis, anthrax, plague, 
tularaemia, viral haemorrhagic fevers, 
rabies
Fresh-water 
swimming
Schistosomiasis, leptospirosis, 
Naegleria fowleri
Exposure to soil
Inhalation: dimorphic fungi
Inhalation or inoculation: Burkholderia 
pseudomallei
Inoculation (most often when barefoot): 
hookworms, Strongyloides stercoralis
Raw or undercooked 
fruit and vegetables
Enteric bacterial infections, hepatitis A 
or E virus, Fasciola hepatica, Toxocara 
spp., Echinococcus granulosus (hydatid 
disease), Entamoeba histolytica
Undercooked pork
Taenia solium (cysticercosis)
Crustaceans or 
molluscs
Paragonimiasis, gnathostomiasis, 
Angiostrongylus cantonensis infection, 
hepatitis A virus, cholera
Unpasteurised dairy 
products
Brucellosis, salmonellosis, abdominal 
tuberculosis, listeriosis
Untreated water
Enteric bacterial infections, giardiasis, 
Cryptosporidium spp. (chronic in 
immunocompromised), hepatitis A or  
E virus
Infectious disease
13
310
tends to present between 7 and 28 days after exposure 
in an endemic area. VHF, dengue and rickettsial infec-
tion can usually be excluded if more than 21 days have 
passed between leaving the area and onset of illness.
Clinical examination is summarised on page 294. Par-
ticular attention should be paid to the skin, throat, eyes, 
nail beds, lymph nodes, abdomen and heart. Patients 
may be unaware of tick bites or eschars (p. 350). Body 
temperature should be measured at least twice daily.
Investigations and management
Initial investigations should start with thick and thin 
blood films for malaria parasites, FBC, urinalysis and 
chest X-ray if indicated. Box 13.20 lists diagnoses and 
investigations to consider in unexplained acute fever.
Management is directed at the underlying cause. In 
patients with suspected VHF (p. 324), strict infection 
control measures with isolation and barrier nursing are 
implemented to prevent contact with the patient’s body 
fluids. The risk of VHF should be determined using 
epidemiological risk factors and clinical signs (Fig. 13.5), 
and further management undertaken as described on 
page 324.
Diarrhoea acquired in the tropics
Gastrointestinal illness is the most common infection 
amongst visitors to the tropics, with Salmonella spp., 
Campylobacter spp. and Cryptosporidium spp. infections 
prevalent worldwide (Box 13.21). Typhoid, paratyphoid, 
Shigella spp. and Entamoeba histolytica (amoebiasis) are 
usually encountered in visitors to the Indian subconti-
nent or sub-Saharan and southern Africa.
The approach to patients with acute diarrhoea is 
described on page 306. The benefits of treating 
travellers’ diarrhoea with antimicrobials are marginal 
(Box 13.22). The differential diagnosis of diarrhoea per-
sisting for more than 14 days is wide (Box 22.21, p. 857). 
Parasitic and bacterial causes, tropical malabsorption, 
inflammatory bowel disease and neoplasia should all be 
considered. Box 13.23 lists causes encountered particu-
larly in visitors to the tropics. The work-up should 
include tests for parasitic causes of chronic diarrhoea, 
*Adapted from Traveller’s Health Yellow Book, CDC Health Information for 
International Travel 2008.
13.19  Incubation times and illnesses in 
travellers*
< 2 wks
Non-specific fever
• Malaria
• Chikungunya
• Dengue
• Scrub typhus
• Spotted group rickettsiae
• Acute HIV
• Acute hepatitis C virus
• Campylobacter
• Salmonellosis
• Shigellosis
• East African 
trypanosomiasis
• Leptospirosis
• Relapsing fever
• Influenza
• Yellow fever
Fever and coagulopathy (usually thrombocytopenia)
• Malaria
• VHF
• Meningococcaemia
• Enteroviruses
• Leptospirosis and other 
bacterial pathogens 
associated with 
coagulopathy
Fever and CNS involvement
• Malaria
• Typhoid fever
• Rickettsial typhus (epidemic 
caused by Rickettsia 
prowazekii)
• Meningococcal meningitis
• Arboviral encephalitis
• East African 
trypanosomiasis
• Other causes of encephalitis 
or meningitis
• Angiostrongyliasis
• Rabies
Fever and pulmonary involvement
• Influenza
• Pneumonia, including 
Legionella pneumonia
• Acute histoplasmosis
• Acute coccidioidomycosis
• Q fever
• SARS
Fever and rash
• Viral exanthems (rubella, 
measles, varicella, mumps, 
HHV-6, enteroviruses
• Chikungunya
• Dengue
• Spotted or typhus group 
rickettsiosis
• Typhoid fever
• Parvovirus B19
• HIV-1
2–6 wks
• Malaria
• Tuberculosis
• Hepatitis A, B, C and E 
viruses
• Visceral leishmaniasis
• Acute schistosomiasis
• Amoebic liver abscess
• Leptospirosis
• African trypanosomiasis
• VHF
• Q fever
• Acute American 
trypanosomiasis
• Viral causes of 
mononucleosis syndromes
> 6 wks
• Non-falciparum malaria
• Tuberculosis
• Hepatitis B and E viruses
• HIV-1
• Visceral leishmaniasis
• Filariasis
• Onchocerciasis
• Schistosomiasis
• Amoebic liver abscess
• Chronic mycoses
• African trypanosomiasis
• Rabies
• Typhoid fever
(HHV-6 = human herpes virus-6; SARS = severe acute respiratory syndrome; 
VHF = viral haemorrhagic fever)
13.20  Investigation of tropically acquired 
acute fever without localising signs
Features on FBC
Further investigations
Neutrophil leucocytosis
Bacterial sepsis
Blood culture
Leptospirosis
Culture of blood and urine, 
serology
Borreliosis (tick- or louse-
borne relapsing fever)
Blood film
Amoebic liver abscess
Ultrasound
Normal white cell count and differential
Typhoid fever
Blood and stool culture
Typhus
Serology
Arboviral infection
Serology (PCR and viral 
culture)
Lymphocytosis
Viral fevers
Serology
Infectious mononucleosis
Monospot test
Rickettsial fevers
Serology
(PCR = polymerase chain reaction)
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
311
Fig. 13.5  Approach to the patient with suspected viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF). See page 324. *Epidemiological risk factors: staying with a 
febrile individual, caring for a sick individual, or contact with body fluids from a suspected human or animal case of VHF. (PCR = polymerase chain 
reaction) 
No
Yes
Signs of organ failure
or
epidemiological
risk factors*
Isolation with full
barrier protection
Discuss with regional
level 4 biosafety
specialist unit
PCR
positive
Proceed to standard
investigation, isolation
and treatment of
traveller with fever
or malaria
Malaria
positive
Malaria
negative
PCR negative
No
Yes
Patient has travelled
within 7–21 days to an
area endemic for VHF
and has a fever
Isolation with full
barrier protection
Take blood film for
malaria test
Send PCR to
regional laboratory
for VHF
‘Antimicrobials reduce the duration of acute non-bloody 
diarrhoea.’
• de Bruyn G, et al. Antibiotic treatment for travellers’ diarrhoea. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2000, issue 3. Art. no. CD002242.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
13.22  Antimicrobials in travellers’ diarrhoea
e.g. CMV or disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex 
infections.
Eosinophilia acquired  
in the tropics
Eosinophilia occurs in a variety of haematological, aller-
gic and inflammatory conditions discussed on p. 1004. 
It may also arise in HIV-1 and human T-cell lympho-
tropic virus (HTLV)-1 infection. However, eosinophils 
are important in the immune response to parasitic infec-
tions, in particular those involving parasites with a 
tissue migration phase. In the context of travel to or resi-
dence in the tropics, a patient with an eosinophil count 
of more than 0.4 × 109/L should be investigated for both 
non-parasitic (Box 24.9, p. 1004) and parasitic causes 
(Box 13.24).
The response to parasite infections is often different 
when travellers to and residents of endemic areas are 
compared. Travellers often have recent and light infec-
tions associated with eosinophilia. Residents have often 
been infected for a long time, have evidence of chronic 
pathology and no longer have eosinophilia.
Clinical assessment
A history of travel to known endemic areas for schisto-
somiasis, onchocerciasis and the filariases will indicate 
possible causes. Assessment should establish how long 
patients have spent in endemic areas and the history 
should address all the elements in Box 13.17.
Physical signs or symptoms that suggest a parasitic 
cause for eosinophilia include transient rashes (schisto-
somiasis or strongyloidiasis), fever (Katayama syn-
drome – p. 377), pruritus (onchocerciasis) or migrating 
subcutaneous swellings (loiasis, gnathostomiasis) (see 
Box 13.24). Paragonimiasis can give rise to haemoptysis 
and the migratory phase of intestinal nematodes or 
lymphatic filariasis may cause cough, wheezing and 
transient pulmonary infiltrates. Schistosomiasis induces 
transient respiratory symptoms with infiltrates in the 
acute stages and, when eggs reach the pulmonary vas-
culature in chronic infection, can result in shortness of 
breath with features of right heart failure due to pulmo-
nary hypertension. Fever and hepatosplenomegaly are 
seen in schistosomiasis, Fasciola hepatica infection and 
13.23  Causes of chronic diarrhoea acquired in 
the tropics
• Giardia lamblia
• Strongyloidiasis
• Enteropathic E. coli
• HIV enteropathy
• Intestinal flukes
• Tropical sprue
• Chronic intestinal 
schistosomiasis
• Chronic calcific 
pancreatitis
• Hypolactasia (primary and 
secondary)
e.g. examination of stool and duodenal aspirates for ova 
and parasites, and serological investigation.
Tropical sprue is a malabsorption syndrome (p. 882) 
with no defined aetiology. It was typically associated 
with a long period of residence in the tropics or with 
overland travel but is now rarely seen. Giardia lamblia 
infection may progress to a malabsorption syndrome 
that mimics tropical sprue. If no cause is found, empiri-
cal treatment for Giardia lamblia infection with metroni-
dazole is often helpful.
HIV-1 has now emerged as a major cause of chronic 
diarrhoea. This may be due to HIV enteropathy or infec-
tion with agents such as Cryptosporidium spp., Isospora 
belli or microsporidia (p. 399). However, many other 
causes of chronic AIDS-associated diarrhoea seen in the 
developed world are less common in tropical settings, 
• Enterotoxigenic E. coli 
(ETEC)
• Shigella spp.
• Campylobacter jejuni
• Salmonella spp.
• Plesiomonas shigelloides
• Non-cholera Vibrio spp.
• Aeromonas spp.
13.21  Most common causes of travellers’ 
diarrhoea
Infectious disease
13
312
Skin conditions acquired  
in the tropics
Community-based studies in the tropics consistently 
show that skin infections (bacterial and fungal), scabies 
and eczema are the most common skin problems (Box 
13.26). Scabies and eczema are discussed on pages 1280 
and 1283. Cutaneous leishmaniasis and onchocerciasis 
have defined geographical distributions (pp. 365 and 
374). In travellers, secondarily infected insect bites, pyo-
derma, cutaneous larva migrans and non-specific der-
matitis are common.
toxocariasis (visceral larva migrans). Intestinal worms, 
such as Ascaris lumbricoides and Strongyloides stercoralis, 
can cause abdominal symptoms, including intestinal 
obstruction and diarrhoea. In the case of heavy infesta-
tion with Ascaris, this may be due to fat malabsorption 
and there may be associated nutritional deficits. Schisto-
soma haematobium can cause haematuria or haematosper-
mia. Toxocara spp. can give rise to choroidal lesions with 
visual field defects. Angiostrongylus cantonensis and gna-
thostomiasis induce eosinophilic meningitis, and the 
hyperinfection syndrome caused by Strongyloides ster­
coralis in immunocompromised hosts induces meningi-
tis due to Gram-negative bacteria. Myositis is a feature 
of trichinellosis and cysticercosis, while periorbital 
oedema is found in trichinellosis.
Investigations
The diagnosis of a parasitic infestation requires direct 
visualisation of adult worms, larvae or ova. Serum anti-
body detection may not distinguish between active and 
past infection and is often unhelpful in those born in 
endemic areas. Radiological investigations may provide 
circumstantial evidence of parasite infestation. Box 13.25 
describes initial investigations for eosinophilia.
Management
A specific diagnosis guides therapy. In the absence of a 
specific diagnosis, many clinicians will give an empirical 
course of praziquantel if the individual has been poten-
tially exposed to schistosomiasis, or with albendazole/
ivermectin if strongyloidiasis or intestinal nematodes 
are likely causes.
13.24  Parasite infections that cause eosinophilia
Infestation
Pathogen
Clinical syndrome with eosinophilia
Strongyloidiasis
Strongyloides stercoralis
Larva currens
Soil-transmitted helminthiases
Hookworm
Necator americanus
Anaemia
Ancylostoma duodenale
Anaemia
Ascariasis
Ascaris lumbricoides
Löffler’s syndrome
Toxocariasis
Toxocara canis
Visceral larva migrans
Schistosomiasis
Schistosoma haematobium
Katayama fever
S. mansoni, S. japonicum
Chronic infection
Filariases
Loiasis
Loa loa
Skin nodules
Wuchereria bancrofti
W. bancrofti
Lymphangitis, lymphadenopathy, orchitis, intermittent bouts of cellulitis, 
lymphoedema and elephantiasis
Brugia malayi
B. malayi
Brugian elephantiasis similar but typically less severe than that caused by 
W. bancrofti
Mansonella perstans
M. perstans
Asymptomatic infection, occasionally subconjunctival nodules
Onchocerciasis
Onchocerca volvulus
Visual disturbance, dermatitis
Other nematode infections
Trichinella spiralis
Myositis
Cestode infections
Taenia saginata, T. solium
Usually asymptomatic; eosinophilia associated with migratory phase
Echinococcus granulosus
Lesions in liver or other organ; eosinophilia associated with leakage from 
cyst
Liver flukes
Fasciola hepatica
Hepatic symptoms; eosinophilia associated with migratory phase
Clonorchis sinensis
As for fascioliasis
Opisthorchis felineus
As for fascioliasis
Lung fluke
Paragonimus westermani
Lung lesions
13.25  Initial investigation of eosinophilia
Investigation
Pathogens sought
Stool microscopy
Ova, cysts and parasites
Terminal urine
Ova of Schistosoma haematobium
Duodenal aspirate
Filariform larvae of Strongyloides, 
liver fluke ova
Day bloods
Microfilariae Brugia malayi, Loa loa
Night bloods
Microfilariae Wuchereria bancrofti
Skin snips
Onchocerca volvulus
Slit lamp examination
Onchocerca volvulus
Serology
Schistosomiasis, filariasis, 
strongyloidiasis, hydatid, trichinosis 
etc.
Presenting problems in infectious diseases
13
313
During the investigation of skin lesions, enquiry 
should be made about habitation, activities undertaken 
and regions visited (see Box 13.17). Examples of skin 
lesions in tropical disease are shown in Figure 13.6.
Skin biopsies are helpful in diagnosing aetiology. 
Culture of biopsy material may be needed to 
diagnose bacterial, fungal, parasitic and mycobacterial 
infections.
Infections in adolescence
Particular issues of relevance in adolescent patients are 
shown in Box 13.27.
Infections in pregnancy
Box 13.28 shows some of the infections encountered in 
pregnancy.
Papules
• Scabies
• Insect bites
• Prickly heat
• Ringworm
• Onchocerciasis
Nodules or plaques
• Leprosy
• Chromoblastomycosis
• Dimorphic fungi
• Trypanosomiasis
• Onchocerciasis
• Myiasis (larvae of Tumbu or 
botfly)
• Tungiasis (Tunga 
penetrans)
Migratory linear rash
• Cutaneous larva migrans 
(dog hookworms)
• Strongyloides stercoralis
Migratory papules/nodules
• Loa loa
• Gnathosomiasis
• Schistosomiasis
Thickened skin
• Mycetoma (fungi/Nocardia 
spp.)
• Elephantiasis (filariasis)
Maculopapular rash
• Dengue
• HIV-1
• Typhoid
• Spirillum minus
• Rickettsial infections
• Measles
Petechial or purpuric rash
• Viral haemorrhagic fevers
• Yellow fever
• Meningococcal sepsis
• Leptospirosis
• Rickettsial spotted fevers
• Malaria
Vesicular rash
• Monkeypox
• Insect bites
• Rickettsial pox
Urticarial rash
• Katayama fever 
(schistosomiasis)
• Toxocara spp.
• Strongyloides stercoralis
• Fascioliasis
Ulcers
• Leishmaniasis
• Mycobacterium ulcerans 
(Buruli ulcer)
• Dracunculosis
• Anthrax
• Rickettsial eschar
• Tropical ulcer 
(Fusobacterium ulcerans 
and Treponema vincentii)
• Ecthyma (staphylococci, 
streptococci)
13.26  Rash in tropical travellers/residents
• Common infectious syndromes: include infectious 
mononucleosis, bacterial pharyngitis, whooping  
cough, pneumonia, staphylococcal skin and soft  
tissue infections, urinary tract infections, acute 
gastroenteritis.
• Life-threatening infections: include meningococcal 
meningitis and bacterial sepsis.
• Sexually transmitted infections: include HIV-1, hepatitis B virus 
and chlamydia. These may reflect either voluntary sexual activity 
or sexual coercion/abuse.
• Travel-related infections: diarrhoea, malaria etc. are 
relatively common.
• Infections in susceptible groups: patients with cystic 
fibrosis, congenital immunodeficiency, acute leukaemia and 
other adolescent malignancies are vulnerable to specific 
groups of infections.
• Infections requiring prolonged antimicrobial use: 
adherence to chronic therapy is challenging, for both oral 
(antituberculous or antiretroviral) and systemic (osteomyelitis, 
septic arthritis or post-operative infections) treatments. 
Outpatient antimicrobial therapy is preferred to minimise 
hospitalisation.
• Vaccination: engagement with age-specific vaccine 
programmes should be ensured, e.g. for human 
papillomavirus.
• Risk reduction: education relating to sexual health and 
alcohol and recreational drug usage is important.
13.27  Key issues in infectious diseases in 
adolescence
Fig. 13.6  Examples of skin lesions in patients with fever in the 
tropics.  A  Subcutaneous nodule due to botfly infection. B  Emerging 
larva after treatment with petroleum jelly. C  Eschar of scrub typhus.
 D  Rat bite fever. 
A
B
C
D
Infectious disease
13
314
13.28  Infections during pregnancy
Infection
Consequence
Prevention and management
Rubella
Congenital malformation
Vaccination of non-immune mothers
Cytomegalovirus
Neonatal infection, congenital malformation
Limited prevention strategies
Varicella zoster virus
Neonatal infection, congenital malformation, 
severe infection in mother
VZ immune globulin (see Box 13.34, p. 318), or 
aciclovir if exposure > 4 days previously
Herpes simplex virus
Congenital or neonatal infection
Aciclovir and consideration of caesarean section for 
mothers who shed HSV from genital tract at time of 
delivery. Aciclovir for infected neonates
Hepatitis B virus
Chronic infection of neonate
Hepatitis B immune globulin and active vaccination of 
newborn
HIV-1
Chronic infection of neonate
Antiretrovirals for mother and infant and consideration 
of caesarean section if HIV-1 viral load detectable. 
Avoidance of breastfeeding
Parvovirus B19
Congenital infection
Avoid individuals with acute infection if pregnant
Measles
More severe infection in mother and neonate
Immunisation of mother
Dengue
Neonatal dengue if mother has infection  
< 5 wks prior to delivery
Vector (mosquito) control
Syphilis
Congenital malformation
Serological testing in pregnancy with prompt 
treatment of infected mothers
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and 
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neonatal conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum, 
p. 422)
Treatment of infection in mother and neonate
Listeriosis
Neonatal meningitis or bacteraemia, 
bacteraemia or PUO in mother
Avoidance of unpasteurised cheeses and other dietary 
sources
Brucellosis
Possibly increased incidence of fetal loss
Avoidance of unpasteurised dairy products
Group B streptococcal 
infection
Neonatal meningitis and sepsis. Sepsis in 
mother after delivery
Risk- or screening-based antimicrobial prophylaxis in 
labour (recommendations vary between countries)
Toxoplasmosis
Congenital malformation
Diagnosis and prompt treatment of cases, avoidance 
of undercooked meat while pregnant
Malaria
Fetal loss, intrauterine growth retardation, 
severe malaria in mother
Avoidance of insect bites. Intermittent preventative 
treatment during pregnancy to decrease incidence in 
high-risk countries
VIRAL INFECTIONS
Systemic viral infections with exanthem
Childhood exanthems are characterised by fever and 
widespread rash. Maternal antibody gives protection 
for the first 6–12 months of life and infection occurs 
thereafter. Comprehensive immunisation programmes 
have dramatically reduced the number of paediatric 
infections but incomplete uptake results in infections 
in later life.
Measles
The WHO has set the objective of eradicating measles 
globally using the live attenuated vaccine. However, 
vaccination of more than 95% of the population is 
required to prevent outbreaks. Natural illness produces 
life-long immunity.
Clinical features
Infection is by respiratory droplets with an incubation 
period of 6–19 days. A prodromal illness, 1–3 days 
before the rash, occurs, with upper respiratory 
symptoms, conjunctivitis and the presence of the 
pathognomonic Koplik’s spots, small white spots sur-
rounded by erythema on the buccal mucosa (Fig. 13.7A). 
As natural antibody develops, the maculopapular rash 
appears, spreading from the face to the extremities (Fig. 
13.7B). Generalised lymphadenopathy and diarrhoea 
are common. Complications are more common in older 
children and adults, and include otitis media, bacterial 
pneumonia, transient hepatitis and clinical encephalitis 
(approximately 0.1% of cases). A rare late complication 
is subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE), which 
occurs up to 7 years after infection. Diagnosis is clinical 
(although this has become unreliable in areas where 
measles is no longer common) and by detection of anti-
body (serum IgM, seroconversion or salivary IgM).
Measles is a serious disease in the malnourished, 
vitamin-deficient or immunocompromised, in whom the 
typical rash may be missing and persistent infection 
with a giant cell pneumonitis or encephalitis may 
occur. In tuberculosis infection, measles suppresses cell-
mediated immunity and may exacerbate disease; for this 
reason, measles vaccination should be deferred until 
after commencing antituberculous treatment. Measles 
does not cause congenital malformation but may be 
more severe in pregnant women.
Viral infections
13
315
Fig. 13.7  Measles. A  Koplik’s spots (arrows) seen on buccal mucosa in the early stages of clinical measles. B  Typical measles rash. 
A
B
Mortality clusters at the extremes of age, averaging 
1 : 1000 in developed countries and up to 1 : 4 in develop-
ing countries. Death usually results from a bacterial 
superinfection, occurring as a complication of measles, 
most often pneumonia, diarrhoeal disease or noma/
cancrum oris, a gangrenous stomatitis. Death may also 
result from complications of measles encephalitis.
Management and prevention
Normal immunoglobulin attenuates the disease in the 
immunocompromised (regardless of vaccination status) 
and in non-immune pregnant women, but must be given 
within 6 days of exposure. Vaccination can be used in 
outbreaks and vitamin A may improve the outcome in 
uncomplicated disease. Antibiotic therapy is reserved for 
bacterial complications. All children aged 12–15 months 
should receive measles vaccination (as combined 
measles, mumps and rubella (MMR), a live attenuated 
vaccine), and a further MMR dose at age 4 years.
Rubella (German measles)
Rubella causes exanthem in the non-immunised.
Clinical features
Rubella is spread by respiratory droplet, with infectivity 
from up to 10 days before to 2 weeks after the onset of 
the rash. The incubation period is 15–20 days. In child-
hood, most cases are subclinical, although clinical fea-
tures may include fever, maculopapular rash spreading 
from the face, and lymphadenopathy. Complications 
are rare but include thrombocytopenia and hepatitis. 
Encephalitis and haemorrhage are occasionally reported. 
In adults, arthritis involving hands or knees is relatively 
common, especially in women.
If transplacental infection takes place in the first tri-
mester or later, persistence of the virus is likely and 
severe congenital disease may result (Box 13.29). Even if 
normal at birth, the infant has an increased incidence of 
other diseases developing later, e.g. diabetes mellitus.
Diagnosis
Laboratory confirmation of rubella is required if there 
has been contact with a pregnant woman. This is 
achieved either by detection of rubella IgM in serum or 
by IgG seroconversion. In the exposed pregnant woman, 
absence of rubella-specific IgG confirms the potential for 
congenital infection.
Prevention
All children should be immunised with MMR, as above 
for measles. In view of the risks of congenital rubella 
syndrome, all women of child-bearing age should also 
be tested for rubella and vaccinated if seronegative.
Parvovirus B19
Parvovirus B19 causes exanthem and other clinical syn-
dromes. Some 50% of children and 60–90% of adults are 
seropositive. Most infections are spread by the respira-
tory route, although spread via contaminated blood is 
also possible. The virus has particular tropism for red 
cell precursors.
Clinical features
Many infections are subclinical. Clinical manifestations 
result after an incubation period of 14–21 days (Box 
13.30). The classic exanthem (erythema infectiosum) is 
preceded by a prodromal fever and coryzal symptoms. 
A ‘slapped cheek’ rash is characteristic but the rash is 
very variable (Fig. 13.8). In adults, polyarthropathy is 
common. Infected individuals have a transient block in 
erythropoiesis for a few days, which is of no clinical 
consequence, except in individuals with increased 
red cell turnover due to haemoglobinopathy or haemo-
lytic anaemia. These individuals develop an acute 
anaemia which may be severe (transient aplastic crisis; 
p. 1032). Erythropoiesis usually recovers spontaneously 
after 10–14 days. Immunocompromised individuals, 
13.29  Rubella infection: risk of 
congenital malformation
Stage of gestation
Likelihood of malformations
1–2 mths
65–85% chance of illness, multiple 
defects/spontaneous abortion
3 mths
30–35% chance of illness, usually a 
single congenital defect (most frequently 
deafness, cataract, glaucoma, mental 
retardation or congenital heart disease, 
especially pulmonary stenosis or patent 
ductus arteriosus)
4 mths
10% risk of congenital defects, most 
commonly deafness
> 20 wks
Occasional deafness
Infectious disease
13
316
Diagnosis
IgM to parvovirus B19 suggests recent infection but may 
persist for months and false positives occur. Seroconver-
sion to IgG positivity confirms infection but in isolation 
a positive IgG is of little diagnostic utility. Detection of 
parvovirus B19 DNA in blood is particularly useful in 
immunocompromised patients. Giant pronormoblasts 
or haemophagocytosis may be demonstrable in the bone 
marrow.
Management
Infection is usually self-limiting. Symptomatic relief for 
arthritic symptoms may be required. Severe anaemia 
requires transfusion. Persistent viraemia in immuno-
compromised hosts may require immunoglobulin 
therapy to clear the virus.
Pregnant women should avoid contact with cases of 
parvovirus B19 infection; if they are exposed, serology 
should be performed to establish whether they are 
non-immune.
Passive prophylaxis with normal immunoglobulin 
has been suggested for non-immune pregnant women 
exposed to infection but there are limited data to support 
this recommendation. The pregnancy should be closely 
monitored by ultrasound scanning, so that hydrops 
fetalis can be treated by fetal transfusion.
Human herpesvirus 6 and 7
Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) is a lymphotropic virus 
that causes a childhood viral exanthem (exanthem 
subitum), rare cases of an infectious mononucleosis-like 
syndrome and infection in the immunocompromised 
host. Infection is almost universal, with approximately 
95% of children acquiring this virus by 2 years of age. 
Transmission is via saliva.
HHV-7 is very closely related to HHV-6, and is 
believed to be responsible for a proportion of cases of 
exanthem subitum. Like HHV-6, HHV-7 causes an 
almost universal infection in childhood, with subse-
quent latent infection and occasional infection in the 
immunocompromised host.
Clinical features
Exanthem subitum is also known as roseola infantum or 
sixth disease (Box 13.31). A high fever is followed by a 
maculopapular rash as the fever resolves. Fever and/or 
febrile convulsions may also occur without a rash. 
Rarely, older children or adults may develop an infec-
tious mononucleosis-like illness, hepatitis or rash. In 
the immunocompromised, infection is rare but can 
cause fever, rash, hepatitis, pneumonitis, cytopenia or 
encephalitis.
Diagnosis and management
Exanthem subitum is usually a clinical diagnosis but can 
be confirmed by antibody and/or DNA detection. The 
disease is self-limiting. Treatment with ganciclovir or 
foscarnet is used in immunocompromised hosts infected 
with HHV-6.
Chickenpox (varicella)
Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is a dermotropic and neuro­
tropic virus that produces primary infection, usually in 
childhood, which may reactivate in later life. VZV is 
spread by aerosol and direct contact. It is highly 
including those with congenital immunodeficiency or 
AIDS, can develop a more sustained block in erythro-
poiesis in response to the chronic viraemia that results 
from their inability to clear the infection. Infection during 
the first two trimesters of pregnancy can result in intrau-
terine infection and impact on fetal bone marrow; it 
causes 10–15% of non-immune (non-Rhesus-related) 
hydrops fetalis, a rare complication of pregnancy.
Fig. 13.8  Slapped cheek syndrome. The typical facial rash of 
parvovirus B19 infection. 
13.30  Clinical features of parvovirus B19 
infection
Affected age group
Clinical manifestations
Fifth disease (erythema infectiosum)
Small children
Three clinical stages: a ‘slapped 
cheek’ appearance, followed by a 
maculopapular rash progressing to a 
reticulate eruption on the body and 
limbs, then a final stage of 
resolution. Often the child is quite 
well throughout
Gloves and socks syndrome
Young adults
Fever and an acral purpuric eruption 
with a clear margin at the wrists and 
ankles. Mucosal involvement also 
occurs
Arthropathies
Adults and occasionally 
children
Symmetrical small-joint 
polyarthropathy. In children it tends 
to involve the larger joints in an 
asymmetrical distribution
Impaired erythropoiesis
Adults, those with 
haematological disease, 
the immunosuppressed
Mild anaemia; in an individual with 
an underlying haematological 
abnormality can precipitate transient 
aplastic crisis, or in the 
immunocompromised a more 
sustained but often milder pure red 
cell aplasia
Hydrops fetalis
Transplacental fetal 
infection
Asymptomatic or symptomatic 
maternal infection can cause fetal 
anaemia with an aplastic crisis, 
leading to non-immune hydrops 
fetalis and spontaneous abortion
Viral infections
13
317
on limbs). New lesions occur every 2–4 days and each 
crop is associated with fever. The rash progresses from 
small pink macules to vesicles and pustules within 
24 hours. Infectivity lasts from up to 4 days (but usually 
48 hours) before the lesions appear until the last vesicles 
crust over. Due to intense itching, secondary bacterial 
infection from scratching is the most common complica-
tion of primary chickenpox. Self-limiting cerebellar 
ataxia and encephalitis are rare complications.
Adults, pregnant women and the immunocompro-
mised are at increased risk of visceral involvement, 
which presents as pneumonitis, hepatitis or encephalitis. 
Pneumonitis can be fatal and is more likely to occur in 
smokers. Maternal infection in early pregnancy carries a 
3% risk of neonatal damage with developmental abnor-
malities of eyes, CNS and limbs. Chickenpox within 
5 days of delivery leads to severe neonatal varicella with 
visceral involvement and haemorrhage.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is primarily clinical, by recognition of the 
rash. If necessary, this can be confirmed by detection of 
antigen (direct immunofluorescence) or DNA (PCR) of 
aspirated vesicular fluid. Serology is used to identify 
seronegative individuals at risk of infection.
Management and prevention
The benefits of antivirals for uncomplicated primary 
VZV infection in children are marginal and treatment is 
not required (Box 13.32). Antivirals are, however, used 
for uncomplicated chickenpox when the patient presents 
within 24–48 hours of onset of vesicles, in all patients 
with complications, and in those who are immunocom-
promised, including pregnant women, regardless of du-
ration of vesicles (Box 13.33). More severe disease, 
particularly in immunocompromised hosts, requires ini-
tial parenteral therapy. Immunocompromised patients 
may have prolonged viral shedding and may require 
prolonged treatment until all lesions crust over.
Fig. 13.9  Varicella zoster virus infection. A  Chickenpox. B  Shingles in a thoracic dermatome. 
B
A
infectious to non-immune individuals. Disease in 
children is usually well tolerated. Manifestations are 
more severe in adults, pregnant women and the 
immunocompromised.
Clinical features
The incubation period is 11–20 days, after which a vesic-
ular eruption begins (Fig. 13.9), often on mucosal sur-
faces first, followed by rapid dissemination in a 
centripetal distribution (most dense on trunk and sparse 
13.31  Herpesvirus infections
Virus
Infection
Herpesvirus hominis (herpes simplex, HSV)
HSV-1 (p. 325)
Herpes labialis (‘cold sores’)
Stomatitis, pharyngitis
Corneal ulceration
Finger infections (‘whitlows’)
Eczema herpeticum
Encephalitis
HSV-2 (p. 325)
Genital ulceration and neonatal infection 
(acquired during vaginal delivery)
Acute meningitis or transverse myelitis. 
Rarely, encephalitis
Varicella zoster 
virus (VZV) (p. 316)
Chickenpox (varicella)
Shingles (herpes zoster)
Cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) (p. 321)
Congenital infection
Infectious mononucleosis (heterophile 
antibody-negative)
Hepatitis
Disease in immunocompromised 
patients: retinitis, encephalitis, 
pneumonitis, hepatitis, enteritis
Fever with abnormalities in 
haematological parameters
Epstein–Barr virus 
(EBV) (p. 320)
Infectious mononucleosis
Burkitt’s and other lymphomas
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Oral hairy leucoplakia (AIDS patients)
Other lymphomas
Human herpesvirus 
6 and 7 (HHV-6, 
HHV-7)
Exanthem subitum
Disease in immunocompromised 
patients
Human herpesvirus 
8 (HHV-8) (p. 326)
Kaposi’s sarcoma, primary effusion 
lymphoma, multicentric Castleman’s 
disease
‘Aciclovir shortens symptoms in chickenpox by an average of  
1 day. In shingles, aciclovir reduces pain by 10 days and the  
risk of post-herpetic neuralgia by 8%. Aciclovir is therefore 
cost-effective in shingles but not chickenpox.’
• Nathwani D, et al. Infect Dis Clin Prac 1995; 4:138–145.
• Trying SK. Arch Fam Med; 2000; 9:863–869.
13.32  Aciclovir for chickenpox/shingles
Infectious disease
13
318
Human VZ immunoglobulin (VZIG) is used to atten-
uate infection in people who have had significant contact 
with VZV, are susceptible to infection (i.e. have no 
history of chickenpox or shingles and are seronegative 
for VZV IgG) and are at risk of severe disease (e.g. 
immunocompromised, steroid-treated or pregnant) 
(Box 13.34). Ideally, VZIG should be given within 7 days 
of exposure, but it may attenuate disease even if given 
up to 10 days afterwards. Susceptible contacts who 
develop severe chickenpox after receiving VZIG should 
be treated with aciclovir.
A live, attenuated VZV vaccine is available and in 
routine use in the USA and other countries, but in the 
UK its use has been restricted to non-immune health-
care workers and household contacts of immunocom-
promised individuals. Children receive one dose after 
1 year of age and a second dose at 4–6 years of age; 
seronegative adults receive two doses at least 1 month 
apart. The vaccine may also be used prior to planned 
iatrogenic immunosuppression, e.g. before transplant.
Shingles (herpes zoster)
After initial infection, VZV persists in latent form in the 
dorsal root ganglion of sensory nerves and can reacti-
vate in later life.
Clinical features
Burning discomfort occurs in the affected dermatome, 
where discrete vesicles appear 3–4 days later. This is asso-
ciated with a brief viraemia, which can produce distant 
satellite ‘chickenpox’ lesions. Occasionally, paraesthesia 
occurs without rash (‘zoster sine herpete’). Severe dis­
ease, a prolonged duration of rash, multiple dermatomal 
involvement or recurrence suggests under­lying immune 
deficiency, including HIV. Chickenpox may be con-
tracted from a case of shingles but not vice versa.
An adult should satisfy all three of the following conditions:
1.  Significant contact
Contact with chickenpox (any time from 48 hrs before the rash 
until crusting of lesions) or zoster (exposed, disseminated or, 
with immunocompromised contacts, localised zoster; between 
development of the rash until crusting) defined as:
• Prolonged household contact, sharing a room for ≥ 15 mins 
or face-to-face contact (includes direct contact with zoster 
lesions)
• Hospital contact with chickenpox in another patient, 
health-care worker or visitor
• Intimate contact (e.g. touching) with person with shingles 
lesions
• Newborn whose mother develops chickenpox no more than  
5 days before delivery or 2 days after delivery
2.  Susceptible contact
• Individual with no history of chickenpox, ideally confirmed by 
negative test for VZV IgG
3.  Predisposition to severe chickenpox
• Immunocompromised due to disease (e.g. acute leukaemia, 
HIV, other primary or secondary immunodeficiency)
• Medically immunosuppressed (e.g. following solid organ 
transplant; current or recent (< 6 mths) cytotoxic 
chemotherapy or radiotherapy; current or recent (< 3 mths) 
high-dose corticosteroids; haematopoietic stem cell 
transplant)
• Pregnant (any stage)
• Infants: newborn whose mother has had chickenpox as 
above; premature infants < 28 wks
13.34  Indications for varicella zoster 
immunoglobulin (VZIG) in adults
13.33  Therapy for herpes simplex and 
varicella zoster virus infection
Disease state
Treatment options
Primary genital HSV
Famciclovir 250 mg 3 times daily for 
7–10 days
Valaciclovir 1 g twice daily for  
7–10 days
Oral aciclovir 200 mg 5 times daily 
or 400 mg 3 times daily for  
7–10 days
Severe and preventing 
oral intake
Aciclovir 5 mg/kg 3 times daily IV 
until patient can tolerate oral therapy
Recurrent genital 
HSV-1 or 2
Oral aciclovir 200 mg 5 times daily 
or 400 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
Famciclovir 125 mg twice daily for  
5 days
Valaciclovir 500 mg twice daily for 
3–5 days or 2 g twice daily for  
1 day. Shorter durations increasingly 
favoured
Primary or recurrent 
oral HSV
Usually no treatment
If required, usually short duration, 
e.g. valaciclovir 2 g twice daily for  
1 day
Mucocutaneous HSV 
infection in 
immunocompromised 
host
Aciclovir 5 mg/kg 3 times daily IV for 
7–10 days
Oral aciclovir 400 mg 4 times daily 
for 7–10 days
Famciclovir 500 mg 3 times daily for 
7–10 days
Valaciclovir 1 g twice daily for  
7–10 days
Chickenpox in adult or 
child
Oral aciclovir 800 mg 5 times daily 
for 5 days
Famciclovir 500 mg 3 times daily for 
5 days
Valaciclovir 1 g 3 times daily for  
5 days
Immunocompromised 
host/pregnant woman
Aciclovir 5 mg/kg 3 times daily IV 
until patient is improving, then 
complete therapy with oral therapy 
until all lesions crusting over
Shingles
Treatment and doses as for 
chickenpox but duration typically 
7–10 days
Visceral involvement 
(non-CNS) in HSV
Aciclovir IV 5 mg/kg 3 times daily for 
14 days
Visceral involvement 
(non-CNS) in VZV
Aciclovir IV 5 mg/kg 3 times daily for 
7 days
Severe complications 
(encephalitis, 
disseminated infection)
Aciclovir IV 10 mg/kg 3 times daily 
(up to 20 mg/kg in neonates) for 
14–21 days
HSV disease 
suppression
Aciclovir 400 mg twice daily
Famciclovir 250 mg twice daily
Valaciclovir 500 mg daily
Viral infections
13
319
labyrinthitis, electrocardiographic abnormalities, pan-
creatitis and arthritis.
Approximately 25% of post-pubertal males with 
mumps develop epididymo-orchitis but, although tes-
ticular atrophy occurs, sterility is unlikely. Oophoritis is 
less common. Abortion may occur if infection takes 
place in the first trimester of pregnancy. Complications 
may occur in the absence of parotitis.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is usually clinical. In atypical presenta-
tions without parotitis, serology for mumps-specific IgM 
or IgG seroconversion (four-fold rise in IgG convales-
cent titre) confirms the diagnosis. Virus can also be cul-
tured from urine in the first week of infection or detected 
by PCR in urine, saliva or CSF.
Management and prevention
Treatment is with analgesia. There is no evidence that 
corticosteroids are of value for orchitis. Mumps vaccine 
is one of the components of the combined MMR vaccine.
Influenza
Influenza is an acute systemic viral infection that prima-
rily affects the respiratory tract; it carries a significant 
mortality. It is caused by influenza A virus or, in milder 
form, influenza B virus. Infection is seasonal, and varia-
tion in the haemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) 
glycoproteins on the surface of the virus leads to disease 
of variable intensity each year. Minor changes in haem­
agglutinin are known as ‘genetic drift’, whereas a switch 
in the haemagglutinin or neuraminidase antigen is 
termed ‘genetic shift’. Nomenclature of influenza strains 
is based on these glycoproteins, e.g. H1N1, H3N2 etc. 
Genetic shift results in the circulation of a new influenza 
strain within a community to which few people are 
immune, potentially initiating an influenza epidemic or 
pandemic in which there is a high attack rate and there 
may be increased disease severity.
Clinical features
After an incubation period of 1–3 days, uncomplicated 
disease leads to fever, malaise and cough. Viral pneu-
monia may occur, although pulmonary complications 
Although thoracic dermatomes are most commonly 
involved (Fig. 13.9B), the ophthalmic division of the 
trigeminal nerve is also frequently affected; vesicles may 
appear on the cornea and lead to ulceration. This condi-
tion can lead to blindness and urgent ophthalmology 
review is required. Geniculate ganglion involvement 
causes the Ramsay Hunt syndrome of facial palsy, ipsi-
lateral loss of taste and buccal ulceration, plus a rash in 
the external auditory canal. This may be mistaken for 
Bell’s palsy (p. 1163). Bowel and bladder dysfunction 
occur with sacral nerve root involvement. The virus 
occasionally causes cranial nerve palsy, myelitis or 
encephalitis. Granulomatous cerebral angiitis is a cere-
brovascular complication that leads to a stroke-like syn-
drome in association with shingles, especially in an 
ophthalmic distribution.
Post-herpetic neuralgia causes troublesome persist-
ence of pain for 1–6 months or longer, following healing 
of the rash. It is more common with advanced age.
Management
Early therapy with aciclovir or related agents has been 
shown to reduce both early- and late-onset pain, espe-
cially in patients over 65 years (see Box 13.32). Post-
herpetic neuralgia requires aggressive analgesia, along 
with agents such as amitriptyline 25–100 mg daily or 
gabapentin (commencing at 300 mg daily and building 
slowly to 300 mg twice daily or more). Capsaicin cream 
(0.075%) may be helpful. Although controversial, 
corticosteroids have not been demonstrated to reduce 
post-herpetic neuralgia to date.
Enteroviral exanthems
Coxsackie or echovirus infections can lead to a maculo-
papular eruption or roseola-like rash that occurs after 
fever falls. Enteroviral infections are discussed further 
under viral infections of the skin (see below).
Systemic viral infections without 
exanthem
Other systemic viral infections present with features 
other than a rash suggestive of exanthem. Rashes may 
occur in these conditions but differ from those seen in 
exanthems or are not the primary presenting feature.
Mumps
Mumps is a systemic viral infection characterised by 
swelling of the parotid glands. Infection is endemic 
worldwide and peaks at 5–9 years of age. Vaccination 
has reduced the incidence in children but incomplete 
coverage and waning immunity with time have led to 
outbreaks in young adults. Infection is spread by respi-
ratory droplets.
Clinical features
The median incubation period is 19 days, with a range 
of 15–24 days. Classical tender parotid enlargement, 
which is bilateral in 75%, follows a prodrome of pyrexia 
and headache (Fig. 13.10). Meningitis complicates 
up to 10% of cases. The CSF reveals a lymphocytic 
pleocytosis or, less commonly, neutrophils. Rare compli-
cations include encephalitis, transient hearing loss, 
Fig. 13.10  Typical unilateral mumps. A  Note the loss of angle 
of the jaw on the affected (right) side. B  Comparison showing normal 
(left) side. 
B
A
Infectious disease
13
320
Infectious mononucleosis and 
Epstein–Barr virus
Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is a clinical syndrome 
characterised by pharyngitis, cervical lymphadenopa-
thy, fever and lymphocytosis. It is most often caused 
by Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) but other infections can 
produce a similar clinical syndrome (Box 13.35).
EBV is a gamma herpesvirus. In developing coun-
tries, subclinical infection in childhood is virtually uni-
versal. In developed countries, primary infection may be 
delayed until adolescence or early adult life. Under these 
circumstances, about 50% of infections result in typical 
IM. The virus is usually acquired from asymptomatic 
excreters via saliva, either by droplet infection or envi-
ronmental contamination in childhood, or by kissing 
among adolescents and adults. EBV is not highly conta-
gious and isolation of cases is unnecessary.
Clinical features
EBV infection has a prolonged and undetermined incu-
bation period, followed in some cases by a prodrome of 
fever, headache and malaise. This is succeeded by IM 
with severe pharyngitis, which may include tonsillar 
exudates and non-tender anterior and posterior 
cervical lymphadenopathy. Palatal petechiae, periorbital 
oedema, splenomegaly, inguinal or axillary lymphaden-
opathy, and macular, petechial or erythema multiforme 
rashes may occur. In most cases, fever resolves over 
2 weeks, and fatigue and other abnormalities settle 
over a further few weeks. Complications are listed in 
Box 13.36. Death is rare but can occur due to respiratory 
obstruction, haemorrhage from splenic rupture or 
thrombocytopenia, or encephalitis.
The diagnosis of EBV infection outside the usual age 
in adolescence and young adulthood is more challeng-
ing. In children under 10 years the illness is mild and 
short-lived, but in adults over 30 years of age it can be 
severe and prolonged. In both groups, pharyngeal 
symptoms are often absent. EBV may present with jaun-
dice, as a PUO or with a complication.
Long-term complications of EBV infection
Lymphoma complicates EBV infection in immunocom-
promised hosts, and some forms of Hodgkin’s disease 
are EBV-associated (p. 1042). The endemic form of 
Burkitt’s lymphoma complicates EBV infection in areas 
of sub-Saharan Africa where falciparum malaria is 
endemic. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is a geographically 
restricted tumour seen in China and Alaska that is asso-
ciated with EBV infection. X-linked lymphoproliferative 
(Duncan’s) syndrome is a familial lymphoproliferative 
disorder that follows primary EBV infection in boys 
without any other history of immunodeficiency; it is 
due to mutation of the SAP gene, causing failure of T-cell 
and NK-cell activation and inability to contain EBV 
infection.
are most often due to superinfection with Strep. pneumo-
niae, Staph. aureus or other bacteria. Rare extrapul­
monary manifestations include myositis, myocarditis, 
pericarditis and neurological complications (Reye’s syn-
drome in children, encephalitis or transverse myelitis). 
Mortality is greatest in the elderly, those with medical 
comorbidities and pregnant women. Recently, poly­
morphisms in the gene encoding an antiviral protein, 
interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), 
have been associated with more severe influenza.
Diagnosis
Acute infection is diagnosed by viral antigen or RNA 
detection in a nasopharyngeal sample. The disease may 
also be diagnosed retrospectively by serology.
Management and prevention
Management involves early microbiological identifica-
tion of cases and good infection control, with an empha-
sis on hand hygiene and preventing dissemination of 
infection by coughing and sneezing. Administration of 
neuraminidase inhibitor, oral oseltamivir (75 mg twice 
daily) or inhaled zanamivir (10 mg twice daily) for 
5 days, can reduce the severity of symptoms if started 
within 48 hours of symptom onset (or possibly later in 
immunocompromised individuals). These agents have 
superseded routine use of amantadine and rimantadine. 
Antiviral drugs can also be used as prophylaxis in high-
risk individuals during the ‘flu’ season. Resistance can 
emerge to all of these agents and so updated local advice 
should be followed.
Prevention relies on seasonal vaccination of the 
elderly and of individuals with chronic medical illnesses 
which place them at increased risk of the complications 
of influenza, such as chronic cardiopulmonary diseases 
or immune compromise, as well as their health-care 
workers. The vaccine composition changes each year to 
cover the ‘predicted’ seasonal strains but vaccination 
may fail when a new pandemic strain emerges.
Avian influenza
Avian influenza is caused by transmission of avian influ-
enza A viruses to humans. Avian viruses, such as H5N1, 
possess alternative haemagglutinin antigens to seasonal 
influenza strains. Most cases have had contact with sick 
poultry, predominantly in South-east Asia, and person-
to-person spread has been limited to date. Infections 
with H5N1 viruses have been severe, with enteric fea-
tures and respiratory failure. Treatment depends on 
the resistance pattern but often involves oseltamivir. 
Vaccination against seasonal ‘flu’ does not adequately 
protect against avian influenza. There is a concern that 
adaptation of an avian strain to allow effective person-
to-person transmission is likely to lead to a global pan-
demic of life-threatening influenza.
Swine influenza
Occasional cases of influenza are transmitted from pigs 
to humans. Re-assortment of swine, avian and human 
influenza strains can occur in pigs. Sometimes this can 
lead to an outbreak of swine ‘flu’ in humans, as occurred 
in 2009, when an outbreak of H1N1 influenza spread 
around the world from Mexico.
13.35  Causes of infectious mononucleosis 
syndrome
• Epstein–Barr virus infection
• Cytomegalovirus
• Human herpesvirus-6 or 7
• HIV-1 primary infection  
(p. 394)
• Toxoplasmosis
Viral infections
13
321
Investigations
Atypical lymphocytes are common in EBV infection but 
also occur in other causes of IM, acute retroviral syn-
drome with HIV infection, viral hepatitis, mumps and 
rubella (Fig. 13.11A). A ‘heterophile’ antibody is present 
during the acute illness and convalescence, which is 
detected by the Paul–Bunnell or ‘Monospot’ test. Some-
times antibody production is delayed, so an initially 
negative test should be repeated. However, many chil-
dren and 10% of adolescents with IM do not produce 
heterophile antibody at any stage.
Specific EBV serology confirms the diagnosis. Acute 
infection is characterised by IgM antibodies against the 
viral capsid, antibodies to EBV early antigen and the 
initial absence of antibodies to EBV nuclear antigen (anti-
EBNA). Seroconversion of anti-EBNA at approximately 
1 month after the initial illness may confirm the diagnosis 
in retrospect. CNS infections may be diagnosed by detec-
tion of viral DNA in cerebrospinal fluid.
Management
Treatment is largely symptomatic. If a throat culture 
yields a β-haemolytic streptococcus, penicillin should be 
given. Administration of ampicillin or amoxicillin in this 
condition commonly causes an itchy macular rash and 
should be avoided (Fig. 13.11B). When pharyngeal 
oedema is severe, a short course of corticosteroids, e.g. 
prednisolone 30 mg daily for 5 days, may help. Current 
antiviral drugs are not active against EBV.
Return to work or school is governed by physical 
fitness rather than laboratory tests; contact sports should 
be avoided until splenomegaly has resolved because of 
the danger of splenic rupture. Unfortunately, about 10% 
of patients with IM suffer a chronic relapsing syndrome.
Cytomegalovirus
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), like EBV, circulates readily 
among children. A second period of virus acquisition 
occurs among teenagers and young adults, peaking 
between the ages of 25 and 35 years, rather later than 
with EBV infection. CMV infection is persistent, and is 
characterised by subclinical cycles of active virus repli-
cation and by persistent low-level virus shedding. Most 
post-childhood infections are therefore acquired from 
asymptomatic excreters who shed virus in saliva, urine, 
semen and genital secretions. Sexual transmission and 
oral spread are common among adults, but infection 
may also be acquired by women caring for children with 
asymptomatic infections.
Clinical features
Most post-childhood CMV infections are subclinical, 
although some young adults develop an IM-like syn-
drome and some have a prolonged influenza-like illness 
lasting 2 weeks or more. Physical signs resemble those 
of IM, but in CMV infections hepatomegaly is more 
common, 
while 
lymphadenopathy, 
splenomegaly, 
pharyngitis and tonsillitis occur less often. Jaundice is 
uncommon and usually mild. Complications include 
meningoencephalitis, Guillain–Barré syndrome, auto­
immune haemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia, myo-
carditis and skin eruptions, such as ampicillin-induced 
rash. Immunocompromised patients can develop 
hepatitis, oesophagitis, colitis, pneumonitis, retinitis, 
encephalitis and polyradiculitis.
Fig. 13.11  Features of infectious 
mononucleosis. A  Atypical 
lymphocytes in peripheral blood. 
 B  Skin reaction to ampicillin. 
A
B
13.36  Complications of Epstein–Barr virus 
infection
Common
• Severe pharyngeal oedema
• Antibiotic-induced rash 
(80–90% with ampicillin)
• Hepatitis (80%)
• Prolonged post-viral fatigue 
(10%)
• Jaundice (< 10%)
Uncommon
Neurological
• Cranial nerve palsies
• Polyneuritis
• Transverse myelitis
• Meningoencephalitis
Haematological
• Haemolytic anaemia
• Thrombocytopenia
Renal
• Abnormalities on urinalysis
• Interstitial nephritis
Cardiac
• Myocarditis
• ECG abnormalities
• Pericarditis
Rare
• Ruptured spleen
• Respiratory obstruction
• Agranulocytosis
• X-linked lymphoproliferative 
syndrome
EBV-associated malignancy
• Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
• Burkitt’s lymphoma
• Hodgkin’s disease (certain 
subtypes only)
• Primary CNS lymphoma
• Lymphoproliferative disease 
in immunocompromised
Infectious disease
13
322
albopictus is a vector in some South-east Asian countries. 
There are four serotypes of dengue virus, all producing 
a similar clinical syndrome; type-specific immunity 
is life-long, but immunity against the other serotypes 
lasts only a few months. Dengue haemorrhagic fever 
(DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS) occur in indi-
viduals who are immune to one dengue virus serotype 
and are then infected with another. Prior immunity 
results in increased uptake of virus by cells expressing 
the antibody Fc receptor and increased T-cell activation 
with resultant cytokine release, causing capillary leak 
and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC, 
pp. 201 and 1055).
Clinical features
Clinical features of dengue fever are listed in Box 13.37. 
Asymptomatic infections are common, particularly in 
children, but the disease is more severe in infants and 
the elderly. The initial febrile phase is frequently fol-
lowed by a rash as the fever settles. Laboratory features 
include leucopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and 
elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST). Many symptomatic infections 
run an uncomplicated course, but complications or a 
protracted convalescence may ensue.
Women who develop a primary CMV infection 
during pregnancy have about a 40% chance of passing 
CMV to the fetus, causing congenital infection and 
disease at any stage of gestation. Features include 
petechial rashes, hepatosplenomegaly and jaundice; 
10% of infected infants will have long-term CNS seque-
lae, such as microcephaly, cerebral calcifications, chorio­
retinitis and deafness. Infections in the newborn usually 
are asymptomatic or have features of an IM-like illness, 
although some studies suggest that subtle sequelae 
affecting hearing or mental development may occur.
Investigations
Atypical lymphocytosis is not as prominent as in EBV 
infection and heterophile antibody tests are negative. 
LFTs are often abnormal, with an alkaline phosphatase 
level raised out of proportion to transaminases. Serologi-
cal diagnosis depends on the detection of CMV-specific 
IgM antibody plus a four-fold rise or seroconversion of 
IgG. In the immunocompromised, antibody detection is 
unreliable and detection of CMV in an involved organ 
by PCR, culture or histopathology establishes the diag-
nosis. A positive culture of CMV in the blood may be 
useful in transplant populations but not in HIV-positive 
individuals, since in HIV infection CMV reactivates at 
regular intervals, but these episodes do not correlate 
well with episodes of clinical disease. Detection of CMV 
in urine is not helpful in diagnosing infection, except in 
neonates, since CMV is intermittently shed in the urine 
throughout life following infection.
Management
Only symptomatic treatment is required in the immuno-
competent patient. Immunocompromised individuals 
are treated with ganciclovir 5 mg/kg IV twice daily or 
with oral valganciclovir 900 mg twice daily for at least 
14 days. Foscarnet or cidofovir is also used in CMV treat-
ment of immunocompromised patients who are resist-
ant to or intolerant of ganciclovir-based therapy.
Dengue
Dengue is a febrile illness caused by a flavivirus trans-
mitted by mosquitoes. It is endemic in Asia, the Pacific, 
Africa and the Americas (Fig. 13.12). Approximately 
50 million infections occur annually and dengue is the 
most rapidly spreading mosquito-borne viral illness. 
The principal vector is the mosquito Aedes aegypti, which 
breeds in standing water; collections of water in contain-
ers, water-based air coolers and tyre dumps are a 
good environment for the vector in large cities. Aedes 
Fig. 13.12  Endemic zones of yellow fever and dengue. From 
Halstead 1997 – see p. 386.
Dengue
Yellow fever
Dengue + yellow fever  
Outbreaks of dengue
haemorrhagic fever
13.37  Clinical features of dengue fever
Incubation period
• 2–7 days
Prodrome
• 2 days of malaise and headache
Acute onset
• Fever, backache, arthralgias, headache, generalised pains 
(‘break-bone fever’), pain on eye movement, lacrimation, 
scleral injection, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, pharyngitis, 
upper respiratory tract symptoms, relative bradycardia, 
prostration, depression, hyperaesthesia, dysgeusia, 
lymphadenopathy
Fever
• Continuous or ‘saddle-back’, with break on 4th or 5th day 
and then recrudescence; usually lasts 7–8 days
Rash
• Initial flushing faint macular rash in first 1–2 days. 
Maculopapular, scarlet morbilliform blanching rash from days 
3–5 on trunk, spreading centrifugally and sparing palms and 
soles, onset often with fever defervescence. May  
desquamate on resolution or give rise to petechiae on 
extensor surfaces
Convalescence
• Slow and may be associated with prolonged fatigue 
syndrome, arthralgia or depression
Complications
• Dengue haemorrhagic fever and disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
• Dengue shock syndrome
• Hepatitis, cerebral haemorrhage or oedema, encephalitis, 
cranial nerve palsies, rhabdomyolysis, myocarditis
• Vertical transmission if infection within 5 wks of delivery
Viral infections
13
323
The period 3–7 days after onset of fever is termed the 
‘critical’ phase, during which signs of DHF or DSS may 
develop. In mild forms, petechiae occur in the arm when 
a blood pressure cuff is inflated to a point between systo-
lic and diastolic blood pressure and left for 5 minutes 
(the positive ‘tourniquet test’) – a non-specific test of 
capillary fragility and thrombocytopenia. As the extent 
of capillary leak increases, there may be a raised haema-
tocrit, tachycardia and hypotension, pleural effusions 
and ascites. This may progress to metabolic acidosis and 
multi-organ failure, including acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS, p. 192). Minor (petechiae, ecchy-
moses, epistaxis) or major (gastrointestinal or cerebro­
vascular) haemorrhage may occur.
Probable dengue
• Exposure in an endemic area
• Fever
• Two of:
Nausea/vomiting
Rash
Aches/pains
Positive tourniquet test
Leucopenia
Any warning sign
Laboratory confirmation important
Needs regular medical observation and instruction in the 
warning signs
If there are no warning signs, need for hospitalisation is 
influenced by age, comorbidities, pregnancy and social  
factors
Dengue with warning signs
• Probable dengue plus one of:
Abdominal pain or tenderness
Persistent vomiting
Signs of fluid accumulation, e.g. pleural effusion or 
ascites
Mucosal bleed
Lethargy
Hepatomegaly > 2 cm
Rapid increase in haematocrit with fall in platelet 
count
Needs medical intervention, e.g. intravenous fluid
Severe dengue
• Severe plasma leakage leading to:
Shock (dengue shock syndrome)
Fluid accumulation with respiratory distress
• Severe haemorrhagic manifestations, e.g. GI 
haemorrhage
• Severe organ involvement:
Liver AST or ALT ≥ 1000 U/L
CNS: impaired consciousness
Cardiomyopathy
Other organs, e.g. renal impairment
Needs emergency medical treatment and specialist care 
with intensive care input
Adapted from http://www.who.int/csr/disease/dengue/en/ (ALT = alanine 
aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase)
13.38  WHO-proposed clinical definition of dengue
Diagnosis
In endemic areas, mild dengue must be distinguished 
from other viral infections. The WHO recently revised 
its clinical classification of dengue and is evaluating the 
usefulness of these categories in guiding diagnosis and 
treatment (Box 13.38). The diagnosis can be confirmed 
by seroconversion of IgM or a fourfold rise in IgG anti-
body titres. Serological tests may detect cross-reacting 
antibodies against other flaviviruses, including yellow 
fever vaccine. IgM/IgG ratios may be used to distin-
guish primary from secondary infection. Isolation of 
dengue virus from blood or detection of dengue virus 
RNA by PCR (p. 139) is available in specialist laborato-
ries. Commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) kits to detect the NS1 viral antigen, although 
less sensitive than PCR, are becoming more widely 
available in endemic areas.
Management and prevention
Treatment is supportive, emphasising fluid replacement 
and appropriate management of shock and organ dys-
function. With intensive care support, mortality rates are 
1% or less. Aspirin should be avoided due to bleeding 
risk. Corticosteroids have not been shown to help. No 
existing antivirals are effective.
Breeding places of Aedes mosquitoes should be abol-
ished and the adults destroyed by insecticides. There is 
no licensed vaccine available.
Yellow fever
Yellow fever is a haemorrhagic fever of the tropics, 
caused by a flavivirus. It is a zoonosis of monkeys in 
West and Central African, and South and Central Amer-
ican tropical rainforests, where it may cause devastating 
epidemics (see Fig. 13.12). Transmission is by tree-top 
mosquitoes Aedes africanus (Africa) and Haemagogus spp. 
(America). The infection is introduced to humans either 
by infected mosquitoes when trees are felled, or by 
monkeys raiding human settlements. In towns, yellow 
fever may be transmitted between humans by Aedes 
aegypti, which breeds efficiently in small collections of 
water. The distribution of this mosquito is far wider than 
that of yellow fever, and more widespread infection is a 
continued threat.
Yellow fever causes approximately 200 000 infections 
each year, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa, and the number 
is increasing. Overall mortality is around 15%, although 
this varies widely. Humans are infectious during the 
viraemic phase, which starts 3–6 days after the bite of 
the infected mosquito and lasts for 4–5 days.
Clinical features
After an incubation period of 3–6 days, yellow fever is 
often a mild febrile illness lasting less than 1 week, with 
headache, myalgia, conjunctival erythema and brady-
cardia. This is followed by fever resolution (deferves-
cence), but in some cases, fever recurs after a few hours 
to days. In more severe disease, fever recrudescence 
is associated with lower back pain, abdominal pain 
and somnolence, prominent nausea and vomiting, 
bradycardia and jaundice. Liver damage and DIC lead 
to bleeding with petechiae, mucosal haemorrhages and 
gastrointestinal bleeding. Shock, hepatic failure, renal 
failure, seizures and coma may ensue.
Infectious disease
13
324
an outbreak of VHF involving a woman from Zambia 
and several health-care workers associated with her 
care, and had 80% fatality. Details on recent disease 
outbreaks can be found at the WHO website 
(www.who.int).
Clinical features
VHF present with non-specific fever, malaise, body 
pains, sore throat and headache. On examination, 
conjunctivitis, throat injection, an erythematous or 
petechial rash, haemorrhage, lymphadenopathy and 
bradycardia may be noted. The viruses cause endo­
thelial dysfunction with the development of capillary 
leak. Bleeding is due to endothelial damage and platelet 
dysfunction. Hypovolaemic shock and ARDS may 
develop (p. 192).
Haemorrhage is a late feature of VHF and most 
patients present with earlier features. In Lassa fever, 
joint and abdominal pain is prominent. A macular 
blanching rash may be present but bleeding is unusual, 
occurring in only 20% of hospitalised patients. Encepha-
lopathy may develop and deafness affects 30% of 
survivors.
The clue to the viral aetiology comes from the travel 
and exposure history. Travel to an outbreak area, activ-
ity in a rural environment and contact with sick indi-
viduals or animals within 21 days all increase the risk of 
VHF. Enquiry should be made about insect bites, hospi-
tal visits and attendance at ritual funerals (Ebola virus 
infection). For Lassa fever, retrosternal pain, pharyngitis 
and proteinuria have a positive predictive value of 80% 
in West Africa.
Investigations and management
Non-specific findings include leucopenia, thrombocyto-
penia and proteinuria. In Lassa fever, an AST > 150 U/L 
is associated with a 50% mortality. It is important to 
exclude other causes of fever, especially malaria, 
typhoid and respiratory tract infections. Most patients 
suspected of having a VHF in the UK turn out to have 
malaria.
The diagnosis of VHF must be considered in all 
febrile individuals who present within 21 days of leaving 
an endemic area or who present with haemorrhage or 
organ failure. A febrile patient from an endemic area 
within the incubation period, who has specific epi­
demiological risk factors (see Fig. 13.5, p. 311) or who 
has signs of organ failure or haemorrhage, should be 
treated as being at high risk of VHF; appropriate infec-
tion control measures must be implemented and the 
patient transferred to a centre with biosafety level (BSL) 
4 facilities. Individuals with a history of travel within 
21 days and fever, but without the relevant epidemio-
logical features or signs of VHF, are classified as 
medium-risk and should have an initial blood sample 
tested to exclude malaria. If this is negative, relevant 
specimens (blood, throat swab, urine and pleural fluid, 
if available) are collected and sent to an appropriate 
reference laboratory for nucleic acid detection (PCR), 
virus isolation, and serology. If patients are still felt to 
be at significant risk of VHF or if infection is confirmed, 
they should be transferred to a specialised high-security 
infectious disease unit. All further laboratory tests 
should be performed at BSL4. Transport requires an 
ambulance with BSL3 facilities.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes malaria, typhoid, 
viral hepatitis, leptospirosis, haemorrhagic fevers and 
aflatoxin poisoning. Diagnosis of yellow fever can be 
confirmed by viral isolation from blood in the first 
24 days of illness, the presence of IgM or a fourfold rise 
in IgG antibody titre. Leucopenia is characteristic. Liver 
biopsy should be avoided in life due to the risk of fatal 
bleeding. Post-mortem features, such as acute mid-zonal 
necrosis and Councilman bodies with minimal inflam-
mation in the liver, are suggestive but not specific. 
Immuno­histochemistry for viral antigens improves 
specificity.
Management and prevention
Treatment is supportive, with meticulous attention to 
fluid and electrolyte balance, urine output and blood 
pressure. Blood transfusions, plasma expanders and 
peritoneal dialysis may be necessary. Patients should be 
isolated, as their blood and body products may contain 
virus particles.
A single vaccination with a live attenuated vaccine 
gives full protection for at least 10 years. Potential side-
effects include hypersensitivity, encephalitis and sys-
temic features of yellow fever (viscerotropic disease) 
caused by the attenuated virus. Vaccination is not rec-
ommended in people who are significantly immunosup-
pressed. The risk of vaccine side-effects must be balanced 
against the risk of infection for less immunocompro-
mised hosts, pregnant women and older patients. An 
internationally recognised certificate of vaccination is 
sometimes necessary when crossing borders.
Viral haemorrhagic fevers
Viral haemorrhagic fevers (VHF) are zoonoses caused 
by several different viruses (Box 13.39). They are geo-
graphically restricted and occur in rural settings or in 
health-care facilities. All of these viral illnesses, except 
Ebola and Marburg, have mild self-limiting forms.
Serological surveys have shown that Lassa fever is 
widespread in West Africa and may lead to up to 500 000 
infections annually. Mortality overall may be low, as 
80% of cases are asymptomatic, but in hospitalised cases 
mortality averages 15%. Ebola outbreaks have occurred 
at a rate of approximately one per year, involving up to 
a few hundred cases. The largest outbreaks have been in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Uganda and Sudan. 
Marburg has been documented less frequently, with 
outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of Congo and 
Uganda, but the largest outbreak to date involved 163 
cases in Angola in 2005. Mortality rates of Ebola and 
Marburg are high.
VHF have extended into Europe, with an outbreak of 
Congo–Crimean haemorrhagic fever in Turkey in 2006, 
and cases of haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in 
the Balkans and Russia. These conditions remain very 
rare in the UK, with about one case of Lassa fever arriv-
ing in the country every 2 years.
Kyasanur forest disease is a tick-borne VHF currently 
confined to a small focus in Karnataka, India; there are 
about 500 cases annually. Monkeys are the principal 
hosts, but with forest felling, there are fears that this 
disease will increase.
New outbreaks and new agents are identified spo-
radically. In 2008, Lujo virus, a novel arenavirus, caused 
Viral infections
13
325
mucocutaneous surfaces of the head and neck (Fig. 
13.13), whilst HSV-2 predominantly involves the genital 
mucosa (pp. 415 and 418), although there is overlap (see 
Box 13.31, p. 317). The seroprevalence of HSV-1 is 30–
100%, varying by socioeconomic status, while that of 
HSV-2 is 20–60%. Infection is acquired by inoculation of 
viruses shed by an infected individual on to a mucosal 
surface in a susceptible person. The virus infects sensory 
and autonomic neurons and establishes latent infection 
in the nerve ganglia. Primary infection is followed by 
episodes of reactivation throughout life.
Clinical features
Primary HSV-1 or 2 infection is more likely to be symp-
tomatic later in life, causing gingivostomatitis, pharyn-
gitis or painful genital tract lesions. The primary 
In addition to general supportive measures, ribavirin 
is given intravenously (100 mg/kg, then 25 mg/kg daily 
for 3 days and 12.5 mg/kg daily for 4 days) when Lassa 
fever or South American haemorrhagic fevers are 
suspected.
Prevention
Ribavirin has been used as prophylaxis in close contacts 
in Lassa fever but there are no formal trials of its efficacy.
Viral infections of the skin
Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) cause recurrent muco­
cutaneous infection; HSV-1 typically involves the 
Disease
Reservoir
Transmission
Incubation 
period
Geography
Mortality 
rate
Clinical features of severe 
disease1
Lassa fever
Multimammate 
rats 
(Mastomys 
natalensis)
Urine from rat
Body fluids from 
patients
6–21 days
West Africa
15%
Haemorrhage, shock, 
encephalopathy, ARDS 
(responds to ribavirin) 
Deafness in survivors
Ebola fever
Undefined 
(?bats)
Body fluids from 
patients
Handling infected 
primates
2–21 days
Central Africa 
Outbreaks as far 
north as Sudan
25–90%
Haemorrhage, hepatic and 
renal failure
Marburg fever
Undefined
Body fluids from 
patients
Handling infected 
primates
3–9 days
Central Africa 
Outbreak in 
Angola
25–90%
Haemorrhage, diarrhoea, 
encephalopathy, orchitis
Yellow fever
Monkeys
Mosquitoes
3–6 days
See Fig. 13.12
~15%
Hepatic failure, renal 
failure, haemorrhage
Dengue
Humans
Aedes aegypti
2–7 days
See Fig. 13.12
< 10%2
Haemorrhage, shock
Crimean–
Congo 
haemorrhagic 
fever
Small 
vertebrates
Ixodes tick
1–3 days up 
to 9 days
Africa, Asia, 
Eastern Europe
30%
Encephalopathy, 
haemorrhage, hepatic or 
renal failure, ARDS
Domestic and 
wild animals
Body fluids
3–6 days up 
to 13 days
Rift Valley 
fever
Domestic 
livestock
Contact with 
animals, mosquito 
or other insect 
bites
2–6 days
Africa, Arabian 
peninsula
1%
Haemorrhage, blindness, 
meningoencephalitis 
(complications only in a 
minority)
Kyasanur fever
Monkeys
Ticks
3–8 days
Karnataka State, 
India
5–10%
Haemorrhage, pulmonary 
oedema, neurological 
features, iridokeratitis in 
survivors
Bolivian and 
Argentinian 
haemorrhagic 
fever (Junin 
and Machupo 
viruses)
Rodents 
(Calomys spp.)
Urine, aerosols
Body fluids from 
case (rare)
5–19 days 
(3–6 days 
for 
parenteral)
South America
15–30%
Haemorrhage, shock, 
cerebellar signs (may 
respond to ribavirin)
Haemorrhagic 
fever with 
renal syndrome 
(Hantaan fever)
Rodents
Aerosols from 
faeces
5–42 days 
(typically  
14 days)
Northern Asia, 
northern Europe, 
Balkans
5%
Acute renal impairment, 
cerebrovascular accidents, 
pulmonary oedema, shock 
(hepatic failure and 
haemorrhagic features 
only in some variants)
1All potentially have circulatory failure. 2Mortality of uncomplicated and haemorrhagic dengue fever, respectively.
13.39  Viral haemorrhagic fevers
Infectious disease
13
326
attack may be associated with fever and regional 
lymphadenopathy.
Recurrence
Recurrent attacks occur throughout life, most often in 
association with concomitant medical illness, menstrua-
tion, mechanical trauma, immunosuppression, psycho-
logical stress or, for oral lesions, ultraviolet light 
exposure. HSV reactivation in the oral mucosa produces 
the classical ‘cold sore’ or ‘herpes labialis’. Prodromal 
hyperaesthesia is followed by rapid vesiculation, pustu-
lation and crusting. Recurrent HSV genital disease is a 
common cause of recurrent painful ulceration (pp. 415 
and 418). An inoculation lesion on the finger gives rise 
to a paronychia termed a ‘whitlow’ in contacts of patients 
with herpetic lesions (Fig. 13.13B). It was formerly seen 
in health-care workers and dentists, but is prevented by 
protective gloves.
Complications
Disseminated cutaneous lesions can occur in individuals 
with underlying dermatological diseases, such as eczema 
(eczema herpeticum) (Fig. 13.13C). Herpes keratitis 
presents with pain and blurring of vision; characteristic 
dendritic ulcers are visible on slit-lamp examination and 
may produce corneal scarring and permanent visual 
impairment.
Primary HSV-2 can cause meningitis or transverse 
myelitis. HSV is the leading cause of sporadic viral 
encephalitis (p. 1205); this serious complication may 
occur following either primary or secondary disease, 
usually with HSV-1. A haemorrhagic necrotising tempo-
ral lobe cerebritis produces temporal lobe epilepsy and 
altered consciousness/coma. Without treatment, mor-
tality is 80%. HSV is also implicated in the pathogenesis 
of Bell’s palsy with a lower motor neuron VII nerve 
palsy, although antivirals have not been demonstrated 
to improve outcome.
Neonatal HSV disease is usually associated with 
primary infection of the mother at term (see Box 13.28, 
p. 314). In excess of two-thirds of cases develop dissemi-
nated disease with cutaneous lesions, hepatitis, pneu-
monitis and frequently encephalitis.
Immunocompromised hosts can develop visceral 
disease with oesophagitis, hepatitis, pneumonitis, 
encephalitis or retinitis.
Diagnosis
Differentiation from other vesicular eruptions is 
achieved by demonstration of virus in vesicular fluid, 
usually by direct immunofluorescence or PCR. HSV 
encephalitis is diagnosed by a positive PCR for HSV in 
CSF. Serology is of limited value, only confirming 
whether an individual has had previous infection.
Management
The acyclic antivirals are the treatment of choice for HSV 
infection (see Box 13.33, p. 318). Therapy of localised 
disease must commence in the first 48 hours of clinical 
disease (primary or recurrent); thereafter it is unlikely to 
influence clinical outcome. Oral lesions in an immuno­
competent individual may be treated with topical 
aciclovir. All severe manifestations should be treated, 
regardless of the time of presentation. Suspicion of HSV 
encephalopathy is an indication for immediate empirical 
antiviral therapy. Aciclovir resistance is encountered 
occasionally in immunocompromised hosts, in which 
case foscarnet is the treatment of choice.
Human herpesvirus 8
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) (see Box 13.31, p. 317) 
causes Kaposi’s sarcoma in both AIDS-related and 
endemic non-AIDS-related forms (p. 397). HHV-8 is 
spread via saliva, and men who have sex with men have 
increased incidence of infection. Seroprevalence varies 
widely, being highest in sub-Saharan Africa. HHV-8 also 
causes two rare haematological malignancies: primary 
effusion lymphoma and multicentric Castleman’s 
disease. Current antivirals are not effective.
Enterovirus infections
Hand, foot and mouth disease
This systemic infection is usually caused by Coxsackie 
viruses or occasionally echoviruses. It affects children 
and occasionally adults, resulting in local or household 
outbreaks, particularly in the summer months. A rela-
tively mild illness with fever and lymphadenopathy 
develops after an incubation period of approximately 
10 days; 2–3 days later, a painful papular or vesicular 
rash appears on palmoplantar surfaces of hands 
and feet, with associated oral lesions on the buccal 
mucosa and tongue that ulcerate rapidly. A papular 
A
B
C
Fig. 13.13  Cutaneous manifestations of herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1). A  Acute HSV-1. There were also vesicles in the mouth – herpetic 
stomatitis. B  Herpetic whitlow. C  Eczema herpeticum. HSV-1 infection spreads rapidly in eczematous skin. 
Viral infections
13
327
life-threatening in those with eczema (eczema vaccina-
tum) or immune deficiency) and of encephalitis. 
However, vaccination may still be recommended for key 
medical staff.
Other poxviruses: orf and molluscum 
contagiosum
See page 1279 and Figure 13.14.
Gastrointestinal viral infections
Norovirus (Norwalk agent)
Norovirus is the most common cause of infectious gas-
troenteritis in the UK and causes outbreaks in closed 
communities, such as long-stay hospital wards, cruise 
ships and military camps. Food handlers may also trans-
mit this virus, which is relatively resistant to decontami-
nation procedures. The incubation period is 24–48 hours. 
High attack rates and prominent vomiting are character-
istic. Diagnosis is by electron microscopy, antigen or 
DNA detection (PCR) in stool samples. The virus is 
highly infectious and cases should be isolated and 
environmental surfaces cleaned with detergents and 
disinfected with bleach.
Astrovirus
Astroviruses cause diarrhoea in small children and occa-
sionally in immunocompromised adults.
Rotavirus
Rotaviruses are the major cause of diarrhoeal illness in 
young children worldwide and cause 10–20% of deaths 
due to gastroenteritis in developing countries. There are 
winter epidemics in developed countries, particularly in 
nurseries. Adults are less often infected but those in 
close contact with cases may develop disease. The virus 
infects enterocytes, causing decreased surface absorp-
tion. The incubation period is 48 hours and patients 
present with watery diarrhoea, vomiting, fever and 
abdominal pain. Dehydration is prominent. Diagnosis is 
aided by commercially available enzyme immunoassay 
kits, which require fresh or refrigerated stool samples. 
Immunity develops to natural infection. Monovalent 
and multivalent vaccines have been licensed in many 
erythematous rash may appear on buttocks and thighs. 
Antiviral treatment is not available and management 
consists of symptom relief with analgesics.
Herpangina
This infection, caused by Coxsackie viruses, primarily 
affects children and teenagers in the summer months. It 
is characterised by a small number of vesicles at the 
soft/hard palate junction, often associated with high 
fever, an extremely sore throat and headache. The 
lesions are short-lived, rupturing after 2–3 days and 
rarely persisting for more than 1 week. Treatment is with 
analgesics if required. Culture of the virus from vesicles 
or DNA detection by PCR differentiates herpangina 
from HSV.
Poxviruses
These DNA viruses are rare but potentially important 
pathogens.
Smallpox (variola)
This severe disease, which has high mortality, was 
eradicated worldwide by a global vaccination pro-
gramme. Interest in the disease has re-emerged due to 
its potential as a bioweapon. The virus is spread by the 
respiratory route or contact with lesions, and is highly 
infectious.
The incubation period is 7–17 days. A prodrome with 
fever, headache and prostration leads, in 1–2 days, to the 
rash, which develops through macules and papules to 
vesicles and pustules, worst on the face and distal 
extremities. Lesions in one area are all at the same stage 
of development with no cropping (unlike chickenpox). 
Vaccination can lead to a modified course of disease 
with milder rash and lower mortality.
If a case of smallpox is suspected, national public 
health authorities must be contacted. Electron microgra-
phy (like Fig. 13.14) and DNA detection tests (PCR) are 
used to confirm smallpox or, using specific primers, an 
alternative poxvirus.
Monkeypox
Despite the name, the animal reservoirs for this virus are 
probably small squirrels and rodents. It causes a rare 
zoonotic infection in communities in the rainforest belt 
of Central Africa, producing a vesicular rash that is 
indistinguishable from smallpox, but differentiated by 
the presence of lymphadenopathy. Little person-to- 
person transmission occurs. Outbreaks outside Africa 
have been linked to importation of African animals as 
exotic pets. Diagnosis is by electron micrography 
and/or DNA detection (PCR).
Cowpox
Humans in contact with infected cows develop large 
vesicles, usually on the hands or arms and associated 
with fever and regional lymphadenitis. The reservoir is 
thought to be wild rodents, and the virus also produces 
symptomatic disease in cats and a range of other animals.
Vaccinia virus
This laboratory strain is the basis of the existing 
vaccine to prevent smallpox. Widespread vaccination 
is no longer recommended due to the likelihood of 
local spread from the vaccination site (potentially 
Fig. 13.14  Electron micrograph of molluscum contagiosum, 
a poxvirus. 
Infectious disease
13
328
respiratory failure with infection of brainstem nuclei. 
Approximately 50% of survivors are left with neurologi-
cal sequelae.
Investigations, management and prevention
Other infectious causes of encephalitis should be 
excluded (p. 1205). There is neutrophilia and often 
hyponatraemia. CSF analysis reveals lymphocytosis and 
elevated protein. Serological testing may be helpful and 
there is a CSF antigen test.
Treatment is supportive, anticipating and treating 
complications. Vaccination for travellers to endemic 
areas during the monsoon period is effective prophy-
laxis. Some endemic countries include this vaccination 
in their childhood schedules.
West Nile virus
This flavivirus has emerged as an important cause of 
neurological disease in an area that extends from Aus-
tralia, India and Russia through Africa and Southern 
Europe and across to North America. The disease has an 
avian reservoir and a mosquito vector. The elderly are 
at increased risk of neurological disease.
Clinical features
Most infections are asymptomatic. After 2–6 days’ incu-
bation, a mild febrile illness and arthralgia constitute the 
most common clinical presentation. A prolonged incu-
bation may be seen in immunocompromised indivi­
duals. Children may develop a maculopapular rash. 
Neurological disease is seen in 1% and is characterised 
by encephalitis, meningitis or asymmetric flaccid paraly-
sis with 10% mortality.
Diagnosis and management
Diagnosis is by serology or detection of viral RNA in 
blood or CSF. Serological tests may show cross-reactivity 
with other flaviviruses, including vaccine strains. Treat-
ment is supportive.
Enterovirus 71
Enterovirus 71 has caused outbreaks around the globe 
of enteroviral disease with hand, foot and mouth disease 
(p. 326) and aseptic meningitis. Some cases have been 
complicated by encephalitis with flaccid paralysis or by 
brainstem involvement and death. The virus can be iso-
lated from vesicle fluid, stool or CSF, and viral RNA can 
be detected in CSF by reverse transcription (RT-)PCR.
Nipah virus encephalitis
In 1999, a newly discovered paramyxovirus in the 
Hendra group, the Nipah virus, caused an epidemic of 
encephalitis amongst Malaysian pig farmers. Infection is 
through direct contact with pig secretions. Mortality is 
around 30%. Antibodies to the Hendra virus are present 
in 76% of cases.
Human T-cell lymphotropic  
virus type I
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-1) is a 
retrovirus which causes chronic infection with develop-
ment of adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma or HTLV-1-
associated myelopathy (HAM) in a subset of those 
infected (p. 1043). It is found mainly in Japan, the Carib-
bean, Central and South America, and the Seychelles. 
countries and have now demonstrated efficacy in large 
trials in Africa and the Americas. Increased rates of 
intussusception were observed with early rotavirus vac-
cines, but the benefits of the recently licensed vaccines 
outweigh this risk.
Hepatitis viruses (A–E)
See Chapter 23.
Other viruses
Adenoviruses are frequently identified from stool culture 
and implicated as a cause of diarrhoea in children. They 
have also been linked to cases of intussusception.
Respiratory viral infections
These infections are described on page 681.
Adenoviruses, 
rhinoviruses 
and 
enteroviruses 
(Coxsackie viruses and echoviruses) often produce non-
specific symptoms. Parainfluenza and respiratory syn-
cytial viruses cause upper respiratory tract disease, 
croup and bronchiolitis in small children and pneumo-
nia in the immunocompromised. Respiratory syncytial 
virus also causes pneumonia in nursing home residents 
and may be associated with nosocomial pneumonia. In 
recent years, metapneumovirus and bocavirus have 
been identified as causes of upper and occasionally 
lower respiratory tract infection. They may also cause 
pneumonia in immunosuppressed individuals, such as 
recipients of allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell trans-
plants. The severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) 
caused by the SARS coronavirus emerged as a major 
respiratory pathogen during an outbreak in 2002–2003, 
with 8000 cases and 10% mortality (p. 683). In 2012, a 
novel coronavirus, distantly related to the SARS corona-
virus, caused several deaths connected with pneumonia 
and acute renal failure in patients originating from the 
Middle East.
Viral infections with neurological 
involvement
See also page 1205.
Japanese B encephalitis
This flavivirus is an important cause of endemic encepha-
litis in Japan, China, Russia, South-east Asia, India and 
Pakistan; outbreaks also occur elsewhere. There are 
10 000–20 000 cases reported to the WHO annually. Pigs 
and aquatic birds are the virus reservoirs and transmis-
sion is by mosquitoes. Exposure to rice paddies is a 
recognised risk factor.
Clinical features
The incubation period is 4–21 days. Most infections are 
subclinical in childhood and 1% or less of infections 
lead to encephalitis. Initial systemic illness with fever, 
malaise and anorexia is followed by photophobia, vom-
iting, headache and changes in brainstem function. 
Neurological features other than encephalitis include 
meningitis, seizures, cranial nerve palsies, flaccid or 
spastic paralysis, and extrapyramidal features. Mortality 
with neurological disease is 25%. Most children die from 
Bacterial infections
13
329
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Bacterial infections of the skin,  
soft tissues and bones
Most infections of the skin, soft tissues and bone are 
caused by either staphylococci (mainly Staph. aureus) or 
streptococci (mainly Strep. pyogenes). Clinical manifesta-
tions are also described in Chapters 25 and 27.
Staphylococcal infections
Staphylococci are usually found colonising the anterior 
nares and skin. Traditionally, staphylococci were 
divided into two groups according to their ability to 
produce coagulase, an enzyme that converts fibrinogen 
to fibrin in rabbit plasma, causing it to clot. Staph. aureus 
is coagulase-positive, and most other species coagulase-
negative. The coagulase test is now less commonly 
undertaken, with identification of Staph. aureus often 
achieved by other methods.
Staph. aureus is the main cause of staphylococcal 
infections. Staph. intermedius is another coagulase-
positive staphylococcus, which causes infection follow-
ing dog bites. Among coagulase-negative organisms, 
Staph. epidermidis is the predominant commensal organ-
ism of the skin, and can cause severe infections in those 
with central venous catheters or implanted prosthetic 
materials. Staph. saprophyticus is part of the normal 
vaginal flora and causes urinary tract infections in 
sexually active young women. Others implicated in 
human infections include Staph. lugdunensis, Staph. 
schleiferi, Staph. haemolyticus and Staph. caprae. Coagulase-
negative staphylococci are not usually identified to 
species level.
Staphylococci are particularly dangerous if they gain 
access to the blood stream, having the potential to cause 
disease in many sites (Fig. 13.15). In any patient with 
staphylococcal bacteraemia, especially injection drug-
users, the possibility of endocarditis must be considered 
(p. 625). Growth of Staph. aureus in blood cultures should 
not be dismissed as a ‘contaminant’ unless all possible 
underlying sources have been excluded and repeated 
HAM or tropical spastic paraparesis occurs in less than 
5% of those with chronic infection, and presents with 
gait disturbance, spasticity of the lower extremities, 
urinary incontinence, impotence and sensory distur-
bance. Myositis and uveitis may also occur with HTLV-1 
infection. Serology confirms the diagnosis. Treatment is 
usually supportive for asymptomatic patients but can 
include zidovudine and interferon-alfa for leukaemia. 
The role of antivirals in other settings including HAM is 
being investigated.
Viral infections with rheumatological 
involvement
Rheumatological syndromes characterise a variety of 
viral infections ranging from exanthems, such as rubella 
and parvovirus B19 (p. 315), to blood-borne viruses, 
such as HBV and HIV-1.
Chikungunya virus
Chikungunya is an alphavirus that causes fever, rash 
and arthropathy. It is found principally in Africa and 
Asia, including India. Humans and non-human pri-
mates are the main reservoir and the main vector is the 
Aedes aegypti mosquito. Cases occur in epidemics on a 
background of sporadic cases. In 2007, an outbreak 
extended as far north as Italy.
The incubation period is 2–12 days. A period of fever 
may be followed by an afebrile phase and then recrudes-
cence of fever. Children may develop a maculopapular 
rash. Adults are susceptible to arthritis, which causes 
early morning pain and swelling, most often in the small 
joints. Arthritis can persist for months and may become 
chronic in individuals who are positive for human leu-
cocyte antigen (HLA)-B27. Related alphaviruses causing 
similar syndromes include Sindbis virus (Scandinavia 
and Africa), O’nyong-nyong virus (Central Africa), Ross 
River virus (Australia) and Mayaro virus (Caribbean 
and South America).
Diagnosis is by serology but cross-reactivity between 
alphaviruses occurs. Treatment is symptomatic.
PRION DISEASES
Prions (p. 134) cause transmissible spongiform encepha-
lopathies in humans, sheep, cows and cats (Box 13.40 
and p. 1211). The prion protein is not inactivated by 
cooking or conventional sterilisation, and transmission 
is thought to occur by consumption of infected CNS 
tissue or by inoculation (e.g. via depth EEG electrodes, 
corneal grafts, cadaveric dura mater grafts and pooled 
cadaveric growth hormone preparations). The same dis-
eases can occur in an inherited form, due to mutations 
in the PrP gene.
The apparent transmission of bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy (BSE) to humans following an outbreak 
of BSE in the UK beginning in the late 1980s has caused 
great concern, leading to precautionary measures in the 
UK, such as leucodepletion of all blood used for transfu-
sion, and the mandatory use of disposable surgical 
instruments wherever possible for tonsillectomy, appen-
dicectomy and ophthalmological procedures.
13.40  Prion diseases affecting humans
Disease
Mechanism
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
Sporadic
Spontaneous PrPc to PrPSc 
conversion or somatic 
mutation
Familial
Mutations in the PrP gene
Variant
Infection from bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy
Gerstmann–Sträussler–
Scheinker disease
Mutations in the PrP gene
Fatal familial insomnia
Mutations in the PrP gene
Sporadic fatal insomnia
Spontaneous PrPc to PrPSc 
conversion or somatic 
mutation
Kuru
Cannibalism
Infectious disease
13
330
symptoms but cannula removal and antibiotic treatment 
with flucloxacillin (or a glycopeptide if MRSA is sus-
pected) are necessary if there is any suggestion of 
spreading infection.
Meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus
Resistance to meticillin, due to a penicillin-binding 
protein mutation, has been recognised in Staph. aureus 
for more than 30 years. The recognition of resistance 
to vancomycin/teicoplanin (glycopeptides) in either 
glycopeptide intermediate Staph. aureus (GISA) or, 
blood culture is negative. Any evidence of spreading 
cellulitis indicates the urgent need for an antistaphylo-
coccal antibiotic, such as flucloxacillin. This is particu-
larly true for mid-facial cellulitis, which can result in 
cavernous sinus thrombophlebitis.
In addition, Staph. aureus can cause severe systemic 
disease due to the effects of toxin produced at superficial 
sites in the absence of tissue invasion by bacteria.
Skin infections
Staphylococcal infections cause ecthyma, folliculitis, 
furuncles, carbuncles, bullous impetigo and the scalded 
skin syndrome (pp. 1275–1276). They may also be 
involved in necrotising infections of the skin and subcu-
taneous tissues (p. 305).
Wound infections
Many wound infections are caused by staphylococci, 
which may significantly prolong post-operative hospi-
tal stays (Fig. 13.16A). Prevention involves careful 
attention to hand hygiene, skin preparation and aseptic 
technique, and the use of topical and systemic antibiotic 
prophylaxis.
Treatment is by drainage of any abscesses plus ade-
quate dosage of antistaphylococcal antibiotics. These 
should be instituted early, particularly if prosthetic 
implants of any kind have been inserted.
Cannula-related infection
Staphylococcal infection associated with cannula sepsis 
(Fig. 13.16B and p. 304) and thrombophlebitis is an 
important and, unfortunately, extremely common 
reason for morbidity following hospital admission. The 
Visual Infusion Phlebitis (VIP) score is a useful way of 
monitoring cannulae (Box 13.41). Staphylococci have 
a predilection for plastic, rapidly forming a biofilm 
which remains as a source of bacteraemia as long as the 
plastic is in situ. Local poultice application may relieve 
Fig. 13.15  Infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus. 
CNS
Meningitis
Brain abscess
(neurosurgical 
infections in
particular)
Respiratory
Pneumonia
Lung abscess
Empyema
Cardiac
Endocarditis
Pericarditis
Blood stream
Septicaemia
Metastatic
abscesses
Bone and joint
Osteomyelitis
Septic arthritis
Intestinal 
Enterocolitis
Multisystem
Toxic shock
syndrome
Skin 
Wound 
infections
Boils, styes, 
carbuncles,
abscesses
Fig. 13.16  Manifestations of skin infection with Staph. aureus.
 A  Wound infection. B  Cannula-related infection. 
B
A
Clinical features
Score
Assessment and 
management
IV site appears healthy
0
No signs of phlebitis
Observe cannula
One of the following is 
evident:
1
Possible first signs 
of phlebitis
Observe cannula
Slight pain near IV site
Slight redness near IV site
Two of the following are 
evident:
2
Early stage of 
phlebitis
Resite cannula
Pain near IV site
Erythema
Swelling
ALL of the following are 
evident and extensive:
3
Medium stage of 
phlebitis
Resite cannula
Consider treatment
Pain along path of cannula
Erythema
Induration
ALL of the following are 
evident and extensive:
4
Advanced stage of 
phlebitis or start of 
thrombophlebitis
Resite cannula
Consider treatment
Pain along path of cannula
Erythema
Induration
Palpable venous cord
ALL of the following are 
evident:
5
Advanced stage of 
thrombophlebitis
Initiate treatment
Resite cannula
Pain along path of cannula
Erythema
Induration
Palpable venous cord
Pyrexia
13.41  How to assess an intravenous cannula 
using the Visual Infusion Phlebitis score (VIP)*
*Adapted from Jackson A. Nursing Times 1997; 94:68–71.
Bacterial infections
13
331
The diagnosis is clinical and may be confirmed in 
menstrual cases by vaginal examination, the finding of 
a retained tampon, and microbiological examination 
by Gram stain demonstrating typical staphylococci. Sub-
sequent culture and demonstration of toxin production 
are confirmatory.
Management
Treatment is with immediate and aggressive fluid resus-
citation and an intravenous antistaphylococcal antibiotic 
(flucloxacillin or vancomycin), usually with the addition 
of a protein synthesis inhibitor (e.g. clindamycin) to 
inhibit toxin production. Intravenous immunoglobulin 
is occasionally added in the most severe cases on the 
basis of efficacy in streptococcal toxic shock. Women 
who recover should be advised not to use tampons for 
at least 1 year and should also be warned that, due to an 
inadequate antibody response to TSST1, the condition 
can recur.
Streptococcal infections
Streptococci are nasopharyngeal and gut commensals, 
which appear as Gram-positive cocci in chains (Fig. 6.3, 
p. 136). They are classified by the haemolysis they 
produce on blood agar (Fig. 6.4, p. 136) and by their 
serotypes (Box 13.42). Some streptococci (e.g. Strep. 
milleri group) defy simple classification.
Skin presentations of streptococcal 
infections
Group A streptococci (GAS) are the major cause of cel-
lulitis, erysipelas and impetigo (pp. 1275 and 1277). 
Groups C and G streptococci cause cellulitis, in elderly, 
diabetic or immunocompromised patients in particular. 
Group B streptococcal (GBS) infection is an increasing 
problem at the extremes of age.
Streptococcal scarlet fever
Group A (or occasionally groups C and G) streptococci 
causing pharyngitis, tonsillitis or other infection may 
lead to scarlet fever, if the infecting strain produces a 
streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin. Common in school-
age children, scarlet fever can occur in young adults who 
have contact with young children. A diffuse erythema-
tous rash occurs, which blanches on pressure (Fig. 
13.18A), classically with circumoral pallor. The tongue, 
initially coated, becomes red and swollen (‘strawberry 
tongue’ – Fig. 13.18B). The disease lasts about 7 days, the 
rash disappearing in 7–10 days, followed by a fine 
desquamation. Residual petechial lesions in the antecu-
bital fossa may be seen (‘Pastia’s sign’ – Fig. 13.18C).
Treatment involves active therapy for the underlying 
infection (benzylpenicillin or orally available penicillin) 
plus symptomatic measures.
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
This is associated with severe group A (or occasionally 
group C or G) streptococcal skin infections producing 
one of a variety of toxins, such as pyogenic exotoxin A. 
Like staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome toxin (see 
above), these act as superantigens, stimulating a dra-
matic cytokine response. Initially, an influenza-like 
illness occurs with, in 50% of cases, signs of localised 
infection, most often involving the skin and soft tissues. 
A faint erythematous rash, mainly on the chest, rapidly 
rarely, vancomycin-resistant (VRSA) strains threatens 
the ability to manage serious infections produced by 
such 
organisms. 
Meticillin-resistant 
Staph. 
aureus 
(MRSA) is now a major worldwide health care-acquired 
pathogen, accounting for up to 40% of staphylococcal 
bacteraemia in developed countries. Community-
acquired MRSA (c-MRSA) currently accounts for 50% of 
all MRSA infections in the USA. These organisms have 
also acquired other virulence factors, such as Panton–
Valentine leukocidin (PVL), which can cause rapidly 
fatal infection in young people. Clinicians must be aware 
of the potential danger of these infections and be pre-
pared to take whatever appropriate infection control 
measures are locally advised (p. 145).
Treatment options for MRSA are shown in Box 6.17  
(p. 151). Treatment should always be based on the 
results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing, since resist-
ance to all these agents occurs. Milder MRSA infections 
may be treated with clindamycin, tetracyclines or 
co-trimoxazole. Glycopeptides, linezolid and dapto­
mycin are reserved for treatment of more severe infec-
tions. PVL-producing Staph. aureus infections should be 
treated with protein-inhibiting antibiotics (clindamycin, 
linezolid).
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is a serious 
and life-threatening disease associated with infection by 
Staph. aureus, which produces a specific toxin (toxic 
shock syndrome toxin 1, TSST1). It was commonly seen 
in young women in association with the use of highly 
absorbent intravaginal tampons but can occur with any 
Staph. aureus infection involving a relevant toxin-
producing strain. The toxin acts as a ‘superantigen’, trig-
gering significant T-helper cell activation and massive 
cytokine release.
TSS has an abrupt onset with high fever, generalised 
systemic upset (myalgia, headache, sore throat and 
vomiting), a generalised erythematous blanching rash 
resembling scarlet fever, and hypotension. It rapidly 
progresses over a matter of hours to multisystem 
involvement with cardiac, renal and hepatic compro-
mise, leading to death in 10–20%. Recovery is accompa-
nied at 7–10 days by desquamation (Fig. 13.17).
Fig. 13.17  Full-thickness desquamation after staphylococcal 
toxic shock syndrome. 
Infectious disease
13
332
Fig. 13.18  Clinical features of scarlet fever. A  Characteristic rash with blanching on pressure. B  ‘Strawberry tongue’. C  Pastia’s sign: 
a petechial rash in the cubital fossa. 
C
B
A
progresses to circulatory shock. Without aggressive 
management, multi-organ failure will develop.
Fluid resuscitation must be undertaken, with 
parenteral antistreptococcal antibiotic therapy, usually 
with benzylpenicillin and a protein inhibitor, such as 
clindamycin, to inhibit toxin production. Intravenous 
immunoglobulin is usually administered in addition. If 
necrotising fasciitis is present, it should be treated as 
described on page 305 with urgent débridement.
Treponematoses
Syphilis
This disease is described on page 419.
Endemic treponematoses
Yaws
Yaws is a granulomatous disease, mainly involving the 
skin and bones; it is caused by Treponema pertenue, mor-
phologically and serologically indistinguishable from 
the causative organisms of syphilis and pinta. It is 
important to establish the geographical origin and 
sexual history of patients to exclude a false-positive 
syphilis serology due to the endemic treponemal infec-
tions. Between 1950 and 1960, WHO campaigns treated 
over 60 million people and eradicated yaws from many 
areas, but the disease has persisted patchily throughout 
the tropics; there was resurgence in the 1980s and 1990s 
in West and Central Africa and the South Pacific.
Organisms are transmitted by bodily contact from a 
patient with infectious yaws through minor abrasions of 
the skin of another patient, usually a child. After an 
incubation period of 3–4 weeks, a proliferative granu-
loma containing numerous treponemes develops at 
the site of inoculation. This primary lesion is followed 
by secondary eruptions. In addition, there may be 
hypertrophic periosteal lesions of many bones, with 
underlying cortical rarefaction. Lesions of late yaws are 
characterised by destructive changes which closely 
resemble the osteitis and gummas of tertiary syphilis 
and which heal with much scarring and deformity. 
Investigations and management are outlined in 
Box 13.43.
The disease disappears with improved housing 
and cleanliness. In few fields of medicine have 
β-haemolytic group A (Strep. pyogenes)
• Skin and soft tissue 
infection (including 
erysipelas, impetigo, 
necrotising fasciitis)
• Streptococcal toxic shock 
syndrome
• Puerperal sepsis
• Scarlet fever
• Glomerulonephritis
• Rheumatic fever
• Bone and joint infection
• Tonsillitis
β-haemolytic group B (Strep. agalactiae)
• Neonatal infections, 
including meningitis
• Septicaemia
• Female pelvic infections
• Cellulitis
β-haemolytic group C (various zoonotic streptococci)
• Septicaemia
• Cellulitis
• Pharyngitis
α, β- or non-haemolytic group D enterococci 
(E. faecalis/faecium)
• Endocarditis
• Intra-abdominal infections
• Urinary tract infection
α, β- or non-haemolytic group D streptococci (Strep. bovis)
• Endocarditis
• Septicaemia
• Liver abscess
• Brain abscess
β-haemolytic group G streptococci
• Septicaemia
• Cellulitis
• Liver abscess
α-haemolytic viridans group (Strep. mitis, sanguis, mutans, 
salivarius)
• Septicaemia in 
immunosuppressed
• Endocarditis
α-haemolytic optochin-sensitive (Strep. pneumoniae)
• Pneumonia
• Meningitis
• Endocarditis
• Otitis media
• Septicaemia
• Spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis
Anaerobic streptococci (Peptostreptococcus spp.)
• Peritonitis
• Dental infections
• Liver abscess
• Pelvic inflammatory disease
N.B. All streptococci can cause septicaemia.
13.42  Streptococcal and related infections
Bacterial infections
13
333
granuloma formation and the accompanying fibrosis 
cause contractures and deformity. Clumps of acid-fast 
bacilli can be detected in the ulcer floor.
A combination of rifampicin and streptomycin can 
cure the infection. Infected tissue should be removed 
surgically. Health campaigns in Ghana have success-
fully focused on early removal of the small, pre-
ulcerative nodules.
Systemic bacterial infections
Brucellosis
Brucellosis is an enzootic infection (i.e. endemic in 
animals). Although six species of Brucella Gram-negative 
bacilli are known, only four are important to humans: B. 
melitensis (goats, sheep and camels in Europe, especially 
the Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, Africa, India, 
Central Asia and South America), B. abortus (cattle, 
mainly in Africa, Asia and South America), B. suis (pigs 
in South Asia) and B. canis (dogs). B. melitensis causes 
the most severe disease; B. suis is often associated with 
abscess formation.
Infected animals may excrete Brucella spp. in their 
milk for prolonged periods, and human infection is 
acquired by ingesting contaminated dairy products 
(especially unpasteurised milk), uncooked meat or offal. 
Animal urine, faeces, vaginal discharge and uterine 
products may act as sources of infection through abraded 
skin or via splashes and aerosols to the respiratory tract 
and conjunctiva.
Clinical features
Brucella spp. are intracellular organisms that survive for 
long periods within the reticulo-endothelial system. This 
explains many of the clinical features, including the 
chronicity of disease and tendency to relapse, even after 
antimicrobial therapy.
Acute illness is characterised by a high swinging tem-
perature, rigors, lethargy, headache, joint and muscle 
pains, and scrotal pain. Occasionally, there is delirium, 
abdominal pain and constipation. Physical signs 
are non-specific, e.g. enlarged lymph nodes. Enlarge-
ment of the spleen may lead to hypersplenism and 
thrombocytopenia.
Localised infection (Fig. 13.19), which occurs in about 
30% of patients, is more likely if diagnosis and treatment 
are delayed.
Diagnosis
Definitive diagnosis depends on the isolation of the 
organism. Blood cultures are positive in 75–80% of infec-
tions caused by B. melitensis and 50% of those caused by 
B. abortus. Bone marrow culture should not be used rou-
tinely but may increase the diagnostic yield, particularly 
if antibiotics have been given before specimens are 
taken. CSF culture in neurobrucellosis is positive in 
about 30% of cases. The laboratory should be alerted to 
a suspected diagnosis of brucellosis, as the organism has 
a propensity for infecting laboratory workers and must 
be cultured at an enhanced containment level.
Serology may also aid diagnosis. In endemic areas, a 
single high antibody titre of more than 1/320 or a four-
fold rise in titre is needed to support a diagnosis of acute 
infection. The test usually takes several weeks to become 
chemotherapy and improved hygiene achieved such 
dramatic success as in the control of yaws.
Pinta and bejel
These two treponemal infections occur in poor rural 
populations with low standards of domestic hygiene, 
but are found in separate parts of the world. They have 
features in common, notably that they are transmitted 
by contact, usually within the family and not sexually, 
and in the case of bejel, through common eating and 
drinking utensils. Their diagnosis and management are 
as for yaws (see Box 13.43).
• Pinta. Pinta is probably the oldest of the human 
treponemal infections. It is found only in South and 
Central America, where its incidence is declining. 
The infection is confined to the skin. The early 
lesions are scaly papules or dyschromic patches on 
the skin. The late lesions are often depigmented and 
disfiguring.
• Bejel. Bejel is the Middle Eastern name for non-
venereal syphilis, which has a patchy distribution 
across sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, Central 
Asia and Australia. It has been eradicated from 
Eastern Europe. Transmission is most commonly 
from the mouth of the mother or child and the 
primary mucosal lesion is seldom seen. The early 
and late lesions resemble those of secondary and 
tertiary syphilis (pp. 419–420) but cardiovascular 
and neurological disease is rare.
Tropical ulcer
Tropical ulcer is due to a synergistic bacterial infection 
caused by a fusobacterium (F. ulcerans, an anaerobe) and 
Treponema vincentii. It is common in hot, humid regions. 
The ulcer is most common on the lower legs and devel-
ops as a papule that rapidly breaks down to a sharply 
defined, painful ulcer. The base of the ulcer has a foul 
slough. Penicillin and metronidazole are useful in the 
early stages but rest, elevation and dressings are the 
mainstays of treatment.
Buruli ulcer
This ulcer is caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans and 
occurs widely in tropical rainforests. In 1999, a survey 
in Ghana found 6500 cases; there are an estimated 10 000 
cases in West Africa as a whole.
The initial lesion is a small subcutaneous nodule on 
the arm or leg. This breaks down to form a shallow, 
necrotic ulcer with deeply undermined edges, which 
extends rapidly. Healing may occur after 6 months, but 
Diagnosis of early stages
• Detection of spirochaetes in exudate of lesions by dark 
ground microscopy
Diagnosis of latent and early stages
• Positive serological tests, as for syphilis (see Box 15.8,  
p. 421)
Treatment of all stages
• Single intramuscular injection of 1.2 g long-acting (e.g. 
benzathine) benzylpenicillin
13.43  Diagnosis and treatment of yaws, pinta 
and bejel
Infectious disease
13
334
positive but should eventually detect 95% of acute 
infections.
Management
Aminoglycosides show synergistic activity with tetracy-
clines against brucellae. Treatment regimens for differ-
ent forms of brucellosis are outlined in Box 13.44.
Borrelia infections
Borrelia are flagellated spirochaetal bacteria which infect 
humans after bites from ticks or lice. They cause a variety 
of human infections worldwide (Box 13.45).
Lyme disease
Lyme disease (named after the town of Old Lyme in 
Connecticut, USA) is caused by B. burgdorferi, which 
occurs in the USA, Europe, Russia, China, Japan and 
Australia. In Europe, two additional genospecies are 
also encountered, B. afzelii and B. garinii. The reservoir 
of infection is ixodid (hard) ticks that feed on a variety 
of large mammals, particularly deer. Birds may spread 
ticks over a wide area. The organism is transmitted to 
humans via the bite of infected ticks; larval, nymphal 
and adult forms are all capable of spreading infection.
Ehrlichiosis is a common co-infection with Lyme 
disease (Anaplasma phagocytophila, human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis (HGA); Ehrlichia chaffeensis, human mono-
cytic ehrlichiosis (HME) ).
Clinical features
There are three stages of disease. Progression may be 
arrested at any stage.
• Early localised disease. The characteristic feature is a 
skin reaction around the site of the tick bite, known 
as erythema migrans (Fig. 13.20). Initially, a red 
Fig. 13.19  Clinical features of brucellosis. 
Malodorous perspiration
Suppurative arthritis
Synovitis, bursitis
Osteomyelitis
Spinal spondylitis or sacroiliitis
Paravertebral or psoas abscess
Meningitis
Intracranial or subarachnoid haemorrhage
Stroke
Myelopathy
Radiculopathy
Cranial nerve palsies
Uveitis
Retinal thrombophlebitis
Myocarditis
Endocarditis
Pneumonitis or abscesses
Hilar lymphadenopathy
Splenic abscesses or calcification
Hepatitis
Epididymo-orchitis
Pancytopenia
Adults with non-localised disease
• Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily orally for 6 wks plus 
gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV once daily for 7 days
or
• Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily plus rifampicin 600–900 mg 
orally once daily for 6 wks
Bone disease
• Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily plus rifampicin 600–900 mg 
once daily orally for 6 wks plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV once 
daily for 7 days
or
• Ciprofloxacin 750 mg twice daily orally plus rifampicin 
600–900 mg orally once daily for 3 mths
Neurobrucellosis
• Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily plus rifampicin 600–900 mg 
orally once daily for 6 wks plus ceftriaxone 2 g IV twice daily 
until CSF is clear (though susceptibility should be confirmed 
because sensitivity to third-generation cephalosporins varies 
amongst strains)
Endocarditis
• Almost always needs surgical intervention
plus
• Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily, rifampicin 600–900 mg 
orally once daily and co-trimoxazole 5 mg/kg of trimethoprim 
component for 6 mths plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV once daily 
for 2–4 wks
Pregnancy
• Rifampicin 600–900 mg orally once daily and co-trimoxazole 
5 mg/kg of trimethoprim component for 4 wks, but caution in 
last week of pregnancy due to displacement of bilirubin from 
albumin by drugs and risk of kernicterus to the fetus
13.44  Treatment of brucellosis
Bacterial infections
13
335
Fig. 13.20  Rash of erythema migrans in Lyme disease with 
metastatic secondary lesions. 
13.45  Clinical diseases caused by Borrelia spp.
Species
Vector
Geographic 
distribution
Lyme disease
B. burgdorferi 
sensu stricto
Tick: Ixodes 
scapularis
Northern and eastern 
USA
I. pacificus
Western USA
B. afzelii
I. ricinus
Europe
I. persulcatus
Asia
B. garinii
I. ricinus
Europe
I. persulcatus
Asia
Louse-borne relapsing fever
B. recurrentis
Human louse:
Pediculus humanus 
corporis
Worldwide
Tick-borne relapsing fever
B. hermsii
Tick: Ornithodoros 
hermsii
Western North 
America
B. turicatae
O. turicatae
Southwestern North 
America and northern 
Mexico
B. venezuelensis
O. rudis
Central America and 
northern South 
America
B. hispanica
O. erraticus
Iberian peninsula and 
northwestern Africa
B. crocidurae
O. erraticus
North Africa and 
Mediterranean region
B. duttonii
O. moubata
Central, eastern and 
southern Africa
B. persica
O. tholozani
Western China, India, 
central Asia, Middle 
East
B. latyschewii
O. tartakovskyi
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan
‘bull’s eye’ macule or papule appears 2–30 days 
after the bite. It then enlarges peripherally with 
central clearing, and may persist for months. 
Atypical forms are fairly common. The lesion is not 
pathognomonic of Lyme disease since similar 
lesions can occur after tick bites in areas where 
Lyme disease does not occur. Other acute 
manifestations, such as fever, headache and regional 
lymphadenopathy, may develop with or without 
the rash.
• Early disseminated disease. Dissemination occurs via 
the blood stream and lymphatics. There may be a 
systemic reaction with malaise, arthralgia, and 
occasionally metastatic areas of erythema migrans 
(see Fig. 13.20). Neurological involvement may 
follow weeks or months after infection. Common 
features include lymphocytic meningitis, cranial 
nerve palsies (especially unilateral or bilateral facial 
nerve palsy) and peripheral neuropathy. 
Radiculopathy, often painful, may present a year or 
more after initial infection. Carditis, sometimes 
accompanied by atrioventricular conduction defects, 
is not uncommon in the USA but appears to be rare 
in Europe.
• Late disease. Late manifestations include arthritis, 
polyneuritis and encephalopathy. Prolonged 
arthritis, particularly affecting large joints, and brain 
parenchymal involvement causing neuropsychiatric 
abnormalities may occur, but are rare in the UK. 
Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans is an 
uncommon late complication seen more frequently 
in Europe than North America. Doughy, patchy 
discoloration occurs on the peripheries, eventually 
leading to shiny atrophic skin. The lesions are easily 
mistaken for those of peripheral vascular disease. In 
patients from an endemic area or with risk factors, 
who have facial nerve palsy, Lyme disease should 
be considered.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of early Lyme borreliosis is often clinical. 
Culture from biopsy material is not generally available, 
has a low yield, and may take longer than 6 weeks. 
Antibody detection is frequently negative early in the 
course of the disease, but sensitivity increases to 90–
100% in disseminated or late disease. Immunofluores-
cence or ELISA can give false-positive reactions in a 
number of conditions, including other spirochaetal 
infections, infectious mononucleosis, rheumatoid arthri-
tis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Immuno­
blot (Western blot) techniques are more specific and, 
although technically demanding, should be used to 
confirm the diagnosis. Microorganism DNA detection 
by PCR has been applied to blood, urine, CSF, and biop-
sies of skin and synovium.
Management
Recent evidence suggests that asymptomatic patients 
with positive antibody tests should not be treated. 
However, erythema migrans always requires therapy 
because organisms may persist and cause progressive 
disease, even if the skin lesions resolve. Standard therapy 
consists of a 14-day course of doxycycline (200 mg daily) 
or amoxicillin (500 mg 3 times daily). Some 15% of 
patients with early disease will develop a mild Jarisch–
Herxheimer reaction (JHR) during the first 24 hours of 
therapy (p. 421). In pregnant women and small children, 
or in those allergic to amoxicillin and doxycycline, 
14-day treatment with cefuroxime axetil (500 mg 
twice daily) or erythromycin (250 mg 4 times daily) 
may be used.
Disseminated disease and arthritis require therapy 
for a minimum of 28 days. Arthritis may respond poorly, 
and prolonged or repeated courses may be necessary. 
Neuroborreliosis is treated with parenteral β-lactam 
Infectious disease
13
336
antibiotics for 3–4 weeks; the cephalosporins may be 
superior to penicillin in this situation.
Prevention
Protective clothing and insect repellents should be used 
in tick-infested areas. Since the risk of borrelial transmis-
sion is lower in the first few hours of a blood feed, 
prompt removal of ticks is advisable. Unfortunately, 
larval and nymphal ticks are tiny and may not be 
noticed. Where risk of transmission is high, a single 
200 mg dose of doxycycline, given within 72 hours of 
exposure, has been shown to prevent erythema migrans. 
A recombinant OspA vaccine was developed but with-
drawn due to side-effects.
Louse-borne relapsing fever
The human body louse, Pediculus humanus, causes itching. 
Borreliae (B. recurrentis) are liberated from infected lice 
when they are crushed during scratching, which also 
inoculates the borreliae into the skin. The disease occurs 
worldwide, with epidemic relapsing fever most often 
seen in Central/East Africa and South America.
The borreliae multiply in the blood, where they are 
abundant in the febrile phases, and invade most tissues, 
especially the liver, spleen and meninges. Hepatitis and 
thrombocytopenia are common.
Clinical features
Onset is sudden with fever. The temperature rises to 
39.5–40.5°C, accompanied by a tachycardia, headache, 
generalised aching, injected conjunctivae (Fig. 13.21) 
and, frequently, a petechial rash, epistaxis and herpes 
labialis. As the disease progresses, the liver and spleen 
frequently become tender and palpable, and jaundice is 
common. There may be severe serosal and intestinal 
haemorrhage, mental confusion and meningism. The 
fever ends in crisis between the 4th and 10th days, often 
associated with profuse sweating, hypotension, and cir-
culatory and cardiac failure. There may be no further 
fever but, in a proportion of patients, after an afebrile 
period of about 7 days, there are one or more relapses, 
which are usually milder and less prolonged. In the 
absence of specific treatment, the mortality rate is up to 
40%, especially among the elderly and malnourished.
Investigations and management
The organisms are demonstrated in the blood during 
fever either by dark ground microscopy of a wet film or 
in Wright–Giemsa stained thick and thin films.
The problems of treatment are to eradicate the organ-
ism, to minimise the severe JHR which inevitably follows 
successful chemotherapy, and to prevent relapses. The 
safest treatment is procaine penicillin 300 mg IM, fol-
lowed the next day by 0.5 g tetracycline. Tetracycline 
alone is effective and prevents relapse, but may give rise 
to a worse reaction. Doxycycline 200 mg once orally in 
place of tetracycline has the advantage of also being 
curative for typhus, which often accompanies epidemics 
of relapsing fever. JHR is best managed in a high-
dependency unit with expert nursing and medical care.
The patient, clothing and all contacts must be freed 
from lice, as in epidemic typhus.
Tick-borne relapsing fever
Soft ticks (Ornithodoros spp.) transmit B. duttonii (and 
several other borrelia species) through saliva while 
feeding on their host. People sleeping in mud houses are 
at risk, as the tick hides in crevices during the day and 
feeds on humans during the night. Rodents are the res-
ervoir in all parts of the world except East Africa, where 
humans are the reservoir. Clinical manifestations are 
similar to those seen with the louse-borne disease, but 
spirochaetes are detected in fewer patients on dark field 
microscopy. A 7-day course (due to a higher relapse rate 
than in louse-borne relapsing fever) of treatment with 
either tetracycline (500 mg 4 times daily) or erythro­
mycin (500 mg 4 times daily) is needed.
Leptospirosis
Microbiology and epidemiology
Leptospirosis is one of the most common zoonotic dis-
eases, favoured by a tropical climate and flooding during 
the monsoon but occurring worldwide. Leptospires are 
tightly coiled, thread-like organisms about 5–7 µm in 
length, which are actively motile; each end is bent into 
a hook. Leptospira interrogans is pathogenic for humans. 
The genus can be separated into more than 200 serovars 
(subtypes) belonging to 23 serogroups.
Leptospirosis appears to be ubiquitous in wildlife 
and in many domestic animals. The organisms persist 
indefinitely in the convoluted tubules of the kidney and 
are shed into the urine in massive numbers, but infection 
is asymptomatic in the host. The most frequent hosts are 
rodents, especially the common rat (Rattus norvegicus). 
Particular leptospiral serogroups are associated with 
characteristic animal hosts; for example, L. ictero-
haemorrhagiae is the classical parasite of rats and L. cani-
cola of dogs. There is nevertheless considerable overlap 
in host–serogroup associations.
Leptospires can enter their human hosts through 
intact skin or mucous membranes, but entry is facilitated 
by cuts and abrasions. Prolonged immersion in contami-
nated water will also favour invasion, as the spirochaete 
can survive in water for months. Leptospirosis is 
common in the tropics and also in freshwater sports 
enthusiasts.
Clinical features
After a relatively brief bacteraemia, invading organisms 
are distributed throughout the body, mainly in kidneys, 
liver, meninges and brain. The incubation period aver-
ages 1–2 weeks. Four main clinical syndromes can be 
discerned and clinical features can involve multiple dif-
ferent organ systems (Fig. 13.22).
Fig. 13.21  Louse-borne relapsing fever. Injected conjunctivae. 
Bacterial infections
13
337
Weil’s disease may also be associated with myocar-
ditis, encephalitis and aseptic meningitis. Uveitis and 
iritis may appear months after apparent clinical 
recovery.
Pulmonary syndrome
This syndrome has long been recognised in the Far East, 
and has been described during an outbreak of lepto­
spirosis in Nicaragua. It is characterised by haemoptysis, 
patchy lung infiltrates on chest X-ray, and respiratory 
failure. Total bilateral lung consolidation and ARDS 
(p. 192) with multi-organ dysfunction may develop, 
with a high mortality (over 50%).
Diagnosis
A polymorphonuclear leucocytosis is accompanied in 
severe infection by thrombocytopenia and elevated 
blood levels of creatine kinase. In jaundiced patients, 
there is hepatitis and the prothrombin time may be pro-
longed. The CSF in leptospiral meningitis shows a vari-
able cellular response, a moderately elevated protein 
level and normal glucose content. Acute renal failure 
due to interstitial nephritis is common.
In the tropics, dengue, malaria, typhoid fever, scrub 
typhus and hantavirus infection are important differen-
tial diagnoses.
Definitive diagnosis of leptospirosis depends upon 
isolation of the organism, serological tests or the detec-
tion of specific DNA. In general, however, it is probably 
under-diagnosed.
• Blood cultures are most likely to be positive if taken 
before the tenth day of illness. Special media are 
required and cultures may have to be incubated for 
several weeks.
• Leptospires appear in the urine during the second 
week of illness, and in untreated patients may be 
recovered on culture for several months.
Bacteraemic leptospirosis
Bacteraemia with any serogroup can produce a non-
specific illness with high fever, weakness, muscle pain 
and tenderness (especially of the calf and back), intense 
headache and photophobia, and sometimes diarrhoea 
and vomiting. Conjunctival congestion is the only 
notable physical sign. The illness comes to an end after 
about 1 week, or else merges into one of the other forms 
of infection.
Aseptic meningitis
Classically associated with L. canicola infection, this 
illness is very difficult to distinguish from viral menin-
gitis. The conjunctivae may be congested but there are 
no other differentiating signs. Laboratory clues include 
a neutrophil leucocytosis, abnormal LFTs, and the occa-
sional presence of albumin and casts in the urine.
Icteric leptospirosis (Weil’s disease)
Fewer than 10% of symptomatic infections result in 
severe icteric illness. Weil’s disease is a dramatic life-
threatening event, characterised by fever, haemorrhages, 
jaundice and renal impairment. Conjunctival hyper­
aemia is a frequent feature. The patient may have a 
transient macular erythematous rash, but the character-
istic skin changes are purpura and large areas of bruis-
ing. In severe cases there may be epistaxis, haematemesis 
and melaena, or bleeding into the pleural, pericardial 
or subarachnoid spaces. Thrombocytopenia, probably 
related to activation of endothelial cells with platelet 
adhesion and aggregation, is present in 50% of cases. 
Jaundice is deep and the liver is enlarged, but there is 
usually little evidence of hepatic failure or encephalopa-
thy. Renal failure, primarily caused by impaired renal 
perfusion and acute tubular necrosis, manifests as olig­
uria or anuria, with the presence of albumin, blood and 
casts in the urine.
Fig. 13.22  Clinical syndromes of 
leptospirosis. (ARDS = acute respiratory distress 
syndrome) 
Headache
Photophobia
Aseptic
meningitis
Bacteraemic leptospirosis
Pulmonary
syndrome
Weil’s disease
Epistaxis
Haematemesis
Conjunctivitis
Uveitis
Jaundice
Pericarditis/
myocarditis/
vasculiitis
Myositis
Diarrhoea
Vomiting
Haemoptysis
Pulmonary
haemorrhage
ARDS
Hepatomegaly
Renal failure
Transient
macular rash
Purpura
Bruising
Infectious disease
13
338
and the high fatality rate associated with pneumonic 
plague.
Clinical features
Organisms inoculated through the skin are taken rapidly 
to the draining lymph nodes, where they elicit a severe 
inflammatory response that may be haemorrhagic. If 
the infection is not contained, septicaemia ensues and 
necrotic, purulent or haemorrhagic lesions develop in 
many organs. Oliguria and shock follow, and dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation may result in wide-
spread haemorrhage. Inhalation of Y. pestis causes 
alveolitis. The incubation period is 3–6 days, but shorter 
in pneumonic plague.
Bubonic plague
In this, the most common form of the disease, onset is 
usually sudden, with a rigor, high fever, dry skin and 
severe headache. Soon, aching and swelling at the site 
of the affected lymph nodes begin. The groin is the most 
common site of this ‘bubo’, made up of the swollen 
lymph nodes and surrounding tissue. Some infections 
are relatively mild but, in the majority of patients, tox-
aemia quickly increases, with a rapid pulse, hypotension 
and mental confusion. The spleen is usually palpable.
Septicaemic plague
Those not exhibiting a bubo usually deteriorate rapidly 
and have a high mortality. The elderly are more prone 
to this form of illness. The patient is toxic and may have 
gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain and diarrhoea. DIC may occur, mani-
fested by bleeding from various orifices or puncture 
sites, along with ecchymoses. Hypotension, shock, renal 
failure and ARDS may lead to further deterioration. 
Meningitis, pneumonia and expectoration of blood-
stained sputum containing Y. pestis may complicate sep-
ticaemic, or occasionally bubonic, plague.
Pneumonic plague
Following primary infection in the lung, the onset of 
disease is very sudden, with cough and dyspnoea. The 
patient soon expectorates copious blood-stained, frothy, 
highly infective sputum, becomes cyanosed and dies. 
Chest radiology reveals bilateral infiltrates which may 
be nodular and progress to an ARDS-like picture.
Investigations
The organism may be cultured from blood, sputum and 
bubo aspirates. For rapid diagnosis, Gram, Giemsa and 
Wayson’s stains (the latter containing methylene blue) 
are applied to smears from these sites. Y. pestis is seen 
as bipolar staining coccobacilli, sometimes referred to as 
having a ‘safety pin’ appearance. Smears are also sub-
jected to antigen detection by immunofluorescence, 
using Y. pestis F1 antigen-specific antibodies. The diag-
nosis may be confirmed by seroconversion or a single 
high titre (> 128) of anti-F1 antibodies in serum. DNA 
detection by PCR is under evaluation.
Plague is a notifiable disease under international 
health regulations (p. 147).
Management
If the diagnosis is suspected on clinical and epidemio-
logical grounds, treatment must be started as soon as, or 
even before, samples have been collected for laboratory 
• Serological tests are diagnostic if seroconversion or 
a fourfold increase in titre is demonstrated. The 
microscopic agglutination test (MAT) is the test of 
choice and can become positive by the end of the 
first week. IgM ELISA and immunofluorescent 
techniques are, however, easier to perform, while 
rapid immunochromatographic tests are specific but 
of only moderate sensitivity in the first week of 
illness.
• Detection of leptospiral DNA by PCR is possible in 
blood in early symptomatic disease, and in urine 
from the eighth day of illness and for many months 
thereafter.
Management and prevention
The general care of the patient is critically important. 
Blood transfusion for haemorrhage and careful attention 
to renal failure, the usual cause of death, are especially 
important. Renal failure is potentially reversible with 
adequate support, such as dialysis. The optimal anti­
microbial regimen has not been established. Most 
infections are self-limiting. Therapy with either oral 
doxycycline (100 mg twice daily for 1 week) or intra­
venous penicillin (900 mg 4 times daily for 1 week) is 
effective but may not prevent the development of renal 
failure. Parenteral ceftriaxone (1 g daily) is as effective 
as penicillin. A Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction may occur 
during treatment but is usually mild. Uveitis is treated 
with a combination of systemic antibiotics and local cor-
ticosteroids. There is no role for the routine use of corti-
costeroids in the management of leptospirosis.
Trials in military personnel have shown that infection 
with L. interrogans can be prevented by taking prophy-
lactic doxycycline 200 mg weekly.
Plague
Plague is caused by Yersinia pestis, a small Gram-negative 
bacillus that is spread between rodents by their fleas. If 
domestic rats become infected, infected fleas may bite 
humans. Hunters and trappers can contract plague from 
handling rodents. In the late stages of human plague, Y. 
pestis may be expectorated and spread between humans 
by droplets, causing ‘pneumonic plague’.
Epidemics of plague, such as the ‘Black Death’, have 
occurred since ancient times. It is often said that the first 
sign of plague is the appearance of dead rats. Plague foci 
are widely distributed throughout the world, including 
the USA; human cases are reported from about ten coun-
tries per year (Fig. 13.23).
Y. pestis is a potential bioweapon because of its 
capacity for mass production and aerosol transmission, 
Fig. 13.23  Foci of the transmission of plague. Reproduced by 
permission of WHO.
Frequent transmission
Infrequent or suspected
transmission
Bacterial infections
13
339
they are relatively rare. Enteric fevers are caused by 
infection with Salmonella typhi and S. paratyphi A and B. 
After a few days of bacteraemia, the bacilli localise, 
mainly in the lymphoid tissue of the small intestine, 
resulting in typical lesions in the Peyer’s patches and 
follicles. These swell at first, then ulcerate and usually 
heal. After clinical recovery, about 5% of patients become 
chronic carriers (i.e. continue to excrete the bacteria after 
1 year); the bacilli may live in the gallbladder for months 
or years and pass intermittently in the stool and, less 
commonly, in the urine.
Clinical features
Typhoid fever
Clinical features are outlined in Box 13.46. The incuba-
tion period is typically about 10–14 days but can be 
longer, and the onset may be insidious. The temperature 
rises in a stepladder fashion for 4 or 5 days with malaise, 
increasing headache, drowsiness and aching in the 
limbs. Constipation may be caused by swelling of lym-
phoid tissue around the ileocaecal junction, although in 
children diarrhoea and vomiting may be prominent 
early in the illness. The pulse is often slower than would 
be expected from the height of the temperature, i.e. a 
relative bradycardia.
At the end of the first week, a rash may appear on the 
upper abdomen and on the back as sparse, slightly 
raised, rose-red spots, which fade on pressure. It is 
usually visible only on white skin. Cough and epistaxis 
occur. Around the 7th–10th day, the spleen becomes 
palpable. Constipation is then succeeded by diarrhoea 
and abdominal distension with tenderness. Bronchitis 
and delirium may develop. If untreated, by the end of 
the second week the patient may be profoundly ill.
Paratyphoid fever
The course tends to be shorter and milder than that of 
typhoid fever and the onset is often more abrupt with 
acute enteritis. The rash may be more abundant and the 
intestinal complications less frequent.
Complications
These are given in Box 13.47. Haemorrhage from, or a 
perforation of, the ulcerated Peyer’s patches may occur 
at the end of the second week or during the third week 
of the illness. A drop in temperature to normal or sub-
normal levels may be falsely reassuring in patients with 
intestinal haemorrhage. Additional complications may 
diagnosis. Streptomycin (1 g twice daily) or gentamicin 
(1 mg/kg 3 times daily) is the drug of choice. Tetra­
cycline (500 mg 4 times daily) and chloramphenicol 
(12.5 mg/kg 4 times daily) are alternatives. Fluoro­
quinolones (ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin) may be as 
effective, but there is less clinical experience. Treatment 
may also be needed for acute circulatory failure, DIC 
and hypoxia.
Prevention and infection control
Rats and fleas should be controlled. In endemic areas, 
people should avoid handling and skinning wild animals. 
The patient should be isolated for the first 48 hours or 
until clinical improvement begins. Attendants must wear 
gowns, masks and gloves. Exposed symptomatic or 
asymptomatic people who have been in close contact 
with a patient with pneumonic plague should receive 
post-exposure 
antibiotic 
prophylaxis 
(doxycycline 
100 mg or ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily) for 7 days.
A formalin-killed vaccine is available for those at 
occupational risk but offers little protection against 
pneumonic plague. A recombinant subunit vaccine 
(protein antigens F1 + V) is in development.
Listeriosis
Listeria monocytogenes is an environmental Gram-positive 
bacillus which can contaminate food. Outbreaks have 
been associated with raw vegetables, soft cheeses, under-
cooked chicken, fish, meat and pâtés. The bacterium 
demonstrates ‘cold enrichment’, outgrowing other con-
taminating bacteria during refrigeration. Although food-
borne outbreaks of gastroenteritis have been reported in 
immunocompetent individuals, Listeria causes more sig-
nificant invasive infection, especially in pregnancy, the 
elderly (over 55 years) and the immunocompromised.
In pregnancy, in addition to systemic symptoms of 
fever and myalgia, listeriosis causes chorioamnionitis, 
fetal deaths, abortions and neonatal infection. In other 
susceptible individuals, it causes systemic illness due 
to bacteraemia without focal symptoms. Meningitis, 
similar to other bacterial meningitis but with normal 
CSF glucose, is the next most common presentation; CSF 
usually shows increased neutrophils but occasionally 
only the mononuclear cells are increased (p. 1201).
Investigations and management
Diagnosis is made by blood and CSF culture. The organ-
ism grows readily in culture media.
The most effective regimen consists of a combination 
of an intravenous aminopenicillin (amoxicillin or ampi-
cillin) plus an aminoglycoside. A sulfamethoxazole/
trimethoprim combination can be used in those with 
penicillin allergy. Cephalosporins are of no use in this 
infection, as the organism is inherently resistant, an 
important consideration when empirically treating 
meningitis.
Proper treatment of foods before eating is the key to 
preventing listeriosis. Pregnant women are advised to 
avoid high-risk products, including soft cheeses.
Typhoid and paratyphoid  
(enteric) fevers
Typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, which are transmitted 
by the faecal–oral route, are important causes of fever in 
India, sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. Elsewhere, 
13.46  Clinical features of typhoid fever
First week
• Fever
• Headache
• Myalgia
• Relative bradycardia
• Constipation
• Diarrhoea and vomiting in 
children
End of first week
• Rose spots on trunk
• Splenomegaly
• Cough
• Abdominal distension
• Diarrhoea
End of second week
• Delirium, complications, then coma and death (if untreated)
Infectious disease
13
340
is passed transovarially (ensuring transmission from 
parent to progeny) in ticks, which allows persistence in 
nature without the absolute requirement for an infected 
animal reservoir. It is a potential weapon for bioterror-
ism. Wild rabbits, rodents, and domestic dogs or cats are 
some of the many potential reservoirs, and ticks, mos-
quitoes or other biting flies are the vectors.
Infection is introduced either through an arthropod 
or animal bite or via contact with infected animals, soil 
or water through skin abrasions. This results in the most 
common ‘ulceroglandular’ variety of the disease (70–
80%), characterised by skin ulceration with regional 
lymphadenopathy. There is also a purely ‘glandular’ 
form. Alternatively, inhalation of the infected aerosols 
may result in pulmonary tularaemia, presenting as 
pneumonia. Rarely, the portal of entry of infection may 
be the conjunctiva, leading to a nodular, ulcerated con-
junctivitis with regional lymphadenopathy (an ‘oculo­
glandular’ form).
Investigations and management
Demonstration of a single high titre (≥ 1 : 160) or a four-
fold rise in 2–3 weeks in the tularaemia tube agglutina-
tion test confirms the diagnosis. Bacterial yield from the 
lesions is extremely poor. DNA detection methods to 
enable rapid diagnosis are in development.
Treatment consists of a 7–10-day course of parenteral 
aminoglycosides, streptomycin (7.5–10 mg/kg twice 
daily) or gentamicin (1.7 mg/kg 3 times daily). F. tula-
rensis is not susceptible to most other antibiotics.
Melioidosis
Melioidosis is caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei, a 
saprophyte found in soil and water (rice paddy fields). 
Infection is by inoculation or inhalation, leading to 
bacteraemia, which is followed by the formation of 
abscesses in the lungs, liver and spleen. Patients with 
diabetes, renal stones, thalassaemia or severe burns are 
particularly susceptible. The disease is most common in 
South India, East Asia and northern Australia, and 
carries a significant mortality. Disease may present 
many years or decades after the initial exposure.
Clinical features
There is high fever, prostration and sometimes diar-
rhoea, with signs of pneumonia and enlargement of the 
liver and spleen. The chest X-ray resembles that of acute 
caseous tuberculosis. In more chronic forms, multiple 
abscesses occur in subcutaneous tissue and bone, and 
profound wasting is a major problem.
Investigations and management
Culture of blood, sputum or pus may yield B. pseudomal-
lei. Indirect haemagglutination testing can be helpful in 
travellers; however, most people in endemic areas are 
seropositive.
In the acute illness, prompt treatment, without 
waiting for confirmation by culture, may be life-saving. 
Ceftazidime 100 mg/kg (2 g 3 times daily), imipenem 
50 mg/kg (1 g 4 times daily) or meropenem (0.5–1 g 
3 times daily) is given for 2–3 weeks. This is followed 
by maintenance therapy of doxycycline 200 mg daily, 
plus co-trimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole 1600 mg plus 
trimethoprim 320 mg twice daily) for a minimum of 
12 weeks. Abscesses should be drained surgically.
involve almost any viscus or system because of the sep-
ticaemia present during the first week. Bone and joint 
infection is common in children with sickle-cell disease.
Investigations
In the first week, diagnosis may be difficult because, in 
this invasive stage with bacteraemia, the symptoms are 
those of a generalised infection without localising fea-
tures. A white blood count may be helpful, as there is 
typically a leucopenia. Blood culture is the most impor-
tant diagnostic method. The faeces contain the organism 
more frequently in the second and third weeks.
Management
Antibiotic therapy must be guided by in vitro sensitivity 
testing. Chloramphenicol (500 mg 4 times daily), ampi-
cillin (750 mg 4 times daily) and co-trimoxazole (2 tablets 
or IV equivalent twice daily) are losing their effect due 
to resistance in many areas of the world, especially India 
and South-east Asia. The fluoroquinolones are the drugs 
of choice (e.g. ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily) if the 
organism is susceptible, but resistance is common, espe-
cially in the Indian subcontinent and also in the UK. 
Extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ceftriaxone and 
cefotaxime) are useful alternatives but have a slightly 
increased treatment failure rate. Azithromycin (500 mg 
once daily) is an alternative when fluoroquinolone 
resistance is present but has not been validated in severe 
disease. Treatment should be continued for 14 days. 
Pyrexia may persist for up to 5 days after the start of 
specific therapy. Even with effective chemotherapy, 
there is still a danger of complications, recrudescence of 
the disease and the development of a carrier state.
Chronic carriers were formerly treated for 4 weeks 
with ciprofloxacin but may require an alternative agent 
and duration, as guided by antimicrobial sensitivity 
testing. Cholecystectomy may be necessary.
Prevention
Improved sanitation and living conditions reduce the 
incidence of typhoid. Travellers to countries where 
enteric infections are endemic should be inoculated with 
one of the three available typhoid vaccines (two inacti-
vated injectable and one oral live attenuated).
Tularaemia
Tularaemia is primarily a zoonotic disease of the north-
ern hemisphere. It is caused by a highly infectious 
Gram-negative bacillus, Francisella tularensis. F. tularensis 
13.47  Complications of typhoid fever
Bowel
• Perforation
• Haemorrhage
Septicaemic foci
• Bone and joint infection
• Meningitis
• Cholecystitis
Toxic phenomena
• Myocarditis
• Nephritis
Chronic carriage
• Persistent gallbladder carriage
Bacterial infections
13
341
Antiemetics and appropriate fluid replacement are 
the mainstays of treatment. Suspect food should be cul-
tured for staphylococci and demonstration of toxin pro-
duction. The public health authorities should be notified 
if food vending is involved.
Bacillus cereus food poisoning
Ingestion of the pre-formed heat-stable exotoxins of B. 
cereus causes rapid onset of vomiting and some diar-
rhoea within hours of food consumption, which resolves 
within 24 hours. Fried rice and freshly made sauces are 
frequent sources; the organism grows and produces 
enterotoxin during storage (Fig. 13.24). If viable bacteria 
are ingested and toxin formation takes place within 
the gut lumen, then the incubation period is longer 
(12–24 hours) and watery diarrhoea and cramps are the 
predominant symptoms. The disease is self-limiting but 
can be quite severe.
Rapid and judicious fluid replacement and appropri-
ate notification of the public health authorities are all 
that is required.
Actinomycete infections
Nocardiosis
Nocardiosis is an uncommon Gram-positive bacterial 
infection caused by aerobic actinomycetes of the genus 
Nocardia found in the soil. Infection occurs most fre-
quently by direct traumatic inoculation or occasionally 
via inhalation or ingestion. Nocardiosis can result in 
localised cutaneous ulcers or nodules, most often in the 
lower limbs. Chronic destructive infection in tropical 
countries can result in actinomycetoma, involving soft 
tissues with occasional penetration to the bone. Actino-
mycetoma may also be caused by other bacteria, and 
a similar clinical syndrome, termed eumycetoma, is 
caused by fungi (p. 382). Systemic Nocardia infection, 
most likely in immunocompromised individuals, results 
in suppurative disease with lung and brain abscesses.
On microscopy, Nocardia spp. appear as long, fila-
mentous, branching Gram-positive rods which are also 
weakly acid-fast. They are easily grown in culture but 
require prolonged incubation.
Treatment is guided by susceptibility testing. Sys-
temic infection typically requires combinations of ceftri-
axone, meropenem, amikacin and co-trimoxazole, often 
for 6–12 months or longer. Abscesses are drained surgi-
cally when this is feasible. Localised cutaneous infection 
is usually treated with a single agent for 1–3 months.
Actinomycetoma is also treated with prolonged anti-
biotic combinations. There is no universal consensus on 
the most appropriate drug or combination. The usual 
combination is streptomycin and dapsone, with dapsone 
replaced by co-trimoxazole in cases with intolerance or 
refractory disease. Success has also been reported with 
co-trimoxazole plus amikacin, with rifampicin added in 
difficult cases and to prevent recurrence.
Actinomyces israelii
Actinomyces israelii can cause deep infection in the head 
and neck, and also suppurating disease in the pelvis 
associated with intrauterine contraceptive devices 
(IUCDs). Treatment is usually with penicillin or 
doxycycline.
Gastrointestinal bacterial infections
The differential diagnosis and approach to patients 
presenting with acute gastroenteritis are described on 
page 306.
Staphylococcal food poisoning
Staph. aureus transmission takes place via the hands of 
food handlers to foodstuffs such as dairy products, 
including cheese, and cooked meats. Inappropriate 
storage of these foods allows growth of the organism 
and production of one or more heat-stable enterotoxins 
which cause the symptoms.
Nausea and profuse vomiting develop within 
1–6 hours. Diarrhoea may not be marked. The toxins that 
cause the syndrome act as ‘superantigens’, inducing a 
significant neutrophil leucocytosis that may be clinically 
misleading. Superantigens are secreted proteins (exotox-
ins) that exhibit highly potent lymphocyte-transforming 
(mitogenic) activity directed towards T lymphocytes. 
Most cases settle rapidly but severe dehydration can 
occasionally be life-threatening.
Fig. 13.24  Bacillus cereus food poisoning. 
Spores
contaminate
uncooked
cereals
e.g. rice
2°
contamination
Parboiled
(insufficient
to kill
spores)
Storage at warm
temperature allows
germination
Rapid deep-fry kills
bacteria not toxins
Ingestion
of toxin
Ingestion of spores
or viable bacteria
Acute vomiting
± diarrhoea
2 – 4 hours
after ingestion
Enterocolitis
12 – 24 hours
after ingestion
Bacteria multiply
in gut and elute
toxin
Inadequate reheating
Viable bacteria remain
Infectious disease
13
342
in the UK due to an aggressive culling policy in broiler 
chicken stocks, coupled with vaccination.
The incubation period of Salmonella gastroenteritis is 
12–72 hours and the predominant feature is diarrhoea, 
sometimes with passage of blood. Vomiting may be 
present at the outset. Approximately 5% of cases are 
bacteraemic. Reactive (post-infective) arthritis occurs in 
approximately 2%.
Antibiotics are not indicated for uncomplicated Sal-
monella gastroenteritis (Box 13.48). However, evidence of 
bacteraemia is a clear indication for antibiotic therapy, 
as salmonellae are notorious for persistent infection and 
often colonise endothelial surfaces such as an athero­
sclerotic aorta or a major blood vessel. Mortality, as with 
other forms of gastroenteritis, is higher in the elderly 
(see Box 13.13, p. 306).
Escherichia coli infection
Many serotypes of E. coli are present in the human gut 
at any given time. Production of disease depends on 
either colonisation with a new or previously unrecog-
nised strain, or the acquisition by current colonising 
bacteria of a particular pathogenicity factor for mucosal 
attachment or toxin production. Travel to unfamiliar 
areas of the world allows contact with different strains 
of endemic E. coli and the development of travellers’ 
diarrhoea. Enteropathogenic strains may be found in 
the gut of healthy individuals and, if these people 
move to a new environment, close contacts may develop 
symptoms.
At least five different clinico-pathological patterns of 
diarrhoea are associated with specific strains of E. coli 
with characteristic virulence factors.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) cause the majority of cases 
of travellers’ diarrhoea in developing countries, although 
there are other causes (see Box 13.21, p. 311). The organ-
isms produce either a heat-labile or a heat-stable entero-
toxin, causing marked secretory diarrhoea and vomiting 
after 1–2 days’ incubation. The illness is usually mild 
and self-limiting after 3–4 days. Antibiotics, such as 
ciprofloxacin, have been used to limit the duration 
of symptoms (see Box 13.22, p. 311) but are of question-
able value.
Entero-invasive E. coli
Illness caused by entero-invasive E. coli (EIEC) is very 
similar to Shigella dysentery (p. 345) and is caused by 
invasion and destruction of colonic mucosal cells. No 
enterotoxin is produced. Acute watery diarrhoea, 
abdominal cramps and some scanty blood-staining of 
the stool are common. The symptoms are rarely severe 
and are usually self-limiting.
Clostridium perfringens 
food poisoning
Spores of C. perfringens are widespread in the guts of 
large animals and in soil. If contaminated meat products 
are incompletely cooked and stored in anaerobic condi-
tions, C. perfringens spores germinate and viable organ-
isms multiply to give large numbers. Subsequent 
reheating of the food causes heat-shock sporulation of 
the organisms, during which they release an entero-
toxin. Symptoms (diarrhoea and cramps) occur some 
6–12 hours following ingestion. The illness is usually 
self-limiting.
Clostridial enterotoxins are potent and most people 
who ingest them will be symptomatic. ‘Point source’ 
outbreaks, in which a number of cases all become symp-
tomatic following ingestion, classically occur after school 
or canteen lunches where meat stews are served.
Clostridial necrotising enteritis (CNE) or pigbel is an 
often-fatal type of food poisoning caused by a β-toxin of 
C. perfringens, type C. The toxin is normally inactivated 
by certain proteases or by normal cooking. Pigbel is 
more likely in protein malnutrition or in the presence of 
trypsin inhibitors, either in foods such as sweet potatoes 
or during infection with Ascaris sp. roundworms.
Campylobacter jejuni infection
This infection is essentially a zoonosis, although con-
taminated water may be implicated, as the organism can 
survive for many weeks in fresh water. The most 
common sources of the infection are chicken, beef and 
contaminated milk products. There has been an associa-
tion with pet puppies. Campylobacter infection is now the 
most common cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in the 
UK, accounting for some 100 000 cases per annum, most 
of which are sporadic.
The incubation period is 2–5 days. Colicky abdominal 
pain, which may be quite severe and mimic surgical 
pathology, occurs with nausea, vomiting and significant 
diarrhoea, frequently containing blood. The majority of 
Campylobacter infections affect fit young adults and 
are self-limiting after 5–7 days. About 10–20% will 
have prolonged symptomatology, occasionally meriting 
treatment with antibiotics such as erythromycin, as 
many organisms are resistant to ciprofloxacin.
Approximately 1% of cases will develop bacteraemia 
and possible distant foci of infection. Campylobacter spp. 
have been linked to Guillain–Barré syndrome and post-
infectious reactive arthritis (pp. 1224 and 1107).
Salmonella spp. infection
Salmonella serotypes other than S. typhi and S. paratyphi 
(p. 339), of which there are more than 2000, are subdi-
vided into five distinct subgroups which produce gas-
troenteritis. They are widely distributed throughout the 
animal kingdom. Two serotypes are most important 
worldwide: S. enteritidis phage type 4 and S. typhimu-
rium dt.104. The latter may be resistant to commonly 
used antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin. Some strains have 
a clear relationship to particular animal species, e.g. S. 
arizonae and pet reptiles. Transmission is by contami-
nated water or food, particularly poultry, egg products 
and related fast foods, direct person-to-person spread or 
the handling of exotic pets such as salamanders, lizards 
or turtles. The incidence of Salmonella enteritis is falling 
‘In otherwise healthy adults or children with non-severe 
Salmonella diarrhoea, antibiotics have no clinical benefit over 
placebo, increase side-effects and prolong Salmonella detection.’
• Sirinavin S, Garner P. Antibiotics for treating salmonella gut infections. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 1999, issue 1. Art. no.: CD001167.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
13.48  Antibiotics in Salmonella gastroenteritis
Bacterial infections
13
343
considerably lower than that of Campylobacter and Sal-
monella infection, it is increasing in the developing 
world.
The reservoir of infection is in the gut of herbivores. 
The organism has an extremely low infecting dose (10–
100 organisms). Runoff water from pasture lands where 
cattle have grazed, which is used to irrigate vegetable 
crops, as well as contaminated milk, meat products 
(especially hamburgers which have been incompletely 
cooked), lettuce, radish shoots and apple juice, have all 
been implicated as sources (Fig. 13.25).
The incubation period is between 1 and 7 days. Initial 
watery diarrhoea becomes frankly and uniformly blood-
stained in 70% of cases and is associated with severe and 
often constant abdominal pain. There is little systemic 
upset, vomiting or fever.
Enterotoxins have both a local effect on the bowel and 
a distant effect on particular body tissues, such as 
glomerular apparatus, heart and brain. The potentially 
life-threatening haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS, 
p. 495) occurs in 10–15% of sufferers from this infection, 
arising 5–7 days after the onset of symptoms. It is most 
likely at the extremes of age, is heralded by a high 
peripheral leucocyte count, and may be induced, par-
ticularly in children, by antibiotic therapy.
HUS is treated by dialysis if necessary and may be 
averted by plasma exchange. Antibiotics should be 
avoided since they can stimulate toxin release.
Clostridium difficile infection
C. difficile is the most commonly diagnosed cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea (p. 308), and is an occa-
sional constituent of the normal intestinal flora. C. diffi-
cile is capable of producing two toxins (A and B). C. 
difficile infection (CDI) usually follows antimicrobial 
therapy, which alters the composition of the gastrointes-
tinal flora and may result in colonisation with C. difficile 
if the patient is exposed to C. difficile spores. The combi-
nation of toxin production and the ability to produce 
environmentally stable spores accounts for the clinical 
features and transmissibility of CDI. A hypervirulent 
strain of C. difficile, ribotype 027, has emerged, which 
produces more toxin than other C. difficile strains and 
thus more severe disease.
Clinical features
Disease manifestations range from diarrhoea to life-
threatening pseudomembranous colitis. Around 80% of 
cases occur in people over 65 years of age, many of 
whom are frail with comorbid diseases. Symptoms 
usually begin in the first week of antibiotic therapy but 
can occur at any time up to 6 weeks after treatment has 
finished. The onset is often insidious, with lower abdom-
inal pain and diarrhoea which may become profuse and 
watery. The presentation may resemble acute ulcerative 
colitis with bloody diarrhoea, fever and even toxic dila-
tation and perforation. Ileus is also seen in pseudomem-
branous colitis.
Investigations
C. difficile can be isolated from stool culture in 30% of 
patients with antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and over 
90% of those with pseudomembranous colitis, but also 
from 5% of healthy adults and up to 20% of elderly 
patients in residential care. The diagnosis of CDI 
Enteropathogenic E. coli
Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) organisms are very 
important in infant diarrhoea. They are able to attach to 
the gut mucosa, inducing a specific ‘attachment and 
effacement’ lesion, and causing destruction of microvilli 
and disruption of normal absorptive capacity. The 
symptoms vary from mild non-bloody diarrhoea to 
quite severe illness, but without bacteraemia.
Entero-aggregative E. coli
Entero-aggregative E. coli (EAEC) strains adhere to the 
mucosa but also produce a locally active enterotoxin and 
demonstrate a particular ‘stacked brick’ aggregation to 
tissue culture cells when viewed by microscopy. They 
have been associated with prolonged diarrhoea in chil-
dren in South America, South-east Asia and India.
Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli
A number of distinct ‘O’ serotypes of E. coli possess both 
the genes necessary for adherence (see ‘EPEC’ above) 
and plasmids encoding for two distinct enterotoxins 
(verotoxins) which are identical to the toxins produced 
by Shigella (‘shiga toxins 1 and 2’). E. coli O157:H7 is 
perhaps the best-known of these verotoxin-producing E. 
coli (VTEC), but others, including types O126 and O11, 
are also implicated. In 2011, an outbreak of food-borne 
illness linked to fenugreek seeds occurred in Germany 
and was due to E. coli O104:H4, an EAEC strain that 
had acquired genes encoding shiga toxin 2a. Although 
the incidence of enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) is 
Fig. 13.25  Verocytotoxigenic E. coli (VTEC) infections. 
Normal reservoir
2.5% British cattle
excrete VTEC
Meat products
surface
contamination
Children camping/
playing on soiled
pasture
Farm contacts/
visits
Water supplies
(runoff)
contaminated
Contaminated
milk
Poor kitchen
hygiene
Poor hand
hygiene
Lack of washing
facilities
Mincing/
processing
Irrigation of
vegetables
Inadequate
pasteurisation
Eaten unwashed
or uncooked
Disease
Very low infecting dose
< 100 organisms/g food
Infectious disease
13
344
but adults may also be affected. The illness resolves 
slowly, with 10–30% of cases complicated by persistent 
arthritis or Reiter’s syndrome (p. 1107).
Cholera
Cholera, caused by Vibrio cholerae serotype O1, is the 
archetypal toxin-mediated bacterial cause of acute 
watery diarrhoea. The enterotoxin activates adenylate 
cyclase in the intestinal epithelium, inducing net secre-
tion of chloride and water. V. cholerae O1 has two bio-
types, classical and El Tor, and each of these has two 
distinct serotypes, Inaba and Ogawa. Following its 
origin in the Ganges valley, devastating epidemics have 
occurred, often in association with large religious festi-
vals, and pandemics have spread worldwide. The 
seventh pandemic, due to the El Tor biotype, began in 
1961 and spread via the Middle East to become endemic 
in Africa. In 1990, it reached Peru and spread through-
out South and Central America. Since 2005, numbers 
of cases of cholera have been increasing. There are 
recurrent outbreaks and epidemics in Africa, often 
related to flooding. El Tor is more resistant to commonly 
used antimicrobials than classical Vibrio, and causes 
prolonged carriage in 5% of infections. A new classical 
toxigenic strain, serotype O139, established itself in 
Bangladesh in 1992 and started a new pandemic.
Infection spreads via the stools or vomit of sympto-
matic patients or of the much larger number of subclini-
cal cases. Organisms survive for up to 2 weeks in fresh 
water and 8 weeks in salt water. Transmission is nor-
mally through infected drinking water, shellfish and 
food contaminated by flies, or on the hands of carriers.
Clinical features
Severe diarrhoea without pain or colic begins suddenly 
and is followed by vomiting. Following the evacuation 
of normal gut faecal contents, typical ‘rice water’ material 
is passed, consisting of clear fluid with flecks of mucus. 
Classical cholera produces enormous loss of fluid and 
electrolytes, leading to intense dehydration with muscu-
lar cramps. Shock and oliguria develop but mental clarity 
remains. Death from acute circulatory failure may occur 
rapidly unless fluid and electrolytes are replaced. 
Improvement is rapid with proper treatment.
The majority of infections, however, cause mild 
illness with slight diarrhoea. Occasionally, a very intense 
illness, ‘cholera sicca’, occurs, with loss of fluid into 
dilated bowel, killing the patient before typical gastro­
intestinal symptoms appear. The disease is more dan-
gerous in children.
Diagnosis and management
Clinical diagnosis is easy during an epidemic. Other-
wise, the diagnosis should be confirmed bacteriologi-
cally. Stool dark-field microscopy shows the typical 
‘shooting star’ motility of V. cholerae. Rectal swab or 
stool cultures allow identification. Cholera is notifiable 
under international health regulations.
Maintenance of circulation by replacement of water 
and electrolytes is paramount (p. 307). Ringer-Lactate is 
the best fluid for intravenous replacement. Vomiting 
usually stops once the patient is rehydrated, and fluid 
should then be given orally up to 500 mL hourly. Early 
intervention with oral rehydration solutions that include 
resistant starch, based on either rice or cereal, shortens 
therefore rests on detection of toxins A or B in the stool. 
Current practice in the UK is to screen stool from patients 
with a compatible clinical syndrome by detection either 
of glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), an enzyme pro-
duced by C. difficile, or of C. difficile nucleic acid (e.g. by 
PCR); if screening is positive, a C. difficile toxin ELISA or 
a tissue culture cytotoxicity assay is performed.
The rectal appearances at sigmoidoscopy may be 
characteristic, with erythema, white plaques or an 
adherent pseudomembrane (Fig. 13.26). Appearances 
may also resemble those of ulcerative colitis. In some 
cases, the rectum is spared and abnormalities are 
observed in the proximal colon. Patients who are ill may 
require abdominal and erect chest X-rays to exclude per-
foration or toxic dilatation. CT may be useful when the 
diagnosis is in doubt.
Management
The precipitating antibiotic should be stopped and the 
patient should be isolated. Supportive therapy with 
intravenous fluids and resting of the bowel is often 
needed. CDI is treated with antibiotics. The options for 
first-line therapy are metronidazole (500 mg orally 
3 times daily for 10 days) or vancomycin (125 mg orally 
4 times daily for 7–10 days). Although vancomycin is 
more effective than metronidazole against hypervirulent 
C. difficile strains (e.g. ribotype 027), it is more expensive 
and may drive the emergence of vancomycin resistance 
in other organisms (e.g. enterococci, Staph. aureus). For 
these reasons, some authorities reserve its use for relapse 
(15–30% of patients), failure of initial response or severe 
infection. A new agent, fidaxomicin, is associated with 
a lower relapse rate than vancomycin. Intravenous 
immunoglobulin and/or corticosteroids are sometimes 
given in the most severe or refractory cases and faecal 
transplantation is also emerging as a therapy in relaps-
ing patients. Surgical intervention is sometimes needed 
and needs to be considered early in severe cases.
Yersinia enterocolitica infection
This organism, commonly found in pork, causes mild to 
moderate gastroenteritis and can produce significant 
mesenteric adenitis after an incubation period of 
3–7 days. It predominantly causes disease in children 
Fig. 13.26  Clostridium difficile infection. Colonoscopic view 
showing numerous adherent ‘pseudomembranes’ on the mucosa. 
Bacterial infections
13
345
Stools are small, and after a few evacuations contain 
blood and purulent exudate with little faecal material. 
Fever, dehydration and weakness occur, with tender-
ness over the colon. Arthritis or iritis may occasionally 
complicate bacillary dysentery (Reiter’s syndrome, 
p. 1107), associated with HLA-B27.
Management and prevention
Oral rehydration therapy or, if diarrhoea is severe, intra-
venous replacement of water and electrolyte loss is nec-
essary. Antibiotic therapy with ciprofloxacin (500 mg 
twice daily for 3 days) is effective in known shigellosis 
and appropriate in epidemics. The use of antidiarrhoeal 
medication should be avoided.
The prevention of faecal contamination of food and 
milk and the isolation of cases may be difficult, except 
in limited outbreaks. Hand-washing is very important.
Respiratory bacterial infections
Most of these infections are described in Chapter 19.
Diphtheria
Infection with Corynebacterium diphtheriae occurs most 
commonly in the upper respiratory tract and is usually 
spread by droplet infection. Infection may also compli-
cate skin lesions, especially in those who misuse alcohol. 
The organisms remain localised at the site of infection 
but release of a soluble exotoxin damages the heart 
muscle and the nervous system.
Diphtheria has been eradicated from many parts of 
the world by mass vaccination using a modified exo-
toxin but remains important in areas where vaccination 
has been incomplete, e.g. in Russia and South-east Asia. 
The disease is notifiable in all countries of Europe and 
North America, and international guidelines have been 
issued by the WHO for the management of infection.
Clinical features
The average incubation period is 2–4 days. The disease 
begins insidiously with a sore throat (Box 13.49). Despite 
modest fever, there is usually marked tachycardia. The 
diagnostic feature is the ‘wash-leather’ elevated, greyish-
green membrane on the tonsils. It has a well-defined 
edge, is firm and adherent, and is surrounded by a zone 
of inflammation. There may be swelling of the neck 
(‘bull neck’) and tender enlargement of the lymph nodes. 
In the mildest infections, especially in the presence of a 
high degree of immunity, a membrane may never 
appear and the throat is merely slightly inflamed.
the duration of diarrhoea and improves prognosis. Total 
fluid requirements may exceed 50 L over a period of 
2–5 days. Accurate records are greatly facilitated by the 
use of a ‘cholera cot’, which has a reinforced hole under 
the patient’s buttocks, beneath which a graded bucket 
is placed.
Three days treatment with tetracycline 250 mg 
4 times daily, a single dose of doxycycline 300 mg or 
ciprofloxacin 1 g in adults reduces the duration of excre-
tion of V. cholerae and the total volume of fluid needed 
for replacement.
Prevention
Strict personal hygiene is vital and drinking water 
should come from a clean piped supply or be boiled. 
Flies must be denied access to food. Parenteral vaccina-
tion with a killed suspension of V. cholerae provides 
some protection. Oral vaccines containing killed V. chol-
erae and the B subunit of cholera toxin are available but 
are of limited efficacy.
In epidemics, public education and control of water 
sources and population movement are vital. Mass 
single-dose vaccination and treatment with tetracycline 
are valuable. Disinfection of discharges and soiled cloth-
ing, and scrupulous hand-washing by medical attend-
ants reduce the danger of spread.
Vibrio parahaemolyticus infection
This marine organism produces a disease similar to 
enterotoxigenic E. coli (see above). It is acquired from 
raw seafood and is very common where ingestion of 
such food is widespread (e.g. Japan). After an incubation 
period of approximately 20 hours, explosive diarrhoea, 
abdominal cramps and vomiting occur. Systemic symp-
toms of headache and fever are frequent but the illness 
is self-limiting after 4–7 days. Rarely, a severe septicae-
mic illness arises; in this case, V. parahaemolyticus can be 
isolated using specific halophilic culture.
Bacillary dysentery (shigellosis)
Shigellae are Gram-negative rods, closely related to E. 
coli, that invade the colonic mucosa. There are four main 
groups: Sh. dysenteriae, flexneri, boydii and sonnei. In the 
tropics, bacillary dysentery is usually caused by Sh. 
flexneri, whilst in the UK most cases are caused by Sh. 
sonnei. Shigellae are often resistant to multiple antibiot-
ics, especially in tropical countries. The organism only 
infects humans and its spread is facilitated by its low 
infecting dose of around 10 organisms.
Spread may occur via contaminated food or flies, but 
transmission by unwashed hands after defecation is by 
far the most important factor. Outbreaks occur in mental 
hospitals, residential schools and other closed institu-
tions, and dysentery is a constant accompaniment of 
wars and natural catastrophes, which bring crowding 
and poor sanitation in their wake. Shigella infection may 
spread rapidly amongst men who have sex with men.
Clinical features
Disease severity varies from mild Sh. sonnei infections 
that may escape detection to more severe Sh. flexneri 
infections, while those due to Sh. dysenteriae may be ful-
minating and cause death within 48 hours.
In a moderately severe illness, the patient complains 
of diarrhoea, colicky abdominal pain and tenesmus. 
Acute infection
• Membranous tonsillitis
• or Nasal infection
• or Laryngeal infection
• or Skin/wound/conjunctival infection (rare)
Complications
• Laryngeal obstruction or paralysis
• Myocarditis
• Peripheral neuropathy
13.49  Clinical features of diphtheria
Infectious disease
13
346
All contacts should also be immunised or given a 
booster dose of toxoid. Booster doses are required every 
10 years to maintain immunity.
Pneumococcal infection
Strep. pneumoniae (the pneumococcus) is the leading 
cause of community-acquired pneumonia globally 
(p. 682) and one of the leading causes of infection-related 
mortality. Otitis media, meningitis and sinusitis are also 
frequently due to Strep. pneumoniae. Occasional patients 
present with bacteraemia without obvious focus. 
Asplenic individuals are at risk of fulminant pneumo-
coccal disease with purpuric rash.
Increasing rates of penicillin resistance have been 
reported around the world for Strep. pneumoniae, 
although they remain relatively low in the UK. Strains 
with high-level resistance causing meningitis require 
treatment with glycopeptides rather than with penicil-
lins or cephalosporins. Macrolide resistance is also 
increasing. Newer quinolones are also used but rates of 
resistance are rising.
Vaccination of infants with the protein conjugate 
pneumococcal vaccine decreases Strep. pneumoniae infec-
tion in infants and in their relatives. The polysaccharide 
pneumococcal vaccine is used in individuals predis-
posed to Strep. pneumoniae infection and the elderly, but 
only modestly reduces pneumococcal bacteraemia and 
does not prevent pneumonia. All asplenic individuals 
should receive vaccination against Strep. pneumoniae.
Anthrax
Anthrax is an endemic zoonosis in many countries; it 
causes human disease following inoculation of the 
spores of Bacillus anthracis. B. anthracis was the first-
recognised bacterial pathogen described by Koch and 
became the model pathogen for ‘Koch’s postulates’ (Box 
6.1, p. 134). It is a Gram-positive organism with a central 
spore. The spores can survive for years in soil. Infection 
is commonly acquired from contact with animals, par-
ticularly herbivores. The ease of production of B. anthra-
cis spores makes this infection a candidate for biological 
warfare or bioterrorism. B. anthracis produces a number 
of toxins which mediate the clinical features of disease.
Clinical features
These depend on the route of entry of the anthrax spores.
Cutaneous anthrax
This skin lesion is associated with occupational expo-
sure to anthrax spores during processing of hides and 
bone products. It accounts for the vast majority of clini-
cal cases. Animal infection is a serious problem in Africa, 
India, Pakistan and the Middle East.
Spores are inoculated into exposed skin. A single 
lesion develops as an irritable papule on an oedematous 
haemorrhagic base. This progresses to a depressed black 
eschar. Despite extensive oedema, pain is infrequent.
Gastrointestinal anthrax
This is associated with the ingestion of contaminated 
meat products. The caecum is the seat of the infection, 
which produces nausea, vomiting, anorexia and fever, 
followed in 2–3 days by severe abdominal pain and 
bloody diarrhoea. Toxaemia and death can develop 
rapidly thereafter.
With anterior nasal infection there is nasal discharge, 
frequently blood-stained. In laryngeal diphtheria, a 
husky voice and high-pitched cough signal potential 
respiratory obstruction requiring urgent tracheostomy. 
If infection spreads to the uvula, fauces and nasophar-
ynx, the patient is gravely ill.
Death from acute circulatory failure may occur within 
the first 10 days. Late complications arise as a result of 
toxin action on the heart or nervous system. About 25% 
of survivors of the early toxaemia may later develop 
myocarditis with arrhythmias or cardiac failure. These 
are usually reversible, with no permanent damage other 
than heart block in survivors.
Neurological involvement occurs in 75% of cases. 
After tonsillar or pharyngeal diphtheria, it usually starts 
after 10 days with palatal palsy. Paralysis of accommo-
dation often follows, manifest by difficulty in reading 
small print. Generalised polyneuritis with weakness and 
paraesthesia may follow in the next 10–14 days. Recov-
ery from such neuritis is always ultimately complete.
Management
A clinical diagnosis of diphtheria must be notified to the 
public health authorities and the patient sent urgently to 
a specialist infectious diseases unit. Treatment should 
begin once appropriate swabs have been taken before 
waiting for microbiological confirmation.
Diphtheria antitoxin is produced from hyperimmune 
horse serum. It neutralises circulating toxin but has no 
effect on toxin already fixed to tissues, so it must be 
injected intramuscularly without awaiting the result of 
a throat swab. However, reactions to this foreign protein 
include a potentially lethal immediate anaphylactic reac-
tion (p. 91) and a ‘serum sickness’ with fever, urticaria 
and joint pains, which occurs 7–12 days after injection. 
A careful history of previous horse serum injections or 
allergic reactions should be taken and a small test injec-
tion of serum should be given half an hour before the 
full dose in every patient. Adrenaline (epinephrine) 
solution must be available to deal with any immediate 
type of reaction (0.5–1.0 mL of 1/1000 solution IM). An 
antihistamine is also given. In a severely ill patient, the 
risk of anaphylactic shock is outweighed by the mortal 
danger of diphtheritic toxaemia, and up to 100 000 U of 
antitoxin are injected intravenously if the test dose has 
not given rise to symptoms. For disease of moderate 
severity, 16 000–40 000 U IM will suffice, and for mild 
cases 4000–8000 U.
Penicillin (1200 mg 4 times daily IV) or amoxicillin 
(500 mg 3 times daily) should be administered for 
2 weeks to eliminate C. diphtheriae. Patients allergic to 
penicillin can be given erythromycin. Due to poor 
immunogenicity of primary infection, all sufferers 
should be immunised with diphtheria toxoid following 
recovery.
Patients must be managed in strict isolation and 
attended by staff with a clearly documented immunisa-
tion history until three swabs 24 hours apart are 
culture-negative.
Prevention
Active immunisation should be given to all children. If 
diphtheria occurs in a closed community, contacts 
should be given erythromycin, which is more effective 
than penicillin in eradicating the organism in carriers.
Bacterial infections
13
347
followed by haematogenous spread to skin and nerve. 
The incubation period is 2–5 years for tuberculoid cases 
and 8–12 years for lepromatous cases. Leprosy incidence 
peaks at 10–14 years, and is more common in males and 
in those with close household exposure to leprosy cases.
Pathogenesis
M. leprae has a predilection for infecting Schwann cells 
and skin macrophages. In tuberculoid leprosy, effective 
CMI controls bacillary multiplication (‘paucibacillary’) 
but organised epithelioid granulomas are formed. In 
lepromatous leprosy, there is abundant bacillary multi-
plication (‘multibacillary’), e.g. in Schwann cells and 
perineurium. Between these two extremes is a contin-
uum, varying from patients with moderate CMI (border-
line tuberculoid) to patients with little cellular response 
(borderline lepromatous).
In addition, immunological reactions to the infection 
occur as the immune response develops and the anti-
genic stimulus from the bacilli varies, particularly in 
borderline patients. Delayed hypersensitivity reactions 
produce type 1 (reversal) reactions, while immune 
complexes contribute to type 2 (erythema nodosum 
leprosum) reactions.
HIV/leprosy co-infected patients have typical lepro-
matous and tuberculoid leprosy skin lesions and typical 
leprosy histology and granuloma formation. Surpris-
ingly, even with low circulating CD4 counts, tuberculoid 
leprosy may be observed and there is not an obvious 
shift to lepromatous leprosy.
Clinical features
Box 13.50 gives the cardinal features of leprosy. Types 
of leprosy are compared in Box 13.51.
• Skin. The most common skin lesions are macules or 
plaques. Tuberculoid patients have few, 
Inhalational anthrax
This form of the disease is extremely rare but has been 
associated with bioterrorism. Without rapid and aggres-
sive therapy at the onset of symptoms, the mortality is 
50–90%. Fever, dyspnoea, cough, headache and symp-
toms of septicaemia develop 3–14 days following expo-
sure. Typically, the chest X-ray shows only widening of 
the mediastinum and pleural effusions, which are haem-
orrhagic. Meningitis may occur.
Management
B. anthracis can be cultured from skin swabs from lesions. 
Skin lesions are readily curable with early antibiotic 
therapy. Treatment is with ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice 
daily) until penicillin susceptibility is confirmed; the 
regimen can then be changed to benzylpenicillin with 
doses up to 2.4 g IV given 6 times daily or phenoxy-
methylpenicillin 500–1000 mg 4 times daily adminis-
tered for 10 days. The addition of an amino­glycoside 
may improve the outlook in severe disease. In view of 
concerns about concomitant inhalational exposure, par-
ticularly in the era of bioterrorism, a further 2-month 
course of ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily or doxycy-
cline 100 mg twice daily orally is added. Prophy­laxis 
with ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily) is recommended 
for anyone at high risk of exposure to anthrax spores.
Bacterial infections with  
neurological involvement
Infections affecting the CNS, including bacterial 
meningitis, botulism and tetanus, are described on 
page 1201.
Mycobacterial infections
Tuberculosis is predominantly, although by no means 
exclusively, a respiratory disease and is described on 
page 688.
Leprosy
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease) is a chronic granulomatous 
disease affecting skin and nerves, and is caused by Myco-
bacterium leprae, a slow-growing mycobacterium which 
cannot be cultured in vitro. The clinical manifestations 
are determined by the degree of the patient’s cell-
mediated immunity (CMI, p. 78) towards M. leprae (Fig. 
13.27). High levels of CMI with elimination of leprosy 
bacilli produces tuberculoid leprosy, whereas absent 
CMI results in lepromatous leprosy. The complications 
of leprosy are due to nerve damage, immunological 
reactions and bacillary infiltration. Leprosy patients are 
frequently stigmatised and using the word ‘leper’ is 
inappropriate.
Epidemiology and transmission
Some 4 million people have leprosy and around 750 000 
new cases are detected annually. About 70% of the 
world’s leprosy patients live in India, with the disease 
endemic in Brazil, Indonesia, Mozambique, Madagas-
car, Tanzania and Nepal.
Untreated lepromatous patients discharge bacilli 
from the nose. Infection occurs through the nose, 
Fig. 13.27  Leprosy: mechanisms of damage and tissue affected. 
Mechanisms under the broken line are characteristic of disease near the 
lepromatous end of the spectrum, and those under the solid line are 
characteristic of the tuberculoid end. They overlap in the centre where, in 
addition, instability predisposes to type 1 lepra reactions. At the peak in 
the centre, neither bacillary growth nor cell-mediated immunity has the 
upper hand (BL = borderline lepromatous; BT = borderline tuberculoid). 
Based on Bryceson and Pfaltzgraff 1990 – see p. 386. 
6
0
High
Zero
Cell-mediated immunity
Bacillary index
Chronic
exaggerated
cellular
hypersensitivity
Nerves, skin
Acute
changes
in cellullar
hypersensitivity
(type 1 lepra reactions)
Nerves, skin
Complications of nerve damage
(anaesthesia, dryness, paralysis, contracture,
misuse, tissue destruction)
Face, hands, feet
Lepromatous       Borderline      Tuberculoid
LL
BL
BT
TT
Bacillary
invasion
Nerves, skin,
muscle, bone,
mucosae, eye, testis
Immune complexes
(type 2 lepra
reactions)
Nerves, skin,
eye, testis,
kidney
Infectious disease
13
348
hypopigmented lesions (Fig. 13.28A). In 
lepromatous leprosy, papules, nodules or diffuse 
infiltration of the skin occur. The earliest lesions are 
ill defined; gradually, the skin becomes infiltrated 
and thickened. Facial skin thickening leads to the 
characteristic leonine facies (Fig. 13.28B).
• Anaesthesia. In skin lesions, the small dermal 
sensory and autonomic nerve fibres are damaged, 
causing local sensory loss and loss of sweating 
within that area. Anaesthesia may also occur in the 
distribution of a damaged large peripheral nerve.  
A ‘glove and stocking’ sensory neuropathy is also 
common in lepromatous leprosy.
• Nerve damage. Peripheral nerve trunks are affected 
at ‘sites of predilection’. These are the ulnar (elbow), 
median (wrist), radial (humerus), radial cutaneous 
(wrist), common peroneal (knee), posterior tibial 
and sural nerves (ankle), facial nerve (zygomatic 
arch) and great auricular nerve (posterior triangle  
of the neck). Damage to peripheral nerve trunks 
produces characteristic signs with regional sensory 
loss and muscle dysfunction (Fig. 13.28C). All these 
nerves should be examined for enlargement and 
tenderness and tested for motor and sensory 
function. The CNS is not affected.
• Eye involvement. Blindness is a devastating 
complication for a patient with anaesthetic hands 
and feet. Eyelid closure is impaired when the facial 
• Skin lesions, typically anaesthetic at tuberculoid end of 
spectrum
• Thickened peripheral nerves
• Acid-fast bacilli on skin smears or biopsy
13.50  Cardinal features of leprosy
13.51  Clinical characteristics of the polar forms 
of leprosy
Clinical and 
tissue-specific 
features
Lepromatous
Tuberculoid
Skin and nerves
Number and 
distribution
Widely 
disseminated
One or a few sites, 
asymmetrical
Skin lesions
Definition
Clarity of margin
Poor
Good
Elevation of 
margin
Never
Common
Colour
Dark skin
Slight 
hypopigmentation
Marked 
hypopigmentation
Light skin
Slight erythema
Coppery or red
Surface
Smooth, shiny
Dry, scaly
Central healing
None
Common
Sweat and hair 
growth
Impaired late
Impaired early
Loss of sensation
Late
Early and marked
Nerve 
enlargement and 
damage
Late
Early and marked
Bacilli (bacterial 
index)
Many (5 or 6+)
Absent (0)
Natural history
Progressive
Self-healing
Other tissues
Upper respiratory 
mucosa, eye, 
testes, bones, 
muscle
None
Reactions
Immune 
complexes (type 2)
Cell-mediated  
(type 1)
Fig. 13.28  Clinical features of leprosy.
 A  Tuberculoid leprosy. Single lesion with a 
well-defined active edge and anaesthesia within 
the lesion. B  Lepromatous leprosy. Widespread 
nodules and infiltration, with loss of the eyebrows. 
This man also has early collapse of the nose. 
 C  Borderline tuberculoid leprosy with severe 
nerve damage. This boy has several well-defined, 
hypopigmented, macular, anaesthetic lesions. He 
has severe nerve damage affecting both ulnar and 
median nerves bilaterally and has sustained 
severe burns to his hands. D  Reversal (type 1) 
reactions. Erythematous, oedematous lesions. 
A
B
C
D
Bacterial infections
13
349
13.52  Reactions in leprosy
Lepra reaction 
type 1 (reversal)
Lepra reaction type 2 
(erythema nodosum 
leprosum)
Mechanism
Cell-mediated 
hypersensitivity
Immune complexes
Clinical 
features
Painful tender 
nerves, loss of 
function
Swollen skin 
lesions
New skin lesions
Tender papules and 
nodules; may ulcerate
Painful tender nerves, loss 
of function
Iritis, orchitis, myositis, 
lymphadenitis
Fever, oedema
Management
Prednisolone 
40 mg, reducing 
over 3–6 mths1
Moderate: prednisolone 
40 mg daily
Severe: thalidomide2 or 
prednisolone 40–80 mg 
daily, reducing over 
1–6 mths; local if eye 
involved3
1lndicated for any new impairment of nerve or eye function.
2Contraindicated in women who may become pregnant.
31% hydrocortisone drops or ointment and 1% atropine drops.
nerve is affected. Damage to the trigeminal nerve 
causes anaesthesia of the cornea and conjunctiva. 
The cornea is then susceptible to trauma and 
ulceration.
• Other features. Many organs can be affected. Nasal 
collapse occurs secondary to bacillary destruction  
of the bony nasal spine. Diffuse infiltration of the 
testes causes testicular atrophy and the acute 
orchitis that occurs with type 2 reactions. This 
results in azoospermia and hypogonadism.
Leprosy reactions
Leprosy reactions (Box 13.52) are events superimposed 
on the cardinal features shown in Box 13.50.
• Type 1 (reversal) reactions. These occur in 30% of 
borderline patients (BT, BB or BL) and are delayed 
hypersensitivity reactions. Skin lesions become 
erythematous (Fig. 13.28D). Peripheral nerves 
become tender and painful, with sudden loss of 
nerve function. These reactions may occur 
spontaneously, after starting treatment and also 
after completion of multidrug therapy.
• Type 2 (erythema nodosum leprosum, ENL) reactions. 
These are partly due to immune complex deposition 
and occur in BL and LL patients who produce 
antibodies and have a high antigen load. They 
manifest with malaise, fever and crops of small 
pink nodules on the face and limbs. Iritis and 
episcleritis are common. Other signs are acute 
neuritis, lymphadenitis, orchitis, bone pain, 
dactylitis, arthritis and proteinuria. ENL may 
continue intermittently for several years.
Borderline cases
In borderline tuberculoid (BT) cases, skin lesions are 
more numerous than in tuberculoid (TT) cases, and 
there is more severe nerve damage and a risk of type 1 
reactions. In borderline leprosy (BB) cases, skin lesions 
are numerous and vary in size, shape and distribution; 
annular lesions are characteristic and nerve damage is 
variable. In borderline lepromatous (BL) cases, there are 
widespread small macules in the skin and widespread 
nerve involvement; both type 1 and type 2 reactions 
occur.
Pure neural leprosy (i.e. without skin lesions) occurs 
principally in India and accounts for 10% of patients. 
There is asymmetrical involvement of peripheral nerve 
trunks and no visible skin lesions. On nerve biopsy, all 
types of leprosy have been found.
Investigations
The diagnosis is clinical, made by finding a cardinal sign 
of leprosy and supported by finding acid-fast bacilli in 
slit-skin smears or typical histology in a skin biopsy. 
Slit-skin smears are obtained by scraping dermal 
material on to a glass slide. The smears are then stained 
for acid-fast bacilli, the number counted per high-power 
field and a score derived on a logarithmic scale (0–6): the 
bacterial index (BI). Smears are useful for confirming the 
diagnosis and monitoring response to treatment. Neither 
serology nor PCR testing for M. leprae DNA is sensitive 
or specific enough for diagnosis.
Management
The principles of treatment are outlined in Box 13.53. All 
leprosy patients should be given multidrug treatment 
(MDT) with an approved first-line regimen (Box 13.54).
• Stop the infection with chemotherapy
• Treat reactions
• Educate the patient about leprosy
• Prevent disability
• Support the patient socially and psychologically
13.53  Principles of leprosy treatment
13.54  Modified WHO-recommended multidrug 
therapy (MDT) regimens in leprosy
Type of 
leprosy1
Monthly 
supervised 
treatment
Daily 
self-
administered 
treatment
Duration of 
treatment2
Paucibacillary
Rifampicin 
600 mg
Dapsone 
100 mg
6 mths
Multibacillary
Rifampicin 
600 mg
Clofazimine 
50 mg
12 mths
Clofazimine 
300 mg
Dapsone 
100 mg
Paucibacillary 
single-lesion
Ofloxacin 
400 mg
Single dose
Rifampicin 
600 mg
Minocycline 
100 mg
1Classification uses the bacillary index (BI) in slit-skin smears or, if BI is not 
available, the number of skin lesions:
•	 paucibacillary single-lesion leprosy (one skin lesion)
•	 paucibacillary (2–5 skin lesions)
•	 multibacillary (> 5 skin lesions).
2Studies from India have shown that multibacillary patients with an initial BI 
> 4 need longer treatment, for at least 24 mths.
Infectious disease
13
350
Pathogenesis
The rickettsiae are intracellular Gram-negative organ-
isms which parasitise the intestinal canal of arthropods. 
Infection is usually conveyed to humans through the skin 
from the excreta of arthropods, but the saliva of some 
biting vectors is infected. The organisms multiply in cap-
illary endothelial cells, producing lesions in the skin, 
CNS, heart, lungs, liver, kidneys and skeletal muscles. 
Endothelial proliferation, associated with a perivascular 
reaction, may cause thrombosis and purpura. In epi-
demic typhus, the brain is the target organ; in scrub 
typhus, the cardiovascular system and lungs in particular 
are attacked. An eschar, a black necrotic crusted sore, is 
often found in tick- and mite-borne typhus (see Fig. 
13.6C, p. 313). This is due to vasculitis following immu-
nological recognition of the inoculated organism. 
Regional lymph nodes often enlarge.
Spotted fever group
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rickettsia rickettsii is transmitted by tick bites. It is widely 
distributed and increasing in western and south-eastern 
states of the USA and also in Central and South America. 
The incubation period is about 7 days. The rash appears 
on about the third or fourth day of illness, looking at first 
like measles, but in a few hours a typical maculopapular 
eruption develops. The rash spreads in 24–48 hours from 
wrists, forearms and ankles to the back, limbs and chest, 
and then to the abdomen, where it is least pronounced. 
Larger cutaneous and subcutaneous haemorrhages may 
appear in severe cases. The liver and spleen become 
palpable. At the extremes of life, the mortality is 2–12%.
Other spotted fevers
R. conorii (boutonneuse fever) and R. africae (African tick 
fever) cause Mediterranean and African tick typhus, 
which also occurs on the Indian subcontinent. The incu-
bation period is approximately 7 days. Infected ticks 
may be picked up by walking on grasslands, or dogs 
may bring ticks into the house. Careful examination 
might reveal a diagnostic eschar, and the maculopapular 
rash on the trunk, limbs, palms and soles. There may be 
delirium and meningeal signs in severe infections but 
recovery is usual. R. africae can be associated with 
multiple eschars. Some cases, particularly those with 
R. africae, present without rash (‘spotless spotted fever’). 
Other spotted fevers are shown in Box 13.55.
Typhus group
Scrub typhus fever
Scrub typhus is caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi (for-
merly Rickettsia tsutsugamushi), transmitted by mites. It 
occurs in the Far East, Myanmar, Pakistan, Bangladesh, 
India, Indonesia, the South Pacific islands and Queens-
land, particularly where patches of forest cleared for 
plantations have attracted rats and mites.
In many patients, one eschar or more develops, sur-
rounded by an area of cellulitis (see Fig. 13.6C, p. 313) 
and enlargement of regional lymph nodes. The incuba-
tion period is about 9 days.
Mild or subclinical cases are common. The onset of 
symptoms is usually sudden, with headache (often 
retro-orbital), fever, malaise, weakness and cough. In 
severe illness, the general symptoms increase, with 
Rifampicin is a potent bactericidal for M. leprae but 
should always be given in combination with other anti-
leprotics, since a single-step mutation can confer resist-
ance. Dapsone is bacteriostatic. It commonly causes mild 
haemolysis and rarely anaemia. Clofazimine is a red, 
fat-soluble crystalline dye, weakly bactericidal for M. 
leprae. Skin discoloration (red to purple-black) and ich-
thyosis are troublesome side-effects, particularly on pale 
skins. New drugs that are bactericidal for M. leprae have 
been identified, notably the fluoroquinolones pefloxacin 
and ofloxacin, minocycline and clarithromycin. These 
agents are now established second-line drugs. Mino­
cycline causes a grey pigmentation of skin lesions.
Although single-dose treatment is less effective than 
the conventional 6-month treatment for paucibacillary 
leprosy, it is an operationally attractive field regimen 
and has been recommended for use by the WHO.
Lepra reactions are treated as shown in Box 13.52. 
Chloroquine can also be used.
Patient education
Educating leprosy patients about their disease is vital. 
Patients should be reassured that, after 3 days of chemo-
therapy, they are not infectious and can lead a normal 
social life. It should be emphasised that gross deformi-
ties are not inevitable.
Patients with anaesthetic hands or feet need to take 
special care to avoid and treat burns and other minor 
injuries. Good footwear is important. Physiotherapy 
may be required to maintain range of movement of 
affected muscles and neighbouring joints.
Prognosis
Untreated, tuberculoid leprosy has a good prognosis; it 
may self-heal and peripheral nerve damage is limited. 
Lepromatous leprosy (LL) is a progressive condition 
with high morbidity if untreated.
After treatment, the majority of patients, especially 
those who have no nerve damage at the time of diagno-
sis, do well, with resolution of skin lesions. Borderline 
patients are at risk of developing type 1 reactions, which 
may result in devastating nerve damage.
Prevention and control
The previous strategy of centralised leprosy control 
campaigns has now been superseded by integrated pro-
grammes, with primary health-care workers in many 
countries now responsible for case detection and provi-
sion of MDT. It is not yet clear how successful this will 
be, especially in the time-consuming area of disability 
prevention.
BCG vaccination has been shown to give good but 
variable protection against leprosy; adding killed M. 
leprae to BCG does not enhance protection.
Rickettsial and related intracellular 
bacterial infections
Rickettsial fevers
The rickettsial fevers are the most common tick-borne 
infections. It is important to ask potentially infected 
patients about contact with ticks, lice or fleas. There are 
two main groups of rickettsial fevers: spotted fevers and 
typhus (Box 13.55).
Bacterial infections
13
351
apathy and prostration. An erythematous maculopapu-
lar rash often appears on about the 5th–7th day and 
spreads to the trunk, face and limbs, including the palms 
and soles, with generalised painless lymphadenopathy. 
The rash fades by the 14th day. The temperature rises 
rapidly and continues as a remittent fever (i.e. the dif-
ference between maximum and minimum temperature 
exceeds 1°C), remaining above normal with sweating 
until it falls on the 12th–18th day. In severe infection, the 
patient is prostrate with cough, pneumonia, confusion 
and deafness. Cardiac failure, renal failure and haemor-
rhage may develop. Convalescence is often slow and 
tachycardia may persist for some weeks.
Epidemic (louse-borne) typhus
Epidemic typhus is caused by R. prowazekii and is trans-
mitted by infected faeces of the human body louse, 
usually through scratching the skin. Patients suffering 
from epidemic typhus infect the lice, which leave when 
the patient is febrile. In conditions of overcrowding, the 
disease spreads rapidly. It is prevalent in parts of Africa, 
especially Ethiopia and Rwanda, and in the South Amer-
ican Andes and Afghanistan. Large epidemics have 
occurred in Europe, usually as a sequel to war. The 
incubation period is usually 12–14 days.
There may be a few days of malaise but the onset is 
more often sudden, with rigors, fever, frontal headaches, 
pains in the back and limbs, constipation and bronchitis. 
The face is flushed and cyanotic, the eyes are congested 
and the patient becomes confused. The rash appears on 
the 4th–6th day. In its early stages, it disappears on pres-
sure but soon becomes petechial with subcutaneous 
mottling. It appears first on the anterior folds of the 
axillae, sides of the abdomen or backs of hands, then on 
the trunk and forearms. The neck and face are seldom 
affected. During the second week, symptoms increase in 
severity. Sores develop on the lips. The tongue becomes 
dry, brown, shrunken and tremulous. The spleen is pal-
pable, the pulse feeble and the patient stuporous and 
delirious. The temperature falls rapidly at the end of the 
second week and the patient recovers gradually. In fatal 
cases, the patient usually dies in the second week from 
toxaemia, cardiac or renal failure, or pneumonia.
Endemic (flea-borne) typhus
Flea-borne or ‘endemic’ typhus caused by R. typhi is 
endemic worldwide. Humans are infected when the 
faeces or contents of a crushed flea, which has fed on an 
infected rat, are introduced into the skin. The incubation 
period is 8–14 days. The symptoms resemble those of a 
Disease
Organism
Reservoir
Vector
Geographical 
area
Rash
Gangrene
Target 
organs
Mortality
Spotted fever group
Rocky 
Mountain 
spotted 
fever
R. rickettsii
Rodents, 
dogs, ticks
Ixodes tick
North, Central 
and South 
America
Morbilliform
Haemorrhagic
Often
Bronchi, 
myocardium, 
brain, skin
2–12%2
Boutonneuse 
fever
R. conorii
Rodents, 
dogs, ticks
Ixodes tick
Mediterranean, 
Africa, 
South-west 
Asia, India
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
2.5%3
Siberian tick 
typhus
R. siberica
Rodents, 
birds, 
domestic 
animals, ticks
Various 
ticks
Siberia, 
Mongolia, 
northern China
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
Australian 
tick typhus
R. australis
Rodents, ticks
Ticks
Australia
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
Oriental 
spotted 
fever
R. japonica
Rodents, 
dogs, ticks
Ticks
Japan
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
African tick 
bite fever1
R. africae
Cattle, game, 
ticks
Ixodes tick
South Africa
Can be 
spotless
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
Typhus group
Scrub 
typhus
Orientia 
tsutsugamushi
Rodents
Trombicula 
mite
South-east 
Asia
Maculopapular
Unusual
Bronchi, 
myocardium, 
brain, skin
Rare3
Epidemic 
typhus
R. prowazekii
Humans
Louse
Worldwide
Morbilliform
Haemorrhagic
Often
Brain, skin, 
bronchi, 
myocardium
Up to 
40%
Endemic 
typhus
R. typhi
Rats
Flea
Worldwide
Slight
–
–
Rare3
1Eschar at bite site and local lymphadenopathy. 2Highest in adult males. 3Except in infants, older people and the debilitated.
13.55  Features of rickettsial infections
Infectious disease
13
352
is problematic, requiring prolonged therapy with doxy-
cycline and rifampicin or ciprofloxacin with hydro­
xychloroquine; even then, organisms are not always 
eradicated. Valve surgery is often required (p. 629).
Bartonellosis
This group of diseases are caused by intracellular Gram-
negative bacilli closely related to the rickettsiae, which 
have been discovered to be important causes of ‘culture-
negative’ endocarditis. They are found in many domes-
tic pets, such as cats, although for several the host is 
ill defined (Box 13.56). The principal human pathogens 
are Bartonella quintana, B. henselae and B. bacilliformis. 
Bartonella infections are associated with the following:
• Trench fever. This is a relapsing fever with severe leg 
pain and is caused by B. quintana. The disease is not 
fatal but is very debilitating.
• Bacteraemia and endocarditis in the homeless. 
Endocarditis due to B. quintana or henselae is 
associated with severe damage to the heart valves.
• Cat scratch disease. B. henselae causes this common 
benign lymphadenopathy in children and young 
adults. A vesicle or papule develops on the head, 
neck or arms after a cat scratch. The lesion resolves 
spontaneously but there may be regional 
lymphadenopathy that persists for up to 4 months 
before also resolving spontaneously.
• Bacillary angiomatosis. This is an HIV-associated 
disease caused by B. quintana or henselae (p. 398).
• Oroya fever and verruga peruana (Carrion’s disease). 
This is endemic in areas of Peru. It is a biphasic 
disease caused by B. bacilliformis and is transmitted 
by sandflies of the genus Phlebotomus. Fever, 
haemolytic anaemia and microvascular thrombosis 
with end-organ ischaemia are features. It is 
frequently fatal if untreated.
Investigations and management
Bartonellae can be grown from the blood but this 
requires prolonged incubation using enriched media. 
Serum antibody detection is possible.
Bartonella species are susceptible to β-lactams, 
rifampicin, erythromycin and tetracyclines. Antibiotic 
use is guided by clinical need. Cat scratch disease usually 
mild louse-borne typhus. The rash may be scanty and 
transient.
Investigation of rickettsial infection
Routine blood investigations are not diagnostic but 
malaria must be excluded by blood film examination 
in most cases, and there is usually hepatitis and throm-
bocytopenia. Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds 
and response to treatment, and may be confirmed by 
antibody detection or PCR in specialised laboratories. 
Differential diagnoses include malaria, typhoid, menin-
gococcal sepsis and leptospirosis.
Management of rickettsial fevers
The different rickettsial fevers vary greatly in severity 
but all respond to tetracycline 500 mg 4 times daily, 
doxycycline 200 mg daily or chloramphenicol 500 mg 
4 times daily for 7 days. Louse-borne typhus and scrub 
typhus can be treated with a single dose of 200 mg doxy-
cycline, repeated for 2–3 days to prevent relapse. 
Chloramphenicol- and doxycycline-resistant strains of 
O. tsutsugamushi have been reported from Thailand and 
patients here may need treatment with rifampicin.
Nursing care is important, especially in epidemic 
typhus. Sedation may be required for delirium and 
blood transfusion for haemorrhage. Relapsing fever and 
typhoid are common intercurrent infections in epidemic 
typhus, and pneumonia in scrub typhus. They must be 
sought and treated. Convalescence is usually protracted, 
especially in older people.
To prevent rickettsial infection, lice, fleas, ticks and 
mites need to be controlled with insecticides.
Q fever
Q fever occurs worldwide and is caused by the rickettsia-
like organism Coxiella burnetii, an obligate intracellular 
organism that can survive in the extracellular environ-
ment. Cattle, sheep and goats are important reservoirs 
and the organism is transmitted by inhalation of aero-
solised particles. An important characteristic of C. bur-
netii is its antigenic variation, called phase variation, due 
to a change of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). When isolated 
from animals or humans, C. burnetii expresses phase I 
antigen and is very infectious (a single bacterium is suf-
ficient to infect a human). In culture, there is an antigenic 
shift to the phase II form, which is not infectious. This 
antigenic shift can be measured and is valuable for the 
differentiation of acute and chronic Q fever.
Clinical features
The incubation period is 3–4 weeks. The initial symp-
toms are non-specific with fever, headache and chills; in 
20% of cases, a maculopapular rash occurs. Other pres-
entations include pneumonia and hepatitis. Chronic Q 
fever may present with osteomyelitis, encephalitis and 
endocarditis.
Investigations and management
Diagnosis is usually serological and the stage of the 
infection can be distinguished by isotype tests and 
phase-specific antigens. Phase I and II IgM titres peak at 
4–6 weeks. In chronic infections, IgG titres to phase I and 
II antigens may be raised.
Prompt treatment of acute Q fever with doxycycline 
reduces fever duration. Treatment of Q fever endocarditis 
13.56  Clinical diseases caused by Bartonella spp.
Reservoir
Vector
Organism
Disease
Cats
Flea
B. henselae
Cat scratch disease, 
bacillary 
angiomatosis, 
endocarditis
Undefined
Lice
B. quintana
Trench fever, 
bacillary 
angiomatosis, 
endocarditis
Undefined
Sandfly
B. bacilliformis
Carrion’s disease: 
Oroya fever and 
verruga peruana
Undefined
Flea
B. rochalimae
Fever, rash, 
anaemia, 
splenomegaly
Protozoal infections
13
353
Investigations and management
Intracellular inclusions may be demonstrated in con-
junctival scrapings by staining with iodine or immuno­
fluorescence. Chlamydia may be isolated in chick 
embryo or cell culture.
A single dose of azithromycin (20 mg/kg) has been 
shown to be superior to 6 weeks of tetracycline eye oint-
ment twice daily for individuals in mass treatment pro-
grammes. Deformity and scarring of the lids, and corneal 
opacities, ulceration and scarring require surgical treat-
ment after control of local infection.
Prevention
Personal and family cleanliness should be improved. 
Proper care of the eyes of newborn and young children 
is essential. Family contacts should be examined. The 
WHO is promoting the SAFE strategy for trachoma 
control (surgery, antibiotics, facial cleanliness and envi-
ronmental improvement).
PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
Protozoa are responsible for many important infectious 
diseases. They can be categorised according to whether 
they cause systemic or local infection. Trichomoniasis is 
described on page 417.
Systemic protozoal infections
Malaria
Malaria in humans is caused by Plasmodium falciparum, 
P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae and the predominantly 
simian parasite, P. knowlesi. It is transmitted by the bite 
of female anopheline mosquitoes and occurs throughout 
the tropics and subtropics at altitudes below 1500 metres 
(Fig. 13.30). Recent estimates have put the number of 
episodes of clinical malaria at 515 million cases per year, 
with two-thirds of these occurring in sub-Saharan Africa, 
especially amongst children and pregnant women. Fol-
lowing previous WHO-sponsored campaigns focusing 
on prevention and effective treatment, the incidence of 
malaria was greatly reduced between 1950 and 1960, but 
since 1970 there has been resurgence. Furthermore, P. 
falciparum has now become resistant to chloroquine and 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, initially in South-east Asia 
and now throughout Africa. The WHO’s Millennium 
Development Goal 6 aims to halt the spread of the 
disease by 2015, and its ‘Roll Back Malaria’ campaign 
was designed to halve mortality by 2010 by utilising the 
‘best evidence’ vector and disease control methods, such 
as artemisinin combination therapy (ACT).
resolves spontaneously but Bartonella endocarditis 
requires valve replacement and combination antibiotic 
therapy.
Chlamydial infections
These are listed in Box 13.57 and are also described in 
Chapters 15 and 19.
Trachoma
Trachoma is a chronic keratoconjunctivitis caused by 
Chlamydia trachomatis, and is the most common cause of 
avoidable blindness. The classic trachoma environment 
is dry and dirty, causing children to have eye and nose 
discharges. Transmission occurs through flies, on fingers 
and within families. In endemic areas, the disease is 
most common in children.
Pathology and clinical features
The onset is usually insidious. Infection may be asymp-
tomatic, lasts for years, may be latent over long periods 
and may recrudesce. The conjunctiva of the upper lid is 
first affected with vascularisation and cellular infiltra-
tion. Early symptoms include conjunctival irritation and 
blepharospasm. The early follicles are characteristic (Fig. 
13.29), but clinical differentiation from conjunctivitis 
due to other viruses may be difficult. Scarring causes 
inversion of the lids (entropion) so that the lashes rub 
against the cornea (trichiasis). The cornea becomes vas-
cularised and opaque. The problem may not be detected 
until vision begins to fail.
13.57  Chlamydial infections
Organism
Disease caused
Chlamydia trachomatis
Trachoma
Lymphogranuloma venereum  
(see Box 15.12, p. 424)
Cervicitis, urethritis, proctitis  
(p. 422)
Chlamydia psittaci
Psittacosis (Box 19.42, p. 683)
Chlamydophila (Chlamydia) 
pneumoniae
Atypical pneumonia (Box 19.42, 
p. 683)
Acute/chronic sinusitis
Fig. 13.29  Trachoma. Trachoma is characterised by hyperaemia and 
numerous pale follicles. 
Fig. 13.30  Distribution of malaria. (For up-to-date information see the 
Malaria Atlas Project (MAP): www.map.ox.ac.uk) 
Infectious disease
13
354
treatment if drugs that kill only the erythrocytic stage of 
the parasite are given.
P. falciparum and P. malariae have no persistent exo-
erythrocytic phase but recrudescence of fever may result 
from multiplication of parasites in red cells which have 
not been eliminated by treatment and immune processes 
(Box 13.58).
Pathology
Red cells infected with malaria are prone to haemolysis. 
This is most severe with P. falciparum, which invades red 
cells of all ages but especially young cells; P. vivax 
and P. ovale invade reticulocytes, and P. malariae 
Travellers are susceptible to malaria (p. 309). Due to 
increased travel, over 2000 cases are imported annually 
into the UK. Most are due to P. falciparum, usually from 
Africa, and of these 1% die because of late diagnosis. 
Immigrants returning home after visiting family and 
friends overseas but who have long-term residence in 
the UK are particularly at risk. They have lost their 
partial immunity and do not realise that they should be 
taking malaria prophylaxis. A few people living near 
airports in Europe have acquired malaria from acciden-
tally imported mosquitoes.
Pathogenesis
Life cycle of the malarial parasite
The female anopheline mosquito becomes infected 
when it feeds on human blood containing gametocytes, 
the sexual forms of the malarial parasite (Figs 13.31 and 
13.32). Development in the mosquito takes from 7 to 
20 days, and results in sporozoites accumulating in the 
salivary glands and being inoculated into the human 
blood stream. Sporozoites disappear from human blood 
within half an hour and enter the liver. After some 
days, merozoites leave the liver and invade red blood 
cells, where further asexual cycles of multiplication take 
place, producing schizonts. Rupture of the schizont 
releases more merozoites into the blood and causes 
fever, the periodicity of which depends on the species 
of parasite.
P. vivax and P. ovale may persist in liver cells as 
dormant forms, hypnozoites, capable of developing into 
merozoites months or years later. Thus the first attack of 
clinical malaria may occur long after the patient has left 
the endemic area, and the disease may relapse after 
Fig. 13.31  Scanning electron micrograph of P. falciparum oöcysts 
lining an anopheline mosquito’s stomach. 
Fig. 13.32  Malarial parasites: life cycle. Hypnozoites(*) are present only in P. vivax and P. ovale infections. (RBC = red blood cell) 
IN FEMALE
ANOPHELINE MOSQUITO
IN HUMANS
Primary
exo-erythrocytic
cycle (liver)
Sexual
differentiation
(RBCs)
Bite
Bite
Female gametocyte being
fertilised by male gamete
Maturation of
female gamete
Exflagellating
male 
gametocyte
Zygote
Stomach
wall
Young
oöcyst
Segmenting
oöcyst
Ruptured
oöcyst
Sporozoites
invading
salivary glands
Hypnozoite∗
Trophozoite
Schizont
Immature
gametocytes
Male and female
gametocytes
Merozoites
Ring
form
Merozoites
Oökinete
Sexual
cycle
Erythrocytic
(asexual) cycle
(RBCs)
Protozoal infections
13
355
manifested by confusion, seizures or coma, usually 
without localising signs. Children die rapidly without 
any special symptoms other than fever. Immunity is 
impaired in pregnancy and the parasite can preferen-
tially bind to a placental protein known as chondroitin 
sulphate A. Abortion and intrauterine growth retarda-
tion from parasitisation of the maternal side of the pla-
centa are frequent. Previous splenectomy increases the 
risk of severe malaria.
P. vivax and P. ovale infection
In many cases, the illness starts with several days of 
continued fever before the development of classical 
bouts of fever on alternate days. Fever starts with a rigor. 
The patient feels cold and the temperature rises to about 
40°C. After half an hour to an hour, the hot or flush 
phase begins. It lasts several hours and gives way to 
profuse perspiration and a gradual fall in temperature. 
The cycle is repeated 48 hours later. Gradually, the 
spleen and liver enlarge and may become tender. 
Anaemia develops slowly. Relapses are frequent in the 
first 2 years after leaving the malarious area and infec-
tion may be acquired from blood transfusion.
P. malariae infection
This is usually associated with mild symptoms and 
bouts of fever every third day. Parasitaemia may persist 
for many years, with the occasional recrudescence of 
fever or without producing any symptoms. Chronic P. 
malariae infection causes glomerulonephritis and long-
term nephrotic syndrome in children.
Investigations
Giemsa-stained thick and thin blood films should be 
examined whenever malaria is suspected. In the thick 
film, erythrocytes are lysed, releasing all blood stages of 
the parasite. This, as well as the fact that more blood is 
used in thick films, facilitates the diagnosis of low-level 
parasitaemia. A thin film is essential to confirm the diag-
nosis, to identify the species of parasite and, in P. falci-
parum infections, to quantify the parasite load (by 
counting the percentage of infected erythrocytes). P. fal-
ciparum parasites may be very scanty, especially in 
patients who have been partially treated. With P. falci-
parum, only ring forms are normally seen in the early 
stages (see Fig. 13.33); with the other species, all stages 
of the erythrocytic cycle may be found. Gametocytes 
appear after about 2 weeks, persist after treatment and 
are harmless, except that they are the source by which 
more mosquitoes become infected.
Immunochromatographic tests for malaria antigens, 
such as OptiMal® (which detects the Plasmodium lactate 
dehydrogenase of several species) and ParasightF® 
(which detects the P. falciparum histidine-rich protein 2), 
are extremely sensitive and specific for falciparum malaria 
but less so for other species. They should be used in 
parallel with blood film examination but are especially 
useful where the microscopist is less experienced in 
examining blood films (e.g. in the UK). The QBC Malaria 
Test is a fluorescence microscopy-based malaria diag-
nostic test which is also widely used.
DNA detection (PCR) is used mainly in research and 
is useful for determining whether a patient has a recru-
descence of the same malaria parasite or a re-infection 
with a new parasite.
normo­blasts, so that infections remain lighter. Anaemia 
may be profound and is worsened by dyserythropoiesis, 
splenomegaly and depletion of folate stores.
In P. falciparum malaria, red cells containing tro-
phozoites adhere to vascular endothelium in post-
capillary venules in brain, kidney, liver, lungs and 
gut by the formation of ‘knob’ proteins. They also 
form ‘rosettes’ and rouleaux with uninfected red cells. 
The vessels become congested, resulting in widespread 
organ damage which is exacerbated by rupture of 
schizonts, liberating toxic and antigenic substances (see 
Fig. 13.32).
P. falciparum has influenced human evolution, with 
the appearance of protective mutations such as sickle-
cell (HbS; p. 1032), thalassaemia (p. 1034), G6PD defi-
ciency (p. 1029) and HLA-B53. P. falciparum does not 
grow well in red cells that contain haemoglobin F, C or 
especially S. Haemoglobin S heterozygotes (AS) are pro-
tected against the lethal complications of malaria. P. 
vivax cannot enter red cells that lack the Duffy blood 
group; therefore many West Africans and African-
Americans are protected.
Clinical features
The clinical features of malaria are non-specific and the 
diagnosis must be suspected in anyone returning from 
an endemic area who has features of infection.
P. falciparum infection
This is the most dangerous of the malarias and patients 
are either ‘killed or cured’. The onset is often insidious, 
with malaise, headache and vomiting. Cough and mild 
diarrhoea are also common. The fever has no particular 
pattern. Jaundice is common due to haemolysis and 
hepatic dysfunction. The liver and spleen enlarge and 
may become tender. Anaemia develops rapidly, as does 
thrombocytopenia.
A patient with falciparum malaria, apparently not 
seriously ill, may rapidly develop dangerous complica-
tions (Fig. 13.33 and Box 13.59). Cerebral malaria is 
13.58  Relationships between life cycle of 
parasite and clinical features of malaria
Cycle/
feature
P. vivax, 
P. ovale
P. malariae
P. falciparum
Pre-patent 
period 
(minimum 
incubation)
8–25 days
15–30 days
8–25 days
Exo-
erythrocytic 
cycle
Persistent as 
hypnozoites
Pre-erythrocytic 
only
Pre-erythrocytic 
only
Asexual 
cycle
48 hrs 
synchronous
72 hrs 
synchronous
< 48 hrs 
asynchronous
Fever 
periodicity
Alternate 
days
Every third day
None
Delayed 
onset
Common
Rare
Rare
Relapses
Common up 
to 2 yrs
Recrudescence 
many years 
later
Recrudescence 
up to 1 yr
Infectious disease
13
356
Complicated P. falciparum malaria
Severe malaria should be considered in any non-immune 
patient with a parasite count greater than 2% and is 
a medical emergency (see Box 13.59). Management 
includes early and appropriate antimalarial chemo­
therapy, active treatment of complications, correction of 
fluid, electrolyte and acid–base balance, and avoidance 
of harmful ancillary treatments.
The treatment of choice is intravenous artesunate 
given as 2.4 mg/kg IV at 0, 12 and 24 hours and then 
once daily for 7 days. However, as soon as the patient 
has recovered sufficiently to swallow tablets, oral artesu-
nate 2 mg/kg once daily is given instead of intravenous 
therapy, to complete a total cumulative dose of 17–
18 mg/kg. Rectal administration of artesunate is 
also being developed to allow administration in remote 
rural areas.
Quinine salt can also be used and is started with a 
loading dose infusion of 20 mg/kg over 4 hours, up to 
a maximum of 1.4 g. This is followed by maintenance 
doses of 10 mg/kg quinine salt given as 4-hour infusions 
2–3 times daily, up to a maximum of 700 mg per dose, 
Management
Mild P. falciparum malaria
Since P. falciparum is now resistant to chloroquine and 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (Fansidar) almost world-
wide, an artemisinin-based treatment is recommended. 
Co-artemether (CoArtem® or Riamet®) contains arte-
mether and lumefantrine and is given as 4 tablets at 0, 
8, 24, 36, 48 and 60 hours. Alternatives are quinine 
by mouth (600 mg of quinine salt 3 times daily for 
5–7 days), together with or followed by either doxycy-
cline (200 mg once daily for 7 days) or clindamycin 
(450 mg 3 times daily for 7 days) or atovaquone-
proguanil (Malarone®, 4 tablets once daily for 3 days). 
Doxycycline should not be used in pregnancy and arte-
mether should be avoided in early pregnancy.
WHO policy in Africa is moving towards always 
using artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), 
e.g. co-artemether or artesunate-amodiaquine. In India 
and other areas, artesunate (200 mg orally daily for 
3 days) and mefloquine (1 g orally on day 2 and 500 mg 
orally on day 3) may be used. Unfortunately, artemisinin 
resistance has now been reported in Cambodia.
Fig. 13.33  Features of P. falciparum infection. (RBC = red blood cell) 
Neurological
Coma
Hypoglycaemia
Seizures
Cranial nerve palsies
Opisthotonus
Respiratory
Pulmonary oedema
Secondary bacterial pneumonia
Abdomen
Jaundice
Tender liver edge with hepatitis
Pain in left upper quadrant
with splenomegaly
Fever
Cardiovascular
Shock
Cardiac failure (‘algid malaria’)
Dysrhythmias with quinine
Renal
Acute renal failure
Severe haemolysis resulting
in haemoglobinuria (‘blackwater fever’)
Optic fundi
Blood
Parasitaemia
Anaemia
Thrombocytopenia
Coagulopathy
Disconjugate gaze due
to cranial nerve palsy
Malaria retinopathy
with Roth’s spots
Ring form
Ring form in RBCs
Trophozoite
Schizont
P. vivax in RBCs 
Blood film showing
parasitaemia
P. falciparum
Protozoal infections
13
357
G6PD-deficient. Cyanosis due to the formation of met­
haemoglobin in the red cells is more common but not 
dangerous.
Prevention
Clinical attacks of malaria may be preventable with 
chemoprophylaxis using chloroquine, atovaquone plus 
proguanil (Malarone), doxycycline or mefloquine. Box 
13.60 gives the recommended doses for protection of the 
non-immune. The risk of malaria in the area to be visited 
and the degree of chloroquine resistance guide the rec-
ommendations for prophylaxis. Updated recommenda-
tions are summarised at www.fitfortravel.nhs.uk. 
Fansidar should not be used for chemoprophylaxis, as 
deaths have occurred from agranulocytosis or Stevens–
Johnson syndrome (p. 1302). Mefloquine is useful in 
areas of multiple drug resistance, such as East and 
Central Africa and Papua New Guinea. Experience 
shows it to be safe for at least 2 years, but there are 
several contraindications to its use (see Box 13.60).
Expert advice is required for individuals unable to 
tolerate the first-line agents listed or in whom they 
are contraindicated. Mefloquine should be started 
2–3 weeks before travel to give time for assessment of 
until the patient can take drugs orally. The loading dose 
should not be given if the patient has received quinine, 
quinidine or mefloquine during the previous 24 hours. 
Patients should be monitored by ECG, with special 
attention to QRS duration and QT interval. Mefloquine 
should not be used for severe malaria since no parenteral 
form is available.
Exchange transfusion has not been tested in ran-
domised controlled trials but may be beneficial for non-
immune patients with persisting high parasitaemias 
(> 10% circulating erythrocytes).
Management of non-falciparum malaria
P. vivax, P. ovale and P. malariae infections should be 
treated with oral chloroquine: 600 mg chloroquine base, 
followed by 300 mg base in 6 hours, then 150 mg base 
twice daily for 2 more days. Some chloroquine resistance 
has been reported from Indonesia.
Late relapses can be prevented by prescribing anti-
malarial drugs in suppressive doses. However, ‘radical 
cure’ is now achieved in most patients with P. vivax or 
P. ovale malaria using a course of primaquine (15 mg 
daily for 14 days), which destroys the hypnozoite phase 
in the liver. Haemolysis may develop in those who are 
Coma (cerebral malaria)
• Maintain airway
• Nurse on side
• Exclude other treatable causes of coma (e.g. hypoglycaemia, 
bacterial meningitis)
• Avoid harmful ancillary treatments such as corticosteroids, 
heparin and adrenaline (epinephrine)
• Intubate if necessary
Hyperpyrexia
• Tepid sponging, fanning, cooling blanket
• Antipyretic drug (paracetamol)
Convulsions
• Maintain airway
• Treat promptly with diazepam or paraldehyde injection
Hypoglycaemia
• Measure blood glucose
• Give 50% dextrose injection followed by 10% dextrose infusion 
(glucagon may be ineffective)
Severe anaemia (packed cell volume < 15%)
• Transfuse fresh whole blood or packed cells if pathogen 
screening of donor blood is available
Acute pulmonary oedema
• Nurse at 45°, give oxygen, venesect 250 mL of blood, give 
diuretic, stop intravenous fluids
• Intubate and add PEEP/CPAP (p. 193) in life-threatening 
hypoxaemia
• Haemofilter
Acute renal failure
• Exclude pre-renal causes
• Fluid resuscitation if appropriate
• Peritoneal dialysis (haemofiltration or haemodialysis if 
available)
Spontaneous bleeding and coagulopathy
• Transfuse screened fresh whole blood (cryoprecipitate/fresh 
frozen plasma and platelets if available)
• Vitamin K injection
Metabolic acidosis
• Exclude or treat hypoglycaemia, hypovolaemia and Gram-
negative septicaemia
• Fluid resuscitation
• Give oxygen
Shock (‘algid malaria’)
• Suspect Gram-negative septicaemia
• Take blood cultures
• Give parenteral antimicrobials
• Correct haemodynamic disturbances
Aspiration pneumonia
• Give parenteral antimicrobial drugs
• Change position
• Physiotherapy
• Give oxygen
Hyperparasitaemia
• Consider exchange or partial exchange transfusion, manual or 
haemophoresis (e.g. > 10% of circulating erythrocytes 
parasitised in non-immune patient with severe disease)
Specific therapy
• Intravenous artesunate
• Mefloquine should be avoided due to increased risk of 
post-malaria neurological syndrome
13.59  Severe manifestations/complications of falciparum malaria and their immediate management
From WHO. Severe falciparum malaria. In: Severe and complicated malaria. 3rd edn. Trans Roy Soc Trop Med Hyg 2000; 94 (suppl. 1): S1–41.
Infectious disease
13
358
Antimalarial tablets
Adult prophylactic dose
Regimen
Chloroquine resistance high
Mefloquine2
250 mg weekly
Started 2–3 wks before travel and continued until 4 wks after
or Doxycycline3,4
100 mg daily
Started 1 wk before and continued until 4 wks after travel
or Malarone4
1 tablet daily
From 1–2 days before travel until 1 wk after return
Chloroquine resistance absent
Chloroquine5 and 
proguanil
300 mg base weekly}
100–200 mg daily
Started 1 wk before and continued until 4 wks after travel
1Choice of regimen is determined by area to be visited, length of stay, level of malaria transmission, level of drug resistance, presence of underlying disease in 
the traveller and concomitant medication taken.
2Contraindicated in the first trimester of pregnancy, lactation, cardiac conduction disorders, epilepsy, psychiatric disorders; may cause neuropsychiatric disorders.
3Causes photosensitisation and sunburn if high-protection sunblock is not used.
4Avoid in pregnancy.
5British preparations of chloroquine usually contain 150 mg base, French preparations 100 mg base and American preparations 300 mg base.
13.60  Chemoprophylaxis of malaria1
side-effects. Chloroquine should not be taken continu-
ously as a prophylactic for more than 5 years without 
regular ophthalmic examination, as it may cause irre-
versible retinopathy. Pregnant and lactating women 
may take proguanil or chloroquine safely.
Prevention also involves advice about the use of 
high-percentage diethyltoluamide (DEET), covering up 
extremities when out after dark, and sleeping under 
permethrin-impregnated mosquito nets (Box 13.61).
Malaria control in endemic areas
There are major initiatives under way to reduce malaria 
in endemic areas and it is estimated that these would be 
cost-effective, even at a cost of $3 billion per year. 
Successful programmes have involved a combination of 
vector control, including indoor residual spraying, use 
of long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs) and 
intermittent preventative therapy (IPT; repeated dose of 
prophylactic drugs in high-risk groups, such as children 
and pregnant women) (see Box 13.61).
Development of a fully protective malaria vaccine is 
still some way off, which is not surprising, considering 
that natural immunity is incomplete and not long-lived. 
There is, however, some evidence that vaccination can 
reduce the incidence of severe malaria in populations. 
Trial vaccines are being evaluated in Africa.
Babesiosis
This is caused by a tick-borne intra-erythrocytic proto-
zoon parasite. There are more than 100 species of Babesia, 
all of which have an animal reservoir, typically either 
rodents or cattle, and are transmitted to humans via the 
tick vector Ixodes scapularis. Most cases of babesiosis in 
the USA are due to B. microti and most in Europe to 
B. divergens. Patients present with fever and malaise 
1–4 weeks after a tick bite. Illness may be complicated 
by haemolytic anaemia. Severe illness is seen in 
splenectomised patients. The diagnosis is made by 
blood-film examination. Treatment is with quinine and 
clindamycin.
African trypanosomiasis  
(sleeping sickness)
African sleeping sickness is caused by trypanosomes 
(Fig. 13.34) conveyed to humans by the bites of infected 
tsetse flies, and is unique to sub-Saharan Africa (Fig. 
13.35). There has been a more than 60% decline in the 
incidence of sleeping sickness across Africa since 1990 
due to better control measures. Trypanosoma brucei gam-
biense trypanosomiasis has a wide distribution in West 
and Central Africa and accounts for 90% of reported 
cases. T. brucei rhodesiense trypanosomiasis is found in 
parts of East and Central Africa. In West Africa, trans-
mission is mainly at the riverside, where the fly rests in 
the shade of trees; no animal reservoir has been identi-
fied for T. gambiense. T. rhodesiense has a large reservoir 
in numerous wild animals and transmission takes place 
in the shade of woods bordering grasslands. Rural pop-
ulations earning their livelihood from agriculture, 
fishing and animal husbandry are susceptible. Local 
Insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs)
‘Five randomised controlled clinical trials provided strong 
evidence that widespread use of ITNs reduces overall mortality 
by about one-fifth in Africa. For every 1000 children aged  
1–5 years protected, approximately 5.5 lives can be saved every 
year. In Africa, full ITN coverage could prevent 370 000 child 
deaths per year.’
Electronic mosquito repellents (EMRs)
‘EMRs are not effective.’
Intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy
‘Antimalarial drugs reduce antenatal parasitaemia and fever in 
pregnant women living in areas with endemic malaria. For 
women in their first or second pregnancy, this reduces the 
instances of severe antenatal anaemia, antenatal parasitaemia 
and perinatal deaths, and increases birth weight.’
Intermittent preventive treatment in children
‘Antimalarial drugs reduce clinical malaria, severe anaemia and 
hospital admissions. Effects on mortality and on health, if 
prophylaxis is stopped, are unknown.’
• Gamble C, et al. (2007)  PLoS Med 2007; 4(3):e107.
• Enayati A, et al. Electronic mosquito repellents for preventing mosquito bites and 
malaria infection. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2007, issue 2. Art. 
no.: CD005434.
• Garner P, Gülmezoglu AM. Drugs for preventing malaria in pregnant women. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2006, issue 4. Art. no.: CD000169.
• Chandramohan D, et al. BMJ 2005; 331(7519):727–733.
For further information: 
www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
13.61  Prevention of malaria
Protozoal infections
13
359
people and tourists visiting forests infested with tsetse 
flies and animal reservoirs may become infected.
Clinical features
A bite by a tsetse fly is painful and commonly becomes 
inflamed, but if trypanosomes are introduced, the site 
may again become painful and swollen about 10 days 
later (‘trypanosomal chancre’) and the regional lymph 
nodes enlarge (‘Winterbottom’s sign’). Within 2–3 weeks 
of infection, the trypanosomes invade the blood stream. 
The disease is characterised by an early haemato­
lymphatic stage and a late encephalitic stage, in which 
the parasite crosses the blood–brain barrier and chronic 
encephalopathy develops.
Rhodesiense infections
In these infections, the disease is more acute and severe 
than in gambiense infections, so that, within days or a few 
weeks, the patient is usually severely ill and may have 
developed pleural effusions and signs of myocarditis or 
hepatitis. There may be a petechial rash. The patient may 
die before there are signs of involvement of the CNS. If 
the illness is less acute, drowsiness, tremors and coma 
develop.
Gambiense infections
The distinction between early and late stages may not 
be apparent in gambiense infections. The disease usually 
runs a slow course over months or years, with irregular 
bouts of fever and enlargement of lymph nodes. These 
are characteristically firm, discrete, rubbery and pain-
less, and are particularly prominent in the posterior tri-
angle of the neck. The spleen and liver may become 
palpable. After some months without treatment, the 
CNS is invaded. This is shown clinically by headache 
and changed behaviour, blunting of higher mental func-
tions, insomnia by night and sleepiness by day, mental 
confusion and eventually tremors, pareses, wasting, 
coma and death.
Investigations
Trypanosomiasis should be considered in any febrile 
patient from an endemic area. In rhodesiense infections, 
thick and thin blood films, stained as for the detection 
of malaria, will reveal trypanosomes. The trypanosomes 
may be seen in the blood or from puncture of the primary 
lesion in the earliest stages of gambiense infections, but it 
is usually easier to demonstrate them by aspiration 
of a lymph node. Concentration methods include 
buffy coat microscopy and miniature anion exchange 
chromatography.
Due to the cyclical nature of parasitaemia, the diag-
nosis is often made by demonstration of antibodies 
using a simple, rapid screening card agglutination 
trypanosomiasis test (CATT), followed by parasitologi-
cal confirmation. If the CNS is affected, the cell count 
(> 20 × 109 leucocytes per litre) and protein content of 
the CSF are increased and the glucose is diminished. A 
very high level of serum IgM or the presence of IgM in 
the CSF is suggestive of trypanosomiasis. Recognition of 
CNS involvement is critical, as failure to treat it might 
be fatal.
Management
Unfortunately, therapeutic options for African trypano-
somiasis are limited and most of the antitrypanosomal 
drugs are toxic and expensive. The prognosis is good if 
treatment is begun early, before the brain has been 
invaded. At this stage, intravenous suramin, after a test 
dose of 100–200 mg, should be given for rhodesiense 
infections (1 g on days 1, 3, 7, 14 and 21). For gambiense 
infections, intramuscular or intravenous pentamidine 
4 mg/kg for 10 days is given (Box 13.62).
Fig. 13.34  Trypanosomiasis. Scanning electron micrograph showing 
trypanosomes swimming among erythrocytes. 
Fig. 13.35  Distribution of human African trypanosomiasis. From 
Simarro, et al. 2011 – see p. 386. Data are from 2009.
Non-endemic
None
1–100
101–500
501–1000
>1000
No. of cases
Gambiense trypanosomiasis
Stage 1
• First-line: pentamidine
• Second-line: eflornithine or melarsoprol
Stage 2
• First-line: eflornithine
• Second-line: melarsoprol
Rhodesiense trypanosomiasis
Stage 1
• First-line: suramin
• Second-line: melarsoprol
Stage 2
• First-line: melarsoprol
• Second-line: nifurtimox combined with melarsoprol
13.62  Drugs used to treat human 
African trypanosomiasis
Infectious disease
13
360
commonly affected. The entrance of T. cruzi through an 
abrasion produces a dusky-red firm swelling and 
enlargement of regional lymph nodes. A conjunctival 
lesion, although less common, is characteristic; the uni-
lateral firm, reddish swelling of the lids may close the 
eye and constitutes ‘Romaña’s sign’. In a few patients, 
an acute generalised infection soon appears, with a tran-
sient morbilliform or urticarial rash, fever, lymphaden-
opathy and enlargement of the spleen and liver. In a 
small minority of patients, acute myocarditis and heart 
failure or neurological features, including personality 
changes and signs of meningoencephalitis, may be seen. 
The acute infection may be fatal to infants.
Chronic phase
About 50–70% of infected patients become seropositive 
and develop an indeterminate form when no parasit­
aemia is detectable. They have a normal lifespan with 
no symptoms, but are a natural reservoir for the disease 
and maintain the life cycle of parasites. After a latent 
period of several years, 10–30% of chronic cases develop 
low-grade myocarditis, and damage to conducting fibres 
causes a cardiomyopathy characterised by cardiac dila-
tation, arrhythmias, partial or complete heart block and 
sudden death. In nearly 10% of patients, damage to 
Auerbach’s plexus results in dilatation of various 
parts of the alimentary canal, especially the colon and 
oesophagus, so-called ‘mega’ disease. Dilatation of the 
bile ducts and bronchi is also a recognised sequela. 
Autoimmune processes may be responsible for much of 
the damage. There are geographical variations of the 
basic pattern of disease. Reactivation of Chagas’ disease 
can occur in patients with HIV if the CD4 count falls 
lower than 200 cells/mm3 (p. 393); this can cause space-
occupying lesions with a presentation similar to Toxo-
plasma encephalitis, encephalitis, meningoencephalitis 
or myocarditis.
Investigations
T. cruzi is easily detectable in a blood film in the acute 
illness. In chronic disease, it may be recovered in up to 
50% of cases by xenodiagnosis, in which infection-free, 
laboratory-bred reduviid bugs are allowed to feed on the 
patient; subsequently, the hind gut or faeces of the bug 
are examined for parasites. Parasite DNA detection by 
PCR in the patient’s blood is a highly sensitive method 
for documentation of infection and, in addition, can be 
employed in faeces of bugs used in xenodiagnosis tests 
to improve sensitivity. Antibody detection is also highly 
sensitive.
Management and prevention
Parasiticidal agents are used to treat the acute phase, 
congenital disease and early chronic phase (within 
10 years of infection). Nifurtimox is given orally. The 
dose, which has to be carefully supervised to minimise 
toxicity while preserving parasiticidal activity, is 10 mg/
kg divided into three equal doses, daily orally for 
60–90 days. The paediatric dose is 15 mg/kg daily. Cure 
rates of 80% in acute disease are obtained. Benznidazole 
is an alternative, given at a dose of 5–10 mg/kg daily 
orally, in two divided doses for 60 days; children receive 
10 mg/kg daily. Both nifurtimox and benznidazole are 
toxic, with adverse reaction rates of 30–55%. Specific 
drug treatment of the chronic form is now increasingly 
Once the nervous system is affected, treatment with 
melarsoprol (an arsenical) is effective for both East and 
West African diseases. It is used in a dose of 2–3.6 mg/
kg/day IV for the first course and 3.6 mg/kg/day there-
after. Three 3-day treatment courses are given, separated 
by 7 days and by 10–21 days. Melarsoprol should be 
given with prednisolone 1 mg/kg up to 40 mg started 
1–2 days before, continued during and tapered after 
treatment to reduce side-effects. Treatment-related 
mortality with melarsoprol is 4–12% due to reactive 
encephalopathy. For CNS infections due to gambiense, 
eflornithine (DFMO), an irreversible inhibitor of orni-
thine decarboxylase (100 and 150 mg/kg IV 4 times 
daily for 14 days for adults and children, respectively), 
is considered to be a safer and cost-effective option. 
Combinations of eflornithine (400 mg daily for 7 days) 
with oral nifurtimox (15 mg/kg daily for 15 days) have 
been shown to decrease relapses, deaths and drug 
toxicity.
Prevention
In endemic gambiense areas, various measures may be 
taken against tsetse flies, and field teams help to detect 
and treat early human infection. In rhodesiense areas, 
control is difficult.
American trypanosomiasis 
(Chagas’ disease)
Chagas’ disease occurs widely in South and Central 
America. The cause is Trypanosoma cruzi, transmitted to 
humans from the faeces of a reduviid (triatomine) bug, 
in which the trypanosomes have a cycle of development 
before becoming infective to humans. These bugs live in 
wild forests in crevices, burrows and palm trees. The 
Triatoma infestans bug has become domesticated in the 
Southern Cone countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Para-
guay and Uruguay). It lives in the mud and wattle walls 
and thatched roofs of simple rural houses, and emerges 
at night to feed and defecate on the sleeping occupants. 
Infected faeces are rubbed in through the conjunctiva, 
mucosa of mouth or nose, or abrasions of the skin. Over 
one hundred species of mammal, domestic, peri­domestic 
and wild, may serve as reservoirs of infection. In some 
areas, blood transfusion accounts for about 5% of cases. 
Congenital transmission occasionally occurs.
Pathology
The trypanosomes migrate via the blood stream, develop 
into amastigote forms in the tissues and multiply intra-
cellularly by binary fission. In the acute phase (primarily 
cell-mediated), inflammation of parasitised as well as 
non-parasitised cardiac muscles and capillaries occurs, 
resulting in acute myocarditis. In the chronic phase, 
focal myocardial atrophy, signs of chronic passive con-
gestion and thromboembolic phenomena, cardiomegaly 
and apical cardiac aneurysm are salient findings. In the 
digestive form of disease, focal myositis and discontinu-
ous lesions of the intramural myenteric plexus, predomi-
nantly in the oesophagus and colon, are seen.
Clinical features
Acute phase
Clinical manifestations of the acute phase are seen in 
only 1–2% of individuals who are infected before the age 
of 15 years. Young children (1–5 years) are most 
Protozoal infections
13
361
15% of heterophile antibody-negative glandular fever 
(p. 320). In India or Brazil, approximately 40–60% of 
pregnant females are seropositive for T. gondii. In HIV-1 
infection (p. 402), toxoplasmosis is an important oppor-
tunistic infection with considerable morbidity and mor-
tality. Generalised toxoplasmosis has been described 
after accidental laboratory infection with highly virulent 
strains.
Clinical features
In most immunocompetent individuals, including chil-
dren and pregnant women, the infection goes unnoticed. 
In approximately 10% of patients, it causes a self-limiting 
illness, most common in adults aged 25–35 years. The 
most common presenting feature is painless lymphad-
enopathy, either local or generalised. In particular, the 
cervical nodes are involved, but mediastinal, mesenteric 
or retroperitoneal groups may be affected. The spleen is 
seldom palpable. Most patients have no systemic symp-
toms, but some complain of malaise, fever, fatigue, 
muscle pain, sore throat and headache. Complete resolu-
tion usually occurs within a few months, although 
symptoms and lymphadenopathy tend to fluctuate 
unpredictably and some patients do not recover com-
pletely for a year or more. Very infrequently, patients 
may develop encephalitis, myocarditis, polymyositis, 
pneumonitis or hepatitis. Retinochoroiditis (Fig. 13.37) 
is nearly always the result of congenital infection but has 
also been reported in acquired disease.
Congenital toxoplasmosis
Acute toxoplasmosis, mostly subclinical, affects 0.3–1% 
of pregnant women, with an approximately 60% trans-
mission rate to the fetus, which rises with increasing 
gestation. Seropositive females infected 6 months before 
conception have no risk of fetal transmission. Congenital 
disease affects approximately 40% of infected fetuses, 
and is more likely and more severe with infection early 
in gestation (see Box 13.28, p. 314). Many fetal infections 
are subclinical at birth but long-term sequelae include 
retinochoroiditis, microcephaly and hydrocephalus.
Investigations
In contrast to immunocompromised patients, in whom 
the diagnosis often requires direct detection of parasites, 
serology is often used in immunocompetent individuals. 
favoured, but, in the cardiac or digestive ‘mega’ dis-
eases, it does not reverse established tissue damage. 
Surgery may be needed.
Preventative measures include improving housing 
and destruction of reduviid bugs by spraying of houses 
with insecticides. Blood donors should be screened.
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite. The sexual 
phase of the parasite’s life cycle (Fig. 13.36) occurs in the 
small intestinal epithelium of the domestic cat. Oöcysts 
are shed in cat faeces and are spread to intermediate 
hosts (pigs, sheep and also humans) through wide-
spread contamination of soil. Oöcysts may survive in 
moist conditions for weeks or months. Once they are 
ingested, the parasite transforms into rapidly dividing 
tachyzoites through cycles of asexual multiplication. 
This leads to the formation of microscopic tissue cysts 
containing bradyzoites, which persist for the lifetime of 
the host. Cats become infected or re-infected by ingest-
ing tissue cysts in prey such as rodents and birds.
Human acquisition of infection occurs via oöcyst-
contaminated soil, salads and vegetables, or by the 
ingestion or tasting of raw or undercooked meats con-
taining tissue cysts. Sheep, pigs and rabbits are the most 
common meat sources. Outbreaks of toxoplasmosis have 
been linked to the consumption of unfiltered water. In 
developed countries, toxoplasmosis is the most common 
protozoal infection; around 22% of adults in the UK are 
seropositive. Most primary infections are subclinical; 
however, toxoplasmosis is thought to account for about 
Fig. 13.36  Life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii. 
Cat
Rodents
Birds
Oöcysts in faeces
Contaminated food,
water or soil
Tissue
cysts
Oöcysts
Oöcysts
Tissue
cysts
Humans
Vertical
transmission
Congenital
infection
Transfusion
Transplantation
Food
animals
Fig. 13.37  Retinochoroiditis due to toxoplasmosis. 
Infectious disease
13
362
The life cycle of Leishmania is shown in Figure 13.39. 
Flagellar promastigotes (10–20 µm) are introduced by 
the feeding female sandfly. The promastigotes are taken 
up by neutrophils, which undergo apoptosis and are 
then engulfed by macrophages, in which the parasites 
transform into amastigotes (2–4 µm; Leishman–Donovan 
body). These multiply, ultimately causing lysis of the 
macrophages and infection of other cells. Sandflies pick 
up amastigotes when feeding on infected patients or 
animal reservoirs. In the sandfly, the parasite transforms 
into a flagellar promastigote, which multiplies by binary 
fission in the gut of the vector and migrates to the pro-
boscis to infect a new host.
Sandflies live in hot and humid climates in the cracks 
and crevices of mud or straw houses and lay eggs in 
organic matter. People living in such conditions are 
more prone to acquiring the disease. Female sandflies 
bite during the night and preferentially feed on animals; 
humans are incidental hosts.
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar)
VL is caused by the protozoon Leishmania donovani 
complex (comprising L. donovani, L. infantum and L. 
chagasi). India, Sudan, Bangladesh and Brazil account for 
90% of cases of VL, while other affected regions include 
The Sabin–Feldman dye test (indirect fluorescent anti-
body test), which detects IgG antibody, is most com-
monly used. Recent infection is indicated by a fourfold 
or greater increase in titre when paired sera are tested 
in parallel. Peak titres of 1/1000 or more are reached 
within 1–2 months of the onset of infection, and the dye 
test then becomes an unreliable indicator of recent infec-
tion. The detection of significant levels of Toxoplasma-
specific IgM antibody may be useful in confirming acute 
infection. A false-positive result or persistence of IgM 
antibodies for years after infection makes interpretation 
difficult; however, negative IgM antibodies virtually 
rule out acute infection.
During pregnancy, it is critical to differentiate 
between recent and past infection; the presence of 
high-avidity IgG antibodies excludes infection acquired 
in the preceding 3–4 months.
If necessary, the presence of Toxoplasma organisms in 
a lymph node biopsy can be sought by staining sections 
histochemically with T. gondii antiserum, or by the use 
of PCR to detect Toxoplasma-specific DNA.
Management
In immunocompetent subjects, uncomplicated toxo­
plasmosis is self-limiting and responds poorly to 
antimicrobial therapy. Treatment with pyrimethamine, 
sulfadiazine and folinic acid is therefore usually reserved 
for rare cases of severe or progressive disease, and for 
infection in immunocompromised patients.
In a pregnant woman with an established recent 
infection, spiramycin (3 g daily in divided doses) should 
be given until term. Once fetal infection is established, 
treatment with sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine plus 
calcium folinate is recommended (spiramycin does not 
cross the placental barrier). The cost/benefit of routine 
Toxoplasma screening and treatment in pregnancy is 
being debated in many countries. There is insufficient 
evidence to determine the effects on mother or baby of 
current antiparasitic treatment for women who serocon-
vert in pregnancy.
Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis is caused by unicellular, flagellate, intra-
cellular protozoa belonging to the genus Leishmania 
(order Kinetoplastidae). There are 21 leishmanial species 
that cause several diverse clinical syndromes, which can 
be placed into three broad groups:
• visceral leishmaniasis (VL, kala-azar)
• cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL)
• mucosal leishmaniasis (ML).
Epidemiology and transmission
Although most clinical syndromes are caused by 
zoonotic transmission of parasites from animals (chiefly 
canine and rodent reservoirs) to humans through phle-
botomine sandfly vectors (Fig. 13.38A), humans are the 
only known reservoir (anthroponotic) in major VL foci 
in the Indian subcontinent and for transmission of leish-
maniasis between injection drug-users (Fig. 13.38B 
and C). Leishmaniasis occurs in approximately 100 
countries around the world, with an estimated annual 
incidence of 2 million new cases (500 000 for VL and 
1.5 million for CL).
Fig. 13.38  Transmission of leishmaniasis. A  Zoonotic transmission.
 B  Anthroponotic transmission. C  Anthroponotic transmission in the 
injection drug-user. 
Zoonotic VL, CL
 L. infantum
 L. major
 L. mexicana complex
 L. (V.) brasiliensis complex
Anthroponotic VL, CL
 L. donovani
 L. tropica
Anthroponotic in
injection drug-users
 HIV-VL co-infection 
 L. infantum
A
B
C
Protozoal infections
13
363
hepatomegaly occurs later. Lymphadenopathy is seen in 
the majority of cases in Africa, the Mediterranean and 
South America, but is rare in the Indian subcontinent. 
Blackish discoloration of the skin, from which the disease 
derived its name, kala-azar (the Hindi word for ‘black 
fever’), is a feature of advanced illness and is now rarely 
seen. Pancytopenia is a common feature. Moderate to 
severe anaemia develops rapidly, and can result in con-
gestive cardiac failure and associated clinical features. 
Thrombocytopenia, often compounded by hepatic dys-
function, may result in bleeding from the retina, gas-
trointestinal tract and nose. In advanced illness, 
hypoalbuminaemia may manifest as pedal oedema, 
ascites and anasarca (gross generalised oedema and 
swelling).
As the disease advances, there is profound immuno-
suppression and secondary infections are very common. 
These include tuberculosis, pneumonia, severe amoebic 
or bacillary dysentery, gastroenteritis, herpes zoster and 
chickenpox. Skin infections, boils, cellulitis and scabies 
are common. Without adequate treatment, most patients 
with clinical VL die.
Investigations
Pancytopenia is the most dominant feature, with 
granulo­cytopenia and monocytosis. Polyclonal hyper-
gammaglobulinaemia, chiefly IgG followed by IgM, and 
hypoalbuminaemia are seen later.
Demonstration of amastigotes (Leishman–Donovan 
bodies) in splenic smears is the most efficient means of 
diagnosis, with 98% sensitivity (Fig. 13.41); however, it 
carries a risk of serious haemorrhage in inexperienced 
hands. Safer methods, such as bone marrow or lymph 
node smears, are not as sensitive. Parasites may be dem-
onstrated in buffy coat smears, especially in immuno-
suppressed patients. Sensitivity can be improved by 
culturing the aspirate material or by PCR for DNA 
detection and species identification, but these tests can 
only be performed in specialised laboratories.
Serodiagnosis, by ELISA or immunofluorescence 
antibody test, is employed in developed countries. In 
endemic regions, a highly sensitive direct agglutination 
test using stained promastigotes and an equally efficient 
rapid immunochromatographic k39 strip test have 
become popular. These tests remain positive for several 
months after cure has been achieved, so do not predict 
the Mediterranean, East Africa, China, Arabia, Israel and 
other South American countries (Fig. 13.40). In addition 
to sandfly transmission, VL has also been reported to 
follow blood transfusion, and disease can present unex-
pectedly in immunosuppressed patients – for example, 
after renal transplantation and in HIV infection.
The great majority of people infected remain asymp-
tomatic. In visceral diseases, the spleen, liver, bone 
marrow and lymph nodes are primarily involved.
Clinical features
In the Indian subcontinent, adults and children are 
equally affected; elsewhere, VL is mainly a disease of 
small children and infants, except in adults with HIV 
co-infection. The incubation period ranges from weeks 
to months (occasionally several years).
The first sign of infection is high fever, usually accom-
panied by rigor and chills. Fever intensity decreases over 
time, and patients may become afebrile for intervening 
periods ranging from weeks to months. This is followed 
by a relapse of fever, often of lesser intensity. Spleno­
megaly develops quickly in the first few weeks and 
becomes massive as the disease progresses. Moderate 
Fig. 13.39  Life cycle of Leishmania. From Knight 1982 – see p. 386.
Sandfly
(Phlebotomus in eastern hemisphere,
Lutzomyia and Psychodopygus
in western hemisphere)
Stomach
Pharynx
Bite
Proboscis
Macrophage
Promastigote
Amastigote
Amastigote
Dermis only
 L. tropica
 L. mexicana etc.
Dermis and
mucosae
(sometimes)
 L. brasiliensis
Viscera and
dermis
(sometimes)
 L. donovani
Fig. 13.40  World distribution of visceral leishmaniasis. 
L. chagasi
L. infantum
L. donovani
Fig. 13.41  Splenic smear showing numerous intracellular, and a 
few extracellular, amastigotes. 
Infectious disease
13
364
Other drugs
The oral drug miltefosine, an alkyl phospholipid, has 
been approved in several countries for the treatment 
of VL. A daily dose of 50 mg (patient’s body weight 
< 25 kg) to 100 mg (≥ 25 kg), or 2.5 mg/kg body weight 
for children, for 28 days cures over 90% of patients. Side-
effects include mild to moderate vomiting and diar-
rhoea, and rarely skin allergy or renal or liver toxicity. 
Since it is a teratogenic drug, it cannot be used in preg-
nancy; female patients are advised not to become 
pregnant for the duration of treatment and 3 months 
thereafter, because of its half-life of nearly 1 week.
Paromomycin is an aminoglycoside that has under-
gone trials in India and Africa, and is highly effective if 
given intramuscularly at 11 mg/kg body weight of 
paromomycin base, daily for 3 weeks. No significant 
auditory or renal toxicity is seen. The drug has been 
approved in India for the treatment of VL.
Pentamidine isethionate was used to treat Sb- 
refractory patients with VL. However, declining efficacy 
and serious side-effects, such as type 1 diabetes mellitus, 
hypoglycaemia and hypotension, have led to it being 
abandoned.
Multidrug therapy of VL is likely to be used 
increasingly to prevent emergence of drug resistance 
(Box 13.63).
Response to treatment
A good response results in abatement of fever, a feeling 
of well-being, gradual decrease in spleen size, weight 
gain and recovery of blood counts. Patients should be 
followed regularly for a period of 6–12 months, as a 
small minority may experience a relapse of the disease 
during this period, irrespective of the treatment 
regimen.
HIV–visceral leishmaniasis co-infection
HIV-induced immunosuppression (Ch. 14) increases the 
risk of contracting VL 100–1000 times. Most cases of 
HIV–VL co-infection have been reported from Spain, 
France, Italy and Portugal. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
has led to a remarkable decline in the incidence of VL 
co-infection in Europe. However, numbers are increas-
ing in Africa (mainly Ethiopia), Brazil and in the Indian 
subcontinent.
Although the clinical triad of fever, splenomegaly 
and hepatomegaly is found in the majority of co-infected 
patients, those with low CD4 count may have atypical 
clinical presentations, posing a diagnostic challenge. VL 
may present with gastrointestinal involvement (stomach, 
duodenum or colon), ascites, pleural or pericardial 
response to treatment or relapse. The vast majority of 
people exposed to the parasite do not develop clinical 
illness but may have positive serological tests thereafter. 
Formal gel (aldehyde) or other similar tests based on the 
detection of raised globulin have limited value and 
should not be employed for the diagnosis of VL.
Differential diagnosis
This includes malaria, typhoid, tuberculosis, schisto-
somiasis and many other infectious and neoplastic con-
ditions, some of which may coexist with VL. Fever, 
splenomegaly, pancytopenia and non-response to anti-
malarial therapy may provide clues before specific labo-
ratory diagnosis is made.
Management
Pentavalent antimonials
Antimony (Sb) compounds were the first drugs to be 
used for the treatment of leishmaniasis and remain the 
mainstay of treatment in most parts of the world. The 
exception is the Indian subcontinent, especially Bihar 
state, where almost two-thirds of cases are refractory 
to Sb treatment. Traditionally, pentavalent antimony is 
available as sodium stibogluconate (100 mg/mL) in 
English-speaking countries and meglumine antimoniate 
(85 mg/mL) in French-speaking ones. The daily dose is 
20 mg/kg body weight, given either intravenously 
or intramuscularly for 28–30 days. Side-effects are 
com­mon and include arthralgias, myalgias, raised 
hepatic transaminases, pancreatitis (especially in patients 
co-infected with HIV) and ECG changes (T wave inver-
sion and reduced amplitude). Severe cardiotoxicity, 
manifest by concave ST segment elevation, prolongation 
of QTc greater than 0.5 msec, and ventricular dysrhyth-
mias, is not uncommon. The incidence of cardiotoxicity 
and death can be very high with improperly manufac-
tured Sb.
Amphotericin B
Amphotericin B deoxycholate, given once daily or 
on alternate days at a dose of 0.75–1.00 mg/kg for 
15–20 doses, is used as the first-line drug in many 
regions where there is a significant level of Sb unre­
sponsiveness. It has a cure rate of nearly 100%. 
Infusion-related side-effects, e.g. high fever with rigor, 
thrombophlebitis, diarrhoea and vomiting, are extremely 
common. Serious adverse events, such as renal or hepatic 
toxicity, hypokalaemia and thrombocytopenia, are not 
uncommon.
Lipid formulations of amphotericin B (p. 160) are less 
toxic. AmBisome is approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration and is first-line therapy in Europe for 
VL. Drug doses vary according to geographical location. 
In the Indian subcontinent, a total dose of 10 or 15 mg/
kg, administered in a single dose or as multiple doses 
over several days, respectively, is considered adequate, 
whereas in Africa 14–18 mg, and in South America and 
Europe 21–24 mg, in divided doses, typically spread 
over 10 days, is needed for immunocompetent patients. 
High daily doses of the lipid formulations are well toler-
ated, and in one study a single dose of 10 mg/kg of 
AmBisome cured 96% of Indian patients. AmBisome has 
been made available at a preferential low price for devel-
oping countries, and greater use of this drug for treat-
ment of VL is expected.
‘In India, combinations of a single dose of liposomal 
amphotericin B (AmBisome, 5 mg/kg) with either 7 days of 
miltefosine or 10 days of paromomycin, or 10 days each of 
miltefosine and paromomycin, cured at least 97% of patients.’
‘In Sudan, a combination of 17 days of antimony (Sb) with 
paromomycin produces a similar rate of cure (> 90%) to 
conventional treatment with 30 days of antimony.’
• Sundar S, et al. Lancet 2011; 377:477–486.
• Musa A, et al. PLoS NTD 2012;  e1674.
13.63  Combination therapy for visceral 
leishmaniasis
Protozoal infections
13
365
dermatological features described above, a measles-like 
micropapular rash (Fig. 13.42B) may be seen all over the 
body. In Sudan, children are more frequently affected 
than in India. Spontaneous healing occurs in about 
three-quarters of cases within 1 year.
Investigations and management
The diagnosis is clinical, supported by demonstration of 
scanty parasites in lesions by slit-skin smear and culture. 
Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry may 
demonstrate the parasite in skin tissues. In the majority 
of patients, serological tests (direct agglutination test or 
k39 strip tests) are positive.
Treatment of PKDL is difficult. In India, Sb for 
120 days, several courses of amphotericin B infusions, or 
miltefosine for 12 weeks is required. In Sudan, Sb for 
2 months is considered adequate. In the absence of a 
physical handicap, most patients are reluctant to com-
plete the treatment. PKDL patients are a human reser-
voir, and focal outbreaks have been linked to patients 
with PKDL in areas previously free of VL.
Prevention and control
Sandflies are extremely sensitive to insecticides, and 
vector control through insecticide spray is very impor-
tant. Mosquito nets or curtains treated with insecticides 
will keep out the tiny sandflies. In endemic areas with 
zoonotic transmission, infected or stray dogs should be 
destroyed.
In areas with anthroponotic transmission, early diag-
nosis and treatment of human infections, to reduce the 
reservoir and control epidemics of VL, is extremely 
important. Serology is useful in diagnosis of suspected 
cases in the field. No vaccine is currently available.
Cutaneous and mucosal 
leishmaniasis
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
CL (oriental sore) occurs in both the Old World and the 
New World (the Americas). Transmission is described 
on page 362.
effusion, or involvement of lungs, tonsil, oral mucosa or 
skin. Diagnostic principles remain the same as those in 
non-HIV patients. Parasites are numerous and easily 
demonstrable, even in buffy coat preparations. Some-
times amastigotes are found in unusual sites, such as 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, pleural fluid or biopsies of 
the gastrointestinal tract. Immunofluorescence, Western 
blot, ELISA and other serological tests used singly have 
low sensitivity. DNA detection by PCR of the blood or 
its buffy coat are at least 95% sensitive, and accurately 
track recovery and relapse.
Treatment of VL with HIV co-infection is essentially 
the same as in immunocompetent patients but there are 
some differences in outcome. Conventional ampho­
tericin B (0.7 mg/kg/day for 28 days) may be more 
effective in achieving initial cure than Sb (20 mg/kg/
day for 28 days). Using high-dose liposomal amphoter-
icin B (4 mg/kg on days 1–5, 10, 17, 24, 31 and 38), a high 
cure rate is possible. However, these co-infected patients 
have a tendency to relapse within 1 year. For prevention 
of relapse, maintenance chemotherapy with monthly 
liposomal amphotericin B is useful.
Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis
After treatment and apparent recovery from the visceral 
disease in India and Sudan, some patients develop 
dermatological manifestations due to local parasitic 
infection.
Clinical features
In India, dermatological changes occur in a small minor-
ity of patients 6 months to at least 3 years after the initial 
infection. They are seen as macules, papules, nodules 
(most frequently) and plaques, which have a predilec-
tion for the face, especially the area around the chin. The 
face often appears erythematous (Fig. 13.42A). Hypo­
pigmented macules can occur over all parts of the body 
and are highly variable in extent and location. There are 
no systemic symptoms and no spontaneous healing.
In Sudan, approximately 50% of patients with VL 
develop post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL), 
experiencing skin manifestations concurrently with VL 
or within the following 6 months. In addition to the 
Fig. 13.42  Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis. A  In India, with macules, papules, nodules and plaques. From Sundar S, et al. 2006 – 
see p. 386. B  In Sudan, with micronodular rash.
A
B
Infectious disease
13
366
CL is commonly imported and should be considered 
in the differential diagnosis of an ulcerating skin lesion, 
especially in travellers who have visited endemic areas 
of the Old World or forests in Central and South America.
Pathogenesis
Inoculated parasites are taken up by dermal macro-
phages, in which they multiply and form a focus for 
lymphocytes, epithelioid cells and plasma cells. Self-
healing may occur with necrosis of infected macro-
phages, or the lesion may become chronic with ulceration 
of the overlying epidermis, depending upon the aetio-
logical pathogen.
Clinical features
The incubation period is typically 2–3 months (range 
2 weeks to 5 years). In all types of CL, the common 
feature is development of a papule followed by ulcera-
tion of the skin with raised borders, usually at the site 
of the bite of the vector. Lesions, single or multiple, start 
as small red papules that increase gradually in size, 
reaching 2–10 cm in diameter. A crust forms, overlying 
an ulcer with a granular base (Fig. 13.44). These ulcers 
develop a few weeks or months after the bite. There can 
be satellite lesions, especially in L. major and occasion-
ally in L. tropica infections. Regional lymphadenopathy, 
pain, pruritus and secondary bacterial infections may 
occur.
Clinically, lesions of L. mexicana and L. peruviana 
closely resemble those seen in the Old World, but lesions 
on the pinna of the ear are common, and are chronic and 
destructive. L. mexicana is responsible for chiclero ulcers, 
the self-healing sores of Mexico.
If immunity is good, there is usually spontaneous 
healing in L. tropica, L. major and L. mexicana lesions. 
In some patients with anergy to Leishmania, the skin 
lesions of L. aethiopica, L. mexicana and L. amazonensis 
infections progress to the development of diffuse CL; 
this is characterised by spread of the infection from the 
initial ulcer, usually on the face, to involve the whole 
body in the form of non-ulcerative nodules. Occasion-
ally, in L. tropica infections, sores that have apparently 
healed relapse persistently (recidivans or lupoid 
leishmaniasis).
Mucosal leishmaniasis
The Viannia subgenus extends widely from the Amazon 
basin as far as Paraguay and Costa Rica, and is 
In the Old World, CL is mild. It is found around the 
Mediterranean basin, throughout the Middle East and 
Central Asia as far as Pakistan, and in sub-Saharan West 
Africa and Sudan (Fig. 13.43). The causative organisms 
for Old World zoonotic CL are L. major, L. tropica and L. 
aethiopica (Box 13.64). Anthroponotic CL is caused by L. 
tropica, and is confined to urban or suburban areas of the 
Old World. Afghanistan is currently the biggest focus, 
but infection is endemic in Pakistan, the western deserts 
of India, Iran, Iraq, Syria and other areas of the Middle 
East. In recent years, there has been an increase in the 
incidence of zoonotic CL in both the Old and the New 
World due to urbanisation and deforestation which led 
to peridomestic transmission (in and around human 
dwellings).
New World CL is a more significant disease, which 
may disfigure the nose, ears and mouth, and is caused 
by the L. mexicana complex (comprising L. mexicana, 
L. amazonensis and L. venezuelensis) and by the Viannia 
subgenus L. (V.) brasiliensis complex (comprising 
L. (V.) guyanensis, L. (V.) panamensis, L. (V.) brasiliensis 
and L. (V.) peruviana).
Fig. 13.43  World distribution of cutaneous leishmaniasis. 
L. mexicana
L. brasiliensis
L. infantum
L. tropica
L. major
L. aethiopica
13.64  Types of Old World cutaneous 
leishmaniasis
Leishmania spp.
Host
Clinical features
L. tropica
Dogs
Slow evolution, less 
severe
L. major
Gerbils, desert 
rodents
Rapid necrosis, wet sores
L. aethiopica
Hyraxes
Solitary facial lesions with 
satellites
Fig. 13.44  Cutaneous leishmaniasis. A  Papule. B  Ulcer. 
A
B
Protozoal infections
13
367
L. guyanensis. In ML, 8 injections of pentamidine 
(4 mg/kg on alternate days) cure the majority of patients. 
Ketoconazole (600 mg daily for 4 weeks) has shown 
some potential against L. mexicana infection. In 
Saudi Arabia, fluconazole (200 mg daily for 6 weeks) 
reduced healing times and cured 79% of patients with 
CL caused by L. major. In India, itraconazole (200 mg 
daily for 6 weeks) produced good results in CL.
Prevention of CL and ML
Personal protection against sandfly bites is important. 
No effective vaccine is yet available.
Gastrointestinal protozoal infections
Amoebiasis
Amoebiasis is caused by Entamoeba histolytica, which is 
spread between humans by its cysts. It is one of the 
leading parasitic causes of morbidity and mortality in 
the tropics and is occasionally acquired in other coun-
tries, such as the UK. Two non-pathogenic Entamoeba 
species (E. dispar and E. moshkovskii) are morphologically 
identical to E. histolytica, and are distinguishable only by 
molecular techniques, isoenzyme studies or monoclonal 
antibody typing. However, only E. histolytica causes 
amoebic dysentery or liver abscess. The life cycle of the 
amoeba is shown in Figure 13.45A.
Pathology
Cysts of E. histolytica are ingested in water or uncooked 
foods contaminated by human faeces. Infection may 
also be acquired through anal/oral sexual practices. In 
the colon, trophozoite forms emerge from the cysts. The 
parasite may invade the mucous membrane of the large 
bowel, producing lesions that are maximal in the 
caecum but found as far down as the anal canal. These 
are flask-shaped ulcers, varying greatly in size and sur-
rounded by healthy mucosa. A localised granuloma 
(amoeboma), presenting as a palpable mass in the 
rectum or a filling defect in the colon on radiography, is 
a rare complication which should be differentiated from 
colonic carcinoma. Amoebic ulcers may cause severe 
haemorrhage but rarely perforate the bowel wall.
Amoebic trophozoites can emerge from the vegeta-
tive cyst from the bowel and be carried to the liver in a 
portal venule. They can multiply rapidly and destroy the 
liver parenchyma, causing an abscess (see also p. 956). 
The liquid contents at first have a characteristic pinkish 
colour, which may later change to chocolate-brown (like 
anchovy sauce).
Cutaneous amoebiasis, though rare, causes progres-
sive genital, perianal or peri-abdominal surgical wound 
ulceration.
Clinical features
Intestinal amoebiasis – amoebic dysentery
Most amoebic infections are asymptomatic. The incuba-
tion period of amoebiasis ranges from 2 weeks to many 
years, followed by a chronic course with abdominal 
pains and two or more unformed stools a day. Offensive 
diarrhoea alternating with constipation, and blood or 
mucus in the stool, are common. There may be abdomi-
nal pain, especially right lower quadrant (which may 
simulate acute appendicitis). A dysenteric presentation 
responsible for deep sores and ML. In L. (V.) brasiliensis 
complex infections, cutaneous lesions may be followed 
by mucosal spread of the disease simultaneously or even 
years later. Young men with chronic lesions are particu-
larly at risk, and between 2% and 40% of infected persons 
develop ‘espundia’, metastatic lesions in the mucosa of 
the nose or mouth. This is characterised by thickening 
and erythema of the nasal mucosa, typically starting at 
the junction of the nose and upper lip. Later, ulceration 
develops. The lips, soft palate, fauces and larynx may 
also be invaded and destroyed, leading to considerable 
suffering and deformity. There is no spontaneous 
healing, and death may result from severe respiratory 
tract infections due to massive destruction of the 
pharynx.
Investigations in CL and ML
CL is often diagnosed on the basis of the lesions’ clinical 
characteristics. However, parasitological confirmation is 
important because clinical manifestations may be 
mimicked by other infections. Amastigotes can be dem-
onstrated on a slit-skin smear with Giemsa staining; 
alternatively, they can be cultured from the sores early 
during the infection. Parasites seem to be particularly 
difficult to isolate from sores caused by L. brasiliensis, 
responsible for the vast majority of cases in Brazil. Touch 
preparations from biopsies and histopathology usually 
have a low sensitivity. Culture of fine needle aspiration 
material has been reported to be the most sensitive 
method.
ML is more difficult to diagnose parasitologically. 
The leishmanin skin test measures delayed-type hyper-
sensitivity to killed Leishmania organisms. A positive test 
is defined as induration of more than 5 mm 48 hours 
after intradermal injection. The test is positive, except in 
diffuse CL and during active VL. PCR is used increas-
ingly for diagnosis and speciation, which is useful in 
selecting therapy.
Management of CL and ML
Small lesions may self-heal or are treated by freezing 
with liquid nitrogen or curettage. There is no ideal anti-
microbial therapy. Treatment should be individualised 
on the basis of the causative organism, severity of the 
lesions, availability of drugs, tolerance of the patient for 
toxicity, and local resistance patterns.
In CL, topical application of paromomycin 15% plus 
methylbenzethonium chloride 12% is beneficial. Intra­
lesional antimony (Sb: 0.2–0.8 mL/lesion) up to 2 g 
seems to be rapidly effective in suitable cases; it is well 
tolerated and economic, and is safe in patients with 
cardiac, liver or renal diseases.
In ML, and in CL when the lesions are multiple or in 
a disfiguring site, it is better to treat with parenteral Sb 
in a dose of 20 mg/kg/day (usually given for 20 days 
for CL and 28 days for ML), or with conventional or 
liposomal amphotericin B (see treatment of VL above). 
Sb is also indicated to prevent the development of 
mucosal disease, if there is any chance that a lesion 
acquired in South America is due to an L. brasiliensis 
strain. Refractory CL or ML should be treated with an 
amphotericin B preparation.
Other regimens may be effective. Two to four doses 
of pentamidine (2–4 mg/kg), administered on alternate 
days, are effective in New World CL caused by 
Infectious disease
13
368
Serum antibodies are detectable by immunofluores-
cence in over 95% of patients with hepatic amoebiasis 
and intestinal amoeboma, but in only about 60% of dys-
enteric amoebiasis. DNA detection by PCR has been 
shown to be useful in diagnosis of E. histolytica infections 
but is not generally available.
Management
Intestinal and early hepatic amoebiasis responds quickly 
to oral metronidazole (800 mg 3 times daily for 5–10 days) 
or other long-acting nitroimidazoles like tinidazole or 
ornidazole (both in doses of 2 g daily for 3 days). Nita-
zoxanide (500 mg twice daily for 3 days) is an alternative 
drug. Either diloxanide furoate or paromomycin, in 
doses of 500 mg orally 3 times daily for 10 days after treat-
ment, should be given to eliminate luminal cysts.
If a liver abscess is large or threatens to burst, or if 
the response to chemotherapy is not prompt, aspiration 
is required and is repeated if necessary. Rupture of an 
abscess into the pleural cavity, pericardial sac or 
peritoneal cavity necessitates immediate aspiration or 
surgical drainage. Small serous effusions resolve 
without drainage.
Prevention
Personal precautions against contracting amoebiasis 
consist of not eating fresh, uncooked vegetables or 
drinking unclean water.
Giardiasis
Infection with Giardia lamblia is found worldwide and is 
common in the tropics. It particularly affects children, 
tourists and immunosuppressed individuals, and is the 
parasite most commonly imported into the UK. In cystic 
form, it remains viable in water for up to 3 months and 
infection usually occurs by ingesting contaminated 
water. Its flagellar trophozoite form attaches to the duo-
denal and jejunal mucosa, causing inflammation.
with passage of blood, simulating bacillary dysentery or 
ulcerative colitis, occurs particularly in older people, in 
the puerperium and with superadded pyogenic infec-
tion of the ulcers.
Amoebic liver abscess
The abscess is usually found in the right hepatic lobe. 
There may not be associated diarrhoea. Early symptoms 
may be local discomfort only and malaise; later, a swing-
ing temperature and sweating may develop, usually 
without marked systemic symptoms or associated car-
diovascular signs. An enlarged, tender liver, cough and 
pain in the right shoulder are characteristic, but symp-
toms may remain vague and signs minimal. A large 
abscess may penetrate the diaphragm and rupture into 
the lung, from where its contents may be coughed up 
through a hepaticobronchial fistula. Rupture into the 
pleural or peritoneal cavity, or rupture of a left lobe 
abscess in the pericardial sac, is less common but more 
serious.
Investigations
The stool and any exudate should be examined at once 
under the microscope for motile trophozoites containing 
red blood cells. Movements cease rapidly as the stool 
preparation cools. Several stools may need to be exam-
ined in chronic amoebiasis before cysts are found. Sig-
moidoscopy may reveal typical flask-shaped ulcers, 
which should be scraped and examined immediately for 
E. histolytica. In endemic areas, one-third of the popula-
tion are symptomless passers of amoebic cysts.
An amoebic abscess of the liver is suspected on clini-
cal grounds; there is often a neutrophil leucocytosis and 
a raised right hemidiaphragm on chest X-ray. Confirma-
tion is by ultrasonic scanning. Aspirated pus from an 
amoebic abscess has the characteristic anchovy sauce or 
chocolate-brown appearance but only rarely contains 
free amoebae (Fig. 13.45B).
Fig. 13.45  Amoebiasis. A  The life cycle of Entamoeba histolytica. From Knight 1982 – see p. 386. B  The chocolate-brown appearance of aspirated 
material from an amoebic liver abscess.
B
Trophozoite
in faeces
(do not encyst)
Cyst maturation
in distal colon 
and faeces
Ingested
mature cyst
Encystment
in colon
Excystment in
small bowel
Lumen 
Colonic
mucosa
Ulcer
Amoeboma
Amoebic
abscess
Ingested
erythrocytes
Tissue
trophozoite
A
trophozoite
Infections caused by helminths
13
369
The geographical distribution of hookworms is 
limited by the larval requirement for warmth and 
humidity. Soil-transmitted nematode infections can be 
prevented by avoidance of faecal soil contamination 
(adequate sewerage disposal) or skin contact (wearing 
shoes), and by strict personal hygiene.
Ancylostomiasis (hookworm)
Ancylostomiasis is caused by parasitisation with Ancy-
lostoma duodenale or Necator americanus. The complex life 
cycle is shown in Figure 13.46. The adult hookworm is 
1 cm long and lives in the duodenum and upper jejunum. 
Eggs are passed in the faeces. In warm, moist, shady soil, 
the larvae develop into rhabditiform and then the infec-
tive filariform stages; they then penetrate human skin 
and are carried to the lungs. After entering the alveoli, 
they ascend the bronchi, are swallowed and mature in 
the small intestine, reaching maturity 4–7 weeks after 
infection. The worms attach themselves to the mucosa 
of the small intestine by their buccal capsule (Fig. 13.47) 
and withdraw blood. The mean daily loss of blood from 
one A. duodenale is 0.15 mL and from N. americanus 
0.03 mL.
Hookworm infection is one of the main causes of 
anaemia in the tropics and subtropics. A. duodenale is 
endemic in the Far East and Mediterranean coastal 
regions, and is also present in Africa, while N. americanus 
is endemic in West, East and Central Africa, and Central 
and South America, as well as in the Far East.
Clinical features
An allergic dermatitis, usually on the feet (ground itch), 
may be experienced at the time of infection. The passage 
of the larvae through the lungs in a heavy infection 
causes a paroxysmal cough with blood-stained sputum, 
associated with patchy pulmonary consolidation and 
eosinophilia. When the worms have reached the small 
intestine, vomiting and epigastric pain resembling 
peptic ulcer disease may occur. Sometimes, frequent 
loose stools are passed. The degree of iron and protein 
Clinical features and investigations
After an incubation period of 1–3 weeks, there is diar-
rhoea, abdominal pain, weakness, anorexia, nausea 
and vomiting. On examination, there may be abdominal 
distension and tenderness.
Stools obtained at 2–3-day intervals should be exam-
ined for cysts. Duodenal or jejunal aspiration by endos-
copy gives a higher diagnostic yield. The ‘string test’ 
may be used, in which one end of a piece of string is 
passed into the duodenum by swallowing and retrieved 
after an overnight fast; expressed fluid is then exam-
ined for the presence of G. lamblia trophozoites. A 
number of stool antigen detection tests are available. 
Jejunal biopsy specimens may show G. lamblia on the 
epithelial surface.
Management
Treatment is with a single dose of tinidazole 2 g, metro-
nidazole 400 mg 3 times daily for 10 days, or nitazoxa-
nide 500 mg orally twice daily for 3 days.
Cryptosporidiosis
Cryptosporidium spp. are coccidian protozoal parasites of 
humans and domestic animals. Infection is acquired by 
the faecal–oral route through contaminated water sup-
plies. The incubation period is approximately 7–10 days 
and is followed by watery diarrhoea and abdominal 
cramps. The illness is usually self-limiting, but in 
immunocompromised patients, especially those with 
HIV, the illness can be devastating, with persistent 
severe diarrhoea and substantial weight loss (p. 399).
Cyclosporiasis
Cyclospora cayetanensis is a globally distributed coccidian 
protozoal parasite of humans. Infection is acquired by 
ingestion of contaminated water. The incubation period 
is approximately 2–11 days and is followed by acute 
onset of diarrhoea with abdominal cramps, which may 
remit and relapse. Although usually self-limiting, the 
illness may last as long as 6 weeks, with significant asso-
ciated weight loss and malabsorption, and is more 
severe in immunocompromised individuals. Diagnosis 
is by detection of oöcysts on faecal microscopy. Treat-
ment may be necessary in a few cases, and the agent of 
choice is co-trimoxazole 960 mg twice daily for 7 days.
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY HELMINTHS
Helminths (from the Greek helmins, meaning worm) 
include three groups of parasitic worm (Box 13.65), large 
multicellular organisms with complex tissues and 
organs.
Intestinal human nematodes
Diseases are caused by adult nematodes living in the 
human gut. There are two types:
• the hookworms, which have a soil stage in which 
they develop into larvae that then penetrate the 
host
• a group of nematodes which survive in the soil 
merely as eggs that have to be ingested for their life 
cycle to continue.
Nematodes or roundworms
• Intestinal human nematodes: Ancylostoma duodenale, 
Necator americanus, Strongyloides stercoralis, Ascaris 
lumbricoides, Enterobius vermicularis, Trichuris trichiura
• Tissue-dwelling human nematodes: Wuchereria bancrofti, 
Brugia malayi, Loa loa, Onchocerca volvulus, Dracunculus 
medinensis, Mansonella perstans, Dirofilaria immitis
• Zoonotic nematodes: Trichinella spiralis
Trematodes or flukes
• Blood flukes: Schistosoma haematobium, S. mansoni, 
S. japonicum, S. mekongi, S. intercalatum
• Lung flukes: Paragonimus spp.
• Hepatobiliary flukes: Clonorchis sinensis, Fasciola hepatica, 
Opisthorchis felineus
• Intestinal flukes: Fasciolopsis buski
Cestodes or tapeworms
• Intestinal tapeworms: Taenia saginata, T. solium, 
Diphyllobothrium latum, Hymenolepis nana
• Tissue-dwelling cysts or worms: Taenia solium, Echinococcus 
granulosus
13.65  Classes of helminth that parasitise humans
Infectious disease
13
370
Strongyloidiasis
Strongyloides stercoralis is a very small nematode (2 mm 
× 0.4 mm) which parasitises the mucosa of the upper 
part of the small intestine, often in large numbers, 
causing persistent eosinophilia. The eggs hatch in the 
bowel but only larvae are passed in the faeces. In moist 
soil, they moult and become the infective filariform 
larvae. After penetrating human skin, they undergo a 
development cycle similar to that of hookworms, except 
that the female worms burrow into the intestinal mucosa 
and submucosa. Some larvae in the intestine may 
develop into filariform larvae, which may then penetrate 
the mucosa or the perianal skin and lead to autoinfection 
and persistent infection. Patients with Strongyloides 
infection persisting for more than 35 years have been 
described. Strongyloidiasis occurs in the tropics and 
subtropics, and is especially prevalent in the Far East.
Clinical features
These are shown in Box 13.66. The classic triad of symp-
toms consists of abdominal pain, diarrhoea and urti-
caria. Cutaneous manifestations, either urticaria or larva 
currens (a highly characteristic pruritic, elevated, ery-
thematous lesion advancing along the course of larval 
migration), are characteristic and occur in 66% of 
patients.
Systemic strongyloidiasis (the Strongyloides hyper­
infection syndrome), with dissemination of larvae 
throughout the body, occurs in association with immune 
suppression (intercurrent disease, HIV and HTLV-1 
infection, corticosteroid treatment). Patients present 
with severe, generalised abdominal pain, abdominal 
distension and shock. Massive larval invasion of the 
lungs causes cough, wheeze and dyspnoea; cerebral 
involvement has manifestations ranging from subtle 
neurological signs to coma. Gram-negative sepsis fre-
quently complicates the picture.
Investigations
There is eosinophilia. Serology (ELISA) is helpful but 
definitive diagnosis depends upon finding the larvae. 
The faeces should be examined microscopically for 
motile larvae; excretion is intermittent and so repeated 
examinations may be necessary. Larvae can also be 
found in jejunal aspirate or detected using the string test 
(p. 369). Larvae may also be cultured from faeces.
deficiency which develops depends not only on the load 
of worms but also on the nutrition of the patient and 
especially on the iron stores. Anaemia with high-output 
cardiac failure may result. The mental and physical 
development of children may be retarded in severe 
infection.
Investigations
There is eosinophilia. The characteristic ovum can be 
recognised in the stool. If hookworms are present in 
numbers sufficient to cause anaemia, faecal occult blood 
testing will be positive and many ova will be present.
Management
A single dose of albendazole (400 mg) is the treatment 
of choice. Alternatively, mebendazole 100 mg twice 
daily for 3 days may be used. Anaemia and heart failure 
associated with hookworm infection respond well to 
oral iron, even when severe; blood transfusion is rarely 
required.
Fig. 13.47  Ancylostoma duodenale. Electron micrograph showing the 
ventral teeth. From Gibbons 1986 – see p. 386.
Penetration of skin by infective larvae
• Itchy rash
Presence of worms in gut
• Abdominal pain, diarrhoea, steatorrhoea, weight loss
Allergic phenomena
• Urticarial plaques and papules, wheezing, arthralgia
Autoinfection
• Transient itchy, linear, urticarial weals across abdomen and 
buttocks (larva currens)
Systemic (super)infection
• Diarrhoea, pneumonia, meningoencephalitis, death
13.66  Clinical features of strongyloidiasis
Fig. 13.46  Ancylostomiasis. Life cycle of Ancylostoma. 
Pharynx
Bronchi
Lungs
Blood
stream
Faecal
eggs
Duodenum
Adult
worm
Blood
loss
Eosinophilia
Warm,
moist
shady soil
Larvae
Ova
Infections caused by helminths
13
371
Clinical features
The gravid female worm lays ova around the anus, 
causing intense itching, especially at night. The ova are 
often carried to the mouth on the fingers and so 
re-infection or human-to-human infection takes place 
(Fig. 13.48). In females, the genitalia may be involved. 
The adult worms may be seen moving on the buttocks 
or in the stool.
Investigations
Ova are detected by applying the adhesive surface of 
cellophane tape to the perianal skin in the morning. This 
is then examined on a glass slide under the microscope. 
A perianal swab, moistened with saline, is an alternative 
sampling method.
Management
A single dose of mebendazole (100 mg), albendazole 
(400 mg), pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg) or piperazine 
(4 g) is given and may be repeated after 2 weeks to 
control auto-reinfection. If infection recurs in a family, 
each member should be treated as above. During this 
period all nightclothes and bed linen are laundered. Fin-
gernails must be kept short and hands washed carefully 
before meals. Subsequent therapy is reserved for those 
family members who develop recurrent infection.
Trichuris trichiura (whipworm)
Infections with whipworm are common all over the 
world under unhygienic conditions. Infection is con-
tracted by the ingestion of earth or food contaminated 
with ova which have become infective after lying for 
3 weeks or more in moist soil. The adult worm is 3–5 cm 
long and has a coiled anterior end resembling a whip. 
Whipworms inhabit the caecum, lower ileum, appendix, 
colon and anal canal. There are usually no symptoms, 
but intense infections in children may cause persistent 
diarrhoea or rectal prolapse, and growth retardation. 
The diagnosis is readily made by identifying ova in 
faeces. Treatment is with mebendazole in doses of 
Management
A course of two doses of ivermectin (200 µg/kg), admin-
istered on successive days, is effective. Alternatively, 
albendazole is given orally in a dose of 15 mg/kg body 
weight twice daily for 3 days. A second course may be 
required. For the Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome, 
ivermectin is given at 200 µg/kg for 5–7 days.
Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm)
This pale yellow nematode is 20–35 cm long. Humans 
are infected by eating food contaminated with mature 
ova. Ascaris larvae hatch in the duodenum, migrate 
through the lungs, ascend the bronchial tree, are swal-
lowed and mature in the small intestine. This tissue 
migration can provoke both local and general hypersen-
sitivity reactions, with pneumonitis, eosinophilic granu-
lomas, bronchial asthma and urticaria.
Clinical features
Intestinal ascariasis causes symptoms ranging from 
occasional vague abdominal pain through to malnutri-
tion. The large size of the adult worm and its tendency 
to aggregate and migrate can result in obstructive com-
plications. Tropical and subtropical areas are endemic 
for ascariasis, and in these areas it causes up to 35% of 
all intestinal obstructions, most commonly in the termi-
nal ileum. Obstruction can be complicated further by 
intussusception, volvulus, haemorrhagic infarction and 
perforation. Other complications include blockage of the 
bile or pancreatic duct and obstruction of the appendix 
by adult worms.
Investigations
The diagnosis is made microscopically by finding ova in 
the faeces. Adult worms are frequently expelled rectally 
or orally. Occasionally, the worms are demonstrated 
radiographically by a barium examination. There is 
eosinophilia.
Management
A single dose of albendazole (400 mg), pyrantel 
pamoate (11 mg/kg; maximum 1 g), ivermectin (150–
200 µg/kg) or mebendazole (100 mg twice daily for 
3 days) is effective for intestinal ascariasis. Patients 
should be warned that they might expel numerous 
whole, large worms. Obstruction due to ascariasis 
should be treated with nasogastric suction, piperazine 
and intravenous fluids.
Prevention
Community chemotherapy programmes have been 
used to reduce Ascaris infection. The whole community 
can be treated every 3 months for several years. 
Alternatively, schoolchildren can be targeted; treating 
them lowers the prevalence of ascariasis in the 
community.
Enterobius vermicularis 
(threadworm)
This helminth is common throughout the world and 
affects mainly children. After the ova are swallowed, 
development takes place in the small intestine, but the 
adult worms are found chiefly in the colon.
Fig. 13.48  Threadworm. Life cycle of Enterobius vermicularis. 
Adult
worm in
colon
Itch
Ova
Infectious disease
13
372
cause lymphangiectasia; this dilatation of the lymphatic 
vessels leads to lymphatic dysfunction and the chronic 
clinical manifestations of lymphatic filariasis, lymph­
oedema and hydrocele. Death of the adult worm results 
in acute filarial lymphangitis. The filariae are symbioti-
cally infected with rickettsia-like bacteria (Wolbachia 
spp.), and release of lipopolysaccharide from these bac-
teria contributes to inflammation. Lymphatic obstruc-
tion persists after death of the adult worm. Secondary 
bacterial infections cause tissue destruction. The host 
response to microfilariae is central to the pathogenesis 
of tropical pulmonary eosinophilia.
Clinical features
Acute filarial lymphangitis presents with fever, pain, 
tenderness and erythema along the course of inflamed 
lymphatic vessels. Inflammation of the spermatic cord, 
epididymis and testis is common. The whole episode 
lasts a few days but may recur several times a year. 
Temporary oedema becomes more persistent and 
regional lymph nodes enlarge. Progressive enlargement, 
coarsening, corrugation, fissuring and bacterial infection 
of the skin and subcutaneous tissue develop gradually, 
causing irreversible ‘elephantiasis’. The scrotum may 
reach an enormous size. Chyluria and chylous effusions 
are milky and opalescent; on standing, fat globules rise 
to the top.
The acute lymphatic manifestations of filariasis must 
be differentiated from thrombophlebitis and infection. 
The oedema and lymphatic obstructive changes must be 
distinguished from congestive cardiac failure, malig-
nancy, trauma and idiopathic abnormalities of the lym-
phatic system. Silicates absorbed from volcanic soil can 
also cause non-filarial elephantiasis.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia is a complication 
seen mainly in India and is likely to be due to microfilar-
iae trapped in the pulmonary capillaries and destroyed 
100 mg twice daily or albendazole 400 mg daily for 
3 days for patients with light infections, and for 5–7 days 
for those with heavy infections.
Tissue-dwelling human nematodes
Filarial worms are tissue-dwelling nematodes. The 
larval stages are inoculated by biting mosquitoes or flies, 
each specific to a particular filarial species. The larvae 
develop into adult worms (2–50 cm long) which, after 
mating, produce millions of microfilariae (170–320 µm 
long) that migrate in blood or skin. The life cycle is 
completed when the vector takes up microfilariae while 
feeding on humans. In the insect, ingested microfilariae 
develop into infective larvae for inoculation in humans, 
normally the only host.
Disease is due to the host’s immune response to the 
worms (both adult and microfilariae), particularly dying 
worms, and its pattern and severity vary with the site 
and stage of each species (Box 13.67). The worms are 
long-lived; microfilariae survive 2–3 years and adult 
worms 10–15 years. The infections are chronic and worst 
in individuals constantly exposed to re-infection.
Lymphatic filariasis
Infection with the filarial worms Wuchereria bancrofti and 
Brugia malayi is associated with clinical outcomes 
ranging from subclinical infection to hydrocele and 
elephantiasis.
W. bancrofti is transmitted by night-biting culicine or 
anopheline mosquitoes in most areas (Fig. 13.49). The 
adult worms, 4–10 cm in length, live in the lymphatics, 
and the females produce microfilariae which circulate in 
large numbers in the peripheral blood, usually at night. 
The infection is widespread in tropical Africa, on the 
North African coast, in coastal areas of Asia, Indonesia 
and northern Australia, the South Pacific islands, the 
West Indies and also in North and South America.
B. malayi usually causes less severe disease than W. 
bancrofti and is transmitted by Mansonia or Anopheles 
mosquitoes in Indonesia, Borneo, Malaysia, Vietnam, 
South China, South India and Sri Lanka.
Pathology
Several factors contribute to the pathogenesis of lym-
phatic filariasis. Toxins released by the adult worm 
13.67  Pathogenicity of filarial infections 
depending on site and stage of worms
Worm species
Adult worm
Microfilariae
Wuchereria 
bancrofti and 
Brugia malayi
Lymphatic 
vessels+++
Blood−
Pulmonary capillaries++
Loa loa
Subcutaneous+
Blood+
Onchocerca 
volvulus
Subcutaneous+
Skin+++
Eye+++
Mansonella 
perstans
Retroperitoneal−
Blood−
Mansonella 
streptocerca
Skin+
Skin++
(+++ severe; ++ moderate; + mild; − rarely pathogenic)
Fig. 13.49  Wuchereria bancrofti and Brugia malayi. Life cycle of 
organisms and pathogenesis of lymphatic filariasis. 
Lymphangitis
and 
lymphoedema
Microfilariae
in blood and
trapped in
pulmonary
capillaries
Adult worm 
in lymphatics
Epididymo-orchitis
and hydrocele
Infective
larva
Mosquito
Microfilariae
Infections caused by helminths
13
373
antibiotic therapy of bacterial cellulitis are important in 
preventing further lymphatic damage and worsening of 
existing elephantiasis. Plastic surgery may be indicated 
in established elephantiasis. Great relief can be obtained 
by removal of excess tissue but recurrences are probable 
unless new lymphatic drainage is established. Hydro­
celes and chyluria can be repaired surgically.
Prevention
Treatment of the whole population in endemic areas 
with annual single-dose DEC (6 mg/kg), either alone or 
in combination with albendazole or ivermectin, can 
reduce filarial transmission. This mass treatment should 
be combined with mosquito control programmes.
Loiasis
Loiasis is caused by infection with the filaria Loa loa. The 
disease is endemic in forested and swampy parts of 
Western and Central Africa. The adult worms, 3–7 cm × 
4 mm, chiefly parasitise the subcutaneous tissue of 
humans, releasing larval microfilariae into the periph-
eral blood in the daytime. The vector is Chrysops, a 
forest-dwelling, day-biting fly.
The host response to Loa loa is usually absent or mild, 
so that the infection may be harmless. From time to time 
a short-lived, inflammatory, oedematous swelling (a 
Calabar swelling) is produced around an adult worm. 
Heavy infections, especially when treated, may cause 
encephalitis.
Clinical features
The infection is often symptomless. The incubation 
period is commonly over a year but may be just 
3 months. The first sign is usually a Calabar swelling, an 
irritating, tense, localised swelling that may be painful, 
especially if it is near a joint. The swelling is generally 
on a limb; it measures a few centimetres in diameter but 
sometimes is more diffuse and extensive. It usually dis-
appears after a few days but may persist for 2 or 3 weeks. 
A succession of such swellings may appear at irregular 
intervals, often in adjacent sites. Sometimes, there is urti-
caria and pruritus elsewhere. Occasionally, a worm may 
be seen wriggling under the skin, especially that of an 
eyelid, and may cross the eye under the conjunctiva, 
taking many minutes to do so.
Investigations
Diagnosis is by demonstrating microfilariae in blood 
taken during the day, but they may not always be found 
in patients with Calabar swellings. Antifilarial antibod-
ies are positive in 95% of patients and there is massive 
eosinophilia. Occasionally, a calcified worm may be seen 
on X-ray.
Management
DEC (see above) is curative, in a dose of 9–12 mg/kg 
daily, continued for 21 days. Treatment may precipitate 
a severe reaction in patients with a heavy microfilar­
aemia characterised by fever, joint and muscle pain, and 
encephalitis; microfilaraemic patients should be given 
corticosteroid cover.
Prevention
Protection is afforded by building houses away from 
trees and by having dwellings wire-screened. Protective 
by allergic inflammation. Patients present with paroxys-
mal cough, wheeze and fever. If untreated, this may 
progress to debilitating chronic interstitial lung disease.
Investigations
In the earliest stages of lymphangitis, the diagnosis is 
made on clinical grounds, supported by eosinophilia 
and sometimes by positive filarial serology. Filarial 
infections cause the highest eosinophil counts of all 
helminthic infections.
Microfilariae can be found in the peripheral blood at 
night, and either are seen moving in a wet blood film or 
are detected by microfiltration of a sample of lysed 
blood. They are usually present in hydrocele fluid, 
which may occasionally yield an adult filaria. By the 
time elephantiasis develops, microfilariae become diffi-
cult to find. Calcified filariae may sometimes be demon-
strable by radiography. Movement of adult worms can 
be seen on scrotal ultrasound. PCR-based tests for detec-
tion of W. bancrofti and B. malayi DNA from blood have 
been developed.
Indirect fluorescence and ELISA detect antibodies in 
over 95% of active cases and 70% of established elephan-
tiasis. The test becomes negative 1–2 years after cure. 
Serological tests cannot distinguish the different filarial 
infections. Highly sensitive and specific immunochro-
matographic card tests for detection of circulating 
W. bancrofti antigen are now commercially available; 
fingerprick blood taken at any time of the day can be 
used for these.
In tropical pulmonary eosinophilia, serology is 
strongly positive and IgE levels are massively elevated, 
but circulating microfilariae are not found. The chest 
X-ray shows miliary changes or mottled opacities. Pul-
monary function tests show a restrictive picture.
Management
Treatment of the individual is aimed at reversing and 
halting disease progression. Diethylcarbamazine (DEC, 
2 mg/kg orally 3 times daily for 12 days, or as a single 
dose) kills microfilariae and adult worms. Most adverse 
effects seen with DEC treatment are due to the host 
response to dying microfilariae, and the reaction inten-
sity is directly proportional to the microfilarial load. The 
main symptoms are fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, 
arthralgia and prostration. These usually occur within 
24–36 hours of the first dose of DEC. Antihistamines or 
corticosteroids may be required to control these allergic 
phenomena. Combining albendazole (400 mg) with 
ivermectin (200 µg/kg) in a single dose, with or without 
DEC (300 mg), is also highly effective in clearing the 
parasites. Treatment of Wolbachia with doxycycline 
(200 mg/day) for 4–8 weeks provides additional benefit 
by eliminating the bacteria; this leads to interruption of 
parasite embryogenesis. For tropical pulmonary eosi-
nophilia, DEC for 14 days is the treatment of choice.
Chronic lymphatic pathology
Experience in India and Brazil shows that active manage-
ment of chronic lymphatic pathology can alleviate symp-
toms. Patients should be taught meticulous skin care of 
their lymphoedematous limbs to prevent secondary bac-
terial and fungal infections. Tight bandaging, massage 
and bed rest with elevation of the affected limb may help 
to control the lymphoedema. Prompt diagnosis and 
Infectious disease
13
374
Clinical features
The infection may remain symptomless for months or 
years. The first symptom is usually itching, localised to 
one quadrant of the body and later becoming general-
ised and involving the eyes. Transient oedema of part or 
all of a limb is an early sign, followed by papular urti-
caria spreading gradually from the site of infection. This 
is difficult to see on dark skins, in which the most 
common signs are papules excoriated by scratching, 
spotty hyperpigmentation from resolving inflammation, 
and more chronic changes of a rough, thickened or 
inelastic, wrinkled skin. Both infected and uninfected 
superficial lymph nodes enlarge and may hang down in 
folds of loose skin in the groin. Hydrocele, femoral 
hernias and scrotal elephantiasis can occur. Firm sub­
cutaneous nodules of more than 1 cm in diameter 
(onchocercomas) occur in chronic infection.
Eye disease is most common in highly endemic areas 
and is associated with chronic heavy infections and 
nodules on the head. Early manifestations include 
itching, lacrimation and conjunctival injection. These 
cause conjunctivitis, sclerosing keratitis with pannus 
formation, uveitis which may lead to glaucoma and cata-
ract, and, less commonly, choroiditis and optic neuritis. 
Classically, ‘snowflake’ deposits are seen in the edges of 
the cornea.
Investigations
The finding of nodules or characteristic lesions of the skin 
or eyes in a patient from an endemic area, associated with 
eosinophilia, is suggestive. Skin snips or shavings, taken 
with a corneoscleral punch or scalpel blade from calf, 
buttock and shoulder, are placed in saline under a cover 
slip on a microscope slide and examined after 4 hours. 
Microfilariae are seen wriggling free in all but the lightest 
infections. Slit-lamp examination may reveal microfilar-
iae moving in the anterior chamber of the eye or trapped 
in the cornea. A nodule may be removed and incised, 
showing the coiled, thread-like adult worm.
Filarial antibodies may be detected in up to 95% of 
patients. Several promising rapid strip tests based on 
antibody or antigen detection are under clinical 
evaluation. When there is a strong suspicion of onchocer-
ciasis but tests are negative, a provocative Mazzotti 
test, in which administration of 0.5–1.0 mg/kg of DEC 
exacerbates pruritus or dermatitis, strongly suggests 
onchocerciasis.
Management
Ivermectin, in a single dose of 100–200 µg/kg, repeated 
several times at 3-monthly intervals to prevent 
relapses, is recommended. It kills microfilariae and has 
minimal toxicity. In the rare event of a severe reaction 
causing oedema or postural hypotension, prednisolone 
20–30 mg may be given daily for 2 or 3 days. Ivermectin 
has little macrofilaricidal effect so that, 1 year after iver-
mectin treatment, skin microfilarial densities regain at 
least 20% of pre-treatment levels; repeated treatments 
are required for the lifespan of the adult worm. Eradica-
tion of Wolbachia with doxycycline (100 mg daily for 
6 weeks) prevents worm reproduction.
Prevention
Mass treatment with ivermectin is practised. It reduces 
morbidity in the community and slows the progression 
clothing and insect repellents are also useful. DEC in a 
dose of 5 mg/kg daily for 3 days each month is partially 
protective.
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Onchocerciasis is the result of infection by the filarial 
Onchocerca volvulus. The infection is conveyed by flies of 
the genus Simulium, which breed in rapidly flowing, 
well-aerated water. Adult flies inflict painful bites 
during the day, both inside and outside houses. While 
feeding, they pick up the microfilariae, which mature 
into the infective larva and are transmitted to a new host 
in subsequent bites. Humans are the only known hosts 
(Fig. 13.50).
Onchocerciasis is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa, 
Yemen and a few foci in Central and South America. It 
is estimated that 17.7 million people are infected, of 
whom 500 000 are visually impaired and 270 000 blind. 
Due to onchocerciasis, huge tracts of fertile land lie vir-
tually untilled, and individuals and communities are 
impoverished.
Pathology
After inoculation of larvae by a bite from an infected fly, 
the worms mature in 2–4 months and live for up to 
17 years in subcutaneous and connective tissues. At sites 
of trauma, over bony prominences and around joints, 
fibrosis may form nodules around adult worms, which 
otherwise cause no direct damage. Innumerable micro-
filariae, discharged by the female O. volvulus, move 
actively in these nodules and in the adjacent tissues, are 
widely distributed in the skin, and may invade the eye. 
Live microfilariae elicit little tissue reaction, but dead 
ones may cause severe allergic inflammation, leading to 
hyaline necrosis and loss of collagen and elastin. Death 
of microfilariae in the eye causes inflammation and may 
lead to blindness.
Fig. 13.50  Onchocerca volvulus. Life cycle of organism and 
pathogenesis of onchocerciasis. 
Adult worm in
subcutaneous
nodule
Microfilariae
in dermis:
dermatitis
Microfilariae
in eyes:
'river blindness'
Infective
larva
Simulium
fly
Microfilariae
Infections caused by helminths
13
375
predominate: there is fever and oedema of the face, 
eyelids and conjunctivae; invasion of the diaphragm 
may cause pain, cough and dyspnoea; and involvement 
of the muscles of the limbs, chest and mouth causes stiff-
ness, pain and tenderness in affected muscles. Larval 
migration may cause acute myocarditis and encephali-
tis. An eosinophilia is usually found after the second 
week. An intense infection may prove fatal but those 
who survive recover completely.
Investigations
Commonly, a group of people who have eaten infected 
pork from a common source develop symptoms at about 
the same time. Biopsy from the deltoid or gastrocnemius 
muscle after the third week of symptoms may reveal 
encysted larvae. Serological tests are also helpful.
Management
Treatment is with albendazole (400 mg twice daily for 
8–14 days) or mebendazole (200–400 mg three times 
daily for 3 days, followed by 400–500 mg three times 
daily for 10 days). Given early in the infection, this may 
kill newly formed adult worms in the submucosa and 
thus reduce the number of larvae reaching the muscles. 
Corticosteroids are necessary to control the serious 
effects of acute inflammation.
Cutaneous larva migrans
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is the most common 
linear lesion seen in travellers (Fig. 13.51). Intensely pru-
ritic, linear, serpiginous lesions result from the larval 
migration of the dog hookworm (Ancylostoma caninum). 
The track moves across the skin at a rate of 2–3 cm/day. 
This contrasts with the rash of Strongyloides (p. 370), 
which is fast-moving and transient. Although the larvae 
of dog hookworms frequently infect humans, they do 
not usually develop into the adult form. The most 
common site for CLM is the foot but elbows, breasts and 
buttocks may be affected. Most patients with CLM have 
recently visited a beach where the affected part was 
exposed. The diagnosis is clinical. Treatment may be 
of eye disease, but it does not clear worm infection. 
Simulium can be destroyed in its larval stage by the 
application of insecticide to streams. Long trousers, 
skirts and sleeves discourage the fly from biting.
Dracunculiasis (Guinea worm)
Infestation with the Guinea worm Dracunculus medinen-
sis manifests itself when the female worm, over a metre 
long, emerges from the skin. Humans are infected by 
ingesting a small crustacean, Cyclops, which inhabits 
wells and ponds, and contains the infective larval stage 
of the worm. The worm was widely distributed across 
Africa and the Middle East, but after a successful eradi-
cation programme is now seen only in sub-Saharan 
Africa.
Management and prevention
Traditionally, the protruding worm is extracted by 
winding it out gently over several days on a matchstick. 
The worm must never be broken. Antibiotics for 
secondary infection and prophylaxis of tetanus are 
also required.
A global elimination campaign is based on the provi-
sion of clean drinking water and eradication of water 
fleas from drinking water. The latter is being achieved 
by simple filtration of water through a plastic mesh filter 
and chemical treatment of water supplies.
Other filariases
Mansonella perstans
This filarial worm is transmitted by the midges Culicoides 
austeni and C. grahami. It is common throughout equato-
rial Africa as far south as Zambia, and also in Trinidad 
and parts of northern and eastern South America.
M. perstans has never been proven to cause disease 
but it may be responsible for a persistent eosinophilia 
and occasional allergic manifestations. M. perstans is 
resistant to ivermectin and DEC, and the infection may 
persist for many years.
Dirofilaria immitis
This dog heart worm infects humans, causing skin and 
lung lesions. It is not uncommon in the USA, Japan and 
Australia.
Zoonotic nematodes
Trichinosis (trichinellosis)
Trichinella spiralis is a nematode that parasitises rats and 
pigs, and is only transmitted to humans if they eat par-
tially cooked infected pork, usually as sausage or ham. 
Bear meat is another source. Symptoms result from inva-
sion of intestinal submucosa by ingested larvae, which 
develop into adult worms, and the secondary invasion 
of striated muscle by fresh larvae produced by these 
adult worms. Outbreaks have occurred in the UK, as 
well as in other countries where pork is eaten.
Clinical features
The clinical features of trichinosis are determined by the 
larval numbers. A light infection with a few worms may 
be asymptomatic; a heavy infection causes nausea and 
diarrhoea 24–48 hours after the infected meal. A few 
days later, the symptoms associated with larval invasion 
Fig. 13.51  Cutaneous larva migrans. 
Infectious disease
13
376
the male, is rather longer (Fig. 13.52B). Within 4–6 weeks 
of infection, they migrate to the venules draining the 
pelvic viscera, where the females deposit ova.
Pathology
This depends on the species and the stage of infection 
(Box 13.68). Most disease is due to the passage of eggs 
through mucosa and to the granulomatous reaction to 
eggs deposited in tissues. The eggs of S. haematobium pass 
mainly through the wall of the bladder, but may also 
involve rectum, seminal vesicles, vagina, cervix and 
uterine tubes. S. mansoni and S. japonicum eggs pass 
mainly through the wall of the lower bowel or are carried 
to the liver. The most serious, although rare, site of ectopic 
deposition of eggs is in the CNS. Granulomas are com-
posed of macrophages, eosinophils, and epithelioid and 
giant cells around an ovum. Later, there is fibrosis and 
eggs calcify, often in sufficient numbers to become radio-
logically visible. Eggs of S. haematobium may leave the 
vesical plexus and be carried directly to the lung. Those 
of S. mansoni and S. japonicum may also reach the lungs 
after the development of portal hypertension and conse-
quent portasystemic collateral cir­culation. In both cir-
cumstances, egg deposition in the pulmonary vasculature, 
and the resultant host response, can lead to the develop-
ment of pulmonary hypertension.
Clinical features
Recent travellers, especially those overlanding through 
Africa, may present with allergic manifestations and 
eosinophilia; residents of schistosomiasis-endemic areas 
are more likely to present with chronic urinary tract 
pathology or portal hypertension.
During the early stages of infection, there may be 
itching lasting 1–2 days at the site of cercarial penetration 
local with 12-hourly application of 15% thiabendazole 
cream, or systemic with a single dose of albendazole 
(400 mg) or ivermectin (150–200 µg/kg).
Trematodes (flukes)
These leaf-shaped worms are parasitic to humans and 
animals. Their complex life cycles may involve one or 
more intermediate hosts, often freshwater molluscs.
Schistosomiasis
Schistosomiasis is one of the most important causes of 
morbidity in the tropics. There are five species of the 
genus Schistosoma which commonly cause disease in 
humans: S. haematobium, S. mansoni, S. japonicum, S. 
mekongi and S. intercalatum. S. haematobium was discov-
ered by Theodor Bilharz in Cairo in 1861 and the disease 
is sometimes called bilharzia or bilharziasis. Schisto-
some eggs have been found in Egyptian mummies dated 
1250 BC.
The life cycle is shown in Figure 13.52A. The ovum is 
passed in the urine or faeces of infected individuals and 
gains access to fresh water, where the ciliated miracid-
ium inside it is liberated; it enters its intermediate host, 
a species of freshwater snail, in which it multiplies. Large 
numbers of fork-tailed cercariae are then liberated into 
the water, where they may survive for 2–3 days. Cer-
cariae can penetrate the skin or the mucous membrane 
of the mouth of humans. They transform into schisto-
somulae and moult as they pass through the lungs; 
thence they are carried by the blood stream to the liver, 
and so to the portal vein, where they mature. The male 
worm is up to 20 mm in length and the more slender 
cylindrical female, usually enfolded longitudinally by 
Fig. 13.52  Schistosoma. A  Life cycle. B  Scanning electron micrograph of adult schistosome worms, showing the larger male worm embracing the 
thinner female. 
 
Lungs
Portal
vein
Blood
stream
Adult worm
in vesical
and rectal
veins
River Nile etc.
Miracidium
Snail
Cercariae
Ovum
A
B
Infections caused by helminths
13
377
The severity of S. haematobium infection varies greatly, 
and many with a light infection are asymptomatic. 
However, as adult worms can live for 20 years or more 
and lesions may progress, these patients should always 
be treated.
Schistosoma mansoni
S. mansoni is endemic throughout Africa, the Middle 
East, Venezuela, Brazil and the Caribbean (see 
Fig. 13.53).
Characteristic symptoms begin 2 months or more 
after infection. They may be slight, no more than malaise, 
or consist of abdominal pain and frequent stools which 
contain blood-stained mucus. With severe advanced 
disease, increased discomfort from rectal polyps may be 
experienced. The early hepatomegaly is reversible, but 
portal hypertension may cause massive splenomegaly, 
fatal haematemesis from oesophageal varices, or pro-
gressive ascites (p. 938). Liver function is initially pre-
served because the pathology is fibrotic rather than 
cirrhotic. S. mansoni and other schistosome infections 
predispose to the carriage of Salmonella, in part because 
Salmonella may attach to the schistosomes and in part 
because shared antigens on schistosomes may induce 
immunological tolerance to Salmonella.
Schistosoma japonicum, S. mekongi and 
S. intercalatum
In addition to humans, the adult worm of S. japonicum 
infects the dog, rat, field mouse, water buffalo, ox, cat, 
pig, horse and sheep. Although other Schistosoma spp. 
can infect species other than humans, the non-human 
reservoir seems to be particularly important in transmis-
sion for S. japonicum but not for S. haematobium or S. 
mansoni. S. japonicum is prevalent in the Yellow River 
and Yangtze–Jiang basins in China, where the infection 
is a major public health problem. It also has a focal 
distribution in the Philippines, Indonesia and Thailand 
(see Fig. 13.53). The related S. mekongi occurs in Laos, 
Thailand and Myanmar, and S. intercalatum in West and 
Central Africa.
The pathology of S. japonicum is similar to that of S. 
mansoni, but as this worm produces more eggs, the 
(‘swimmer’s itch’). After a symptom-free period of 
3–5 weeks, acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome) 
may present with allergic manifestations, such as urti-
caria, fever, muscle aches, abdominal pain, headaches, 
cough and sweating. On examination, hepatomegaly, 
splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy and pneumonia may 
be present. These allergic phenomena may be severe in 
infections with S. mansoni and S. japonicum, but are rare 
with S. haematobium. The features subside after 1–2 weeks.
Chronic schistosomiasis is due to egg deposition and 
occurs months to years after infection. The symptoms 
and signs depend upon the intensity of infection and the 
species of infecting schistosome (see Box 13.68).
Schistosoma haematobium
Humans are the only natural hosts of S. haematobium, 
which is highly endemic in Egypt and East Africa, and 
occurs throughout Africa and the Middle East (Fig. 
13.53). Infection can be acquired after a brief exposure, 
such as swimming in freshwater lakes in Africa.
Painless terminal haematuria is usually the first and 
most common symptom. Frequency of micturition 
follows, due to bladder neck obstruction. Later, the 
disease may be complicated by frequent urinary tract 
infections, bladder or ureteric stone formation, hydro­
nephrosis, and ultimately renal failure with a contracted 
calcified bladder. Pain is often felt in the iliac fossa or in 
the loin, and radiates to the groin. In several endemic 
areas, there is a strong epidemiological association of S. 
haematobium infection with squamous cell carcinoma of 
the bladder. Disease of the seminal vesicles may lead to 
haemospermia. Females may develop schistosomal pap-
illomas of the vulva, and schistosomal lesions of the 
cervix may be mistaken for cancer. Intestinal symptoms 
may follow involvement of the bowel wall. Ectopic 
worms cause skin or spinal cord lesions.
Fig. 13.53  Geographical distribution of schistosomiasis. From 
Cook 1995 – see p. 386.
}
S. mansoni
S. haematobium
S. japonicum
S. mekongi
S. intercalatum
A
B
Time
S. haematobium
S. mansoni and 
S. japonicum
Cercarial penetration
Days
Papular dermatitis at site of 
penetration
As for  
S. haematobium
Larval migration and maturation
Weeks
Pneumonitis, myositis, hepatitis, 
fever, ‘serum sickness’, 
eosinophilia, seroconversion
As for  
S. haematobium
Early egg deposition
Months
Cystitis, haematuria
Colitis, 
granulomatous 
hepatitis, acute 
portal hypertension
Ectopic granulomatous lesions: 
skin, CNS etc.
Immune complex 
glomerulonephritis
As for  
S. haematobium
Late egg deposition
Years
Fibrosis and calcification of 
ureters, bladder: bacterial 
infection, calculi, hydronephrosis, 
carcinoma
Colonic polyposis 
and strictures, 
periportal fibrosis, 
portal hypertension
Pulmonary granulomas and 
pulmonary hypertension
As for  
S. haematobium
13.68  Pathogenesis of schistosomiasis
Infectious disease
13
378
Prevention
So far, no satisfactory single means of controlling schis-
tosomiasis has been established. The life cycle is termi-
nated if the ova in urine or faeces are not allowed to 
contaminate fresh water containing the snail host. The 
provision of latrines and of a safe water supply, however, 
remains a major problem in rural areas throughout the 
tropics. Furthermore, S. japonicum has so many hosts 
besides humans that latrines would be of little avail. 
Annual mass treatment of the population helps prevent 
S. haematobium and S. mansoni infection, but this method 
has so far had little success with S. japonicum. Targeting 
the intermediate host, the snail, presents many difficul-
ties and has not, on its own, proved successful on any 
scale. For personal protection, contact with infected 
water must be avoided.
Liver flukes
Liver flukes infect at least 20 million people and remain 
an important public health problem in many endemic 
areas. They are associated with abdominal pain, 
hepatomegaly and relapsing cholangitis. Clonorchis sin-
ensis is a major aetiological agent of bile duct cancer. The 
three major liver flukes have similar life cycles and 
pathologies, as outlined in Box 13.69.
Other flukes of medical importance include lung and 
intestinal flukes (see Box 13.65, p. 369).
Cestodes (tapeworms)
Cestodes are ribbon-shaped worms which inhabit the 
intestinal tract. They have no alimentary system and 
absorb nutrients through the tegumental surface. The 
anterior end, or scolex, has suckers for attaching to the 
host. From the scolex, a series of progressively develop-
ing segments arise, the proglottides, which may continue 
to show active movements when shed. Cross-fertilisation 
takes place between segments. Ova, present in large 
numbers in mature proglottides, remain viable for weeks, 
and during this period, they may be consumed by the 
intermediate host. Larvae liberated from the ingested 
ova pass into the tissues, forming larval cysticerci.
Tapeworms cause two distinct patterns of disease, 
either intestinal infection or systemic cysticercosis (Fig. 
13.55). Taenia saginata (beef tapeworm), Taenia asiatica 
and Diphyllobothrium latum (fish tapeworm) cause only 
intestinal infection, following human ingestion of inter-
mediate hosts that contain cysticerci (the larval stage of 
the tapeworm). Taenia solium causes intestinal infection 
if a cysticerci-containing intermediate host is ingested, 
and cysticercosis (systemic infection from larval migra-
tion) if ova are ingested. Echinococcus granulosus (dog 
tapeworm) does not cause human intestinal infection, 
but causes hydatid disease (which is analogous to cysti­
cercosis) following ingestion of ova and subsequent 
larval migration.
Intestinal tapeworm
Humans acquire tapeworm by eating undercooked beef 
infected with the larval stage of T. saginata, undercooked 
pork containing the larval stage of T. solium or T. asiatica, 
or undercooked freshwater fish containing larvae of D. 
latum. Usually, only one adult tapeworm is present in 
the gut but up to ten have been reported. The ova of all 
lesions tend to be more extensive and widespread. The 
clinical features resemble those of severe infection with 
S. mansoni, with added neurological features. The small 
and large bowel may be affected, and hepatic fibrosis 
with splenic enlargement is usual. Deposition of eggs or 
worms in the CNS, especially in the brain or spinal cord, 
causes symptoms in about 5% of infections, notably epi-
lepsy, blindness, hemiplegia or paraplegia.
Investigations
There is marked eosinophilia. Serological tests (ELISA) 
are useful as screening tests but remain positive after 
chemotherapeutic cure.
In S. haematobium infection, dipstick urine testing 
shows blood and albumin. The eggs can be found by 
microscopic examination of the centrifuged deposit of 
terminal stream urine (Fig. 13.54). Ultrasound is useful 
for assessing the urinary tract; bladder wall thickening, 
hydronephrosis and bladder calcification can be 
detected. Cystoscopy reveals ‘sandy’ patches, bleeding 
mucosa and later distortion.
In a heavy infection with S. mansoni or S. japonicum, 
the characteristic egg with its lateral spine can usually 
be found in the stool. When the infection is light or 
of long duration, a rectal biopsy can be examined. 
Sigmoidoscopy may show inflammation or bleeding. 
Biopsies should be examined for ova.
Management
The object of specific treatment is to kill the adult schis-
tosomes and so stop egg-laying. Praziquantel (20 mg/
kg orally twice daily for 1 day) is the drug of choice for 
all forms of schistosomiasis. The drug produces parasi-
tological cure in 80% of treated individuals and over 
90% reduction in egg counts in the remainder. Side-
effects are uncommon but include nausea and abdomi-
nal pain. Praziquantel therapy in early infection reverses 
pathologies such as hepatomegaly and bladder wall 
thickening and granulomas.
Surgery may be required to deal with residual lesions 
such as ureteric stricture, small fibrotic urinary bladders, 
or granulomatous masses in the brain or spinal cord. 
Removal of rectal papillomas by diathermy or by other 
means may provide symptomatic relief.
Fig. 13.54  Ova of Schistosoma haematobium in urine. Note the 
terminal spike. 
Infections caused by helminths
13
379
uterine branching (approximately 10); T. saginata has 
only four suckers in its scolex, and discharges single 
proglottids with greater uterine branching (up to 30); T. 
asiatica has a rostellum without hooks on its scolex, and 
is difficult to differentiate from T. saginata, except that 
there are fewer uterine branches (16–21).
Taenia saginata
Infection with T. saginata occurs in all parts of the world. 
The adult worm may be several metres long and pro-
duces little or no intestinal upset in human beings, but 
knowledge of its presence, by noting segments in the 
faeces or on underclothing, may distress the patient. Ova 
may be found in the stool. Praziquantel is the drug of 
choice; niclosamide or nitazoxanide is an alternative. 
Prevention depends on efficient meat inspection and the 
thorough cooking of beef.
Taenia solium
T. solium, the pork tapeworm, is common in central 
Europe, South Africa, South America and parts of Asia. 
It is not as large as T. saginata. The adult worm is found 
only in humans following the eating of undercooked 
pork containing cysticerci. Intestinal infection is treated 
with praziquantel (5–10 mg/kg) or niclosamide (2 g), 
both as a single dose, or alternatively with nitazoxanide 
(500 mg twice daily for 3 days). These are followed 
by a mild laxative (after 1–2 hours) to prevent retro-
grade intestinal autoinfection. Cooking pork well pre-
vents intestinal infection. Great care must be taken 
while attending a patient harbouring an adult worm to 
avoid ingestion of ova or segments.
Taenia asiatica
T. asiatica is a newly recognised species of Taenia, 
restricted to Asia. It is acquired by eating uncooked meat 
or viscera of pigs. Clinical features and treatment are 
similar to those of T. saginata.
the three Taenia are indistinguishable microscopically. 
However, examination of scolex and proglottides can 
differentiate: T. solium has a rostellum and two rows of 
hooklets on the scolex, and discharges multiple proglot-
tides (3–5) attached together with lower degrees of 
Clonorchiasis
Opisthorchiasis
Fascioliasis
Parasite
Clonorchis sinensis
Opisthorchis felineus
Fasciola hepatica
Other mammalian hosts
Dogs, cats, pigs
Dogs, cats, foxes, pigs
Sheep, cattle
Mode of spread
Ova in faeces, water
As for C. sinensis
Ova in faeces on to wet pasture
1st intermediate host
Snails
Snails
Snails
2nd intermediate host
Freshwater fish
Freshwater fish
Encysts on vegetation
Geographical distribution
Far East, especially S. China
Far East, especially NE Thailand
Cosmopolitan, including UK
Pathology
E. coli cholangitis, abscesses, 
biliary carcinoma
As for C. sinensis
Toxaemia, cholangitis, eosinophilia
Symptoms
Often symptom-free, recurrent 
jaundice
As for C. sinensis
Unexplained fever, tender liver, 
may be ectopic, e.g. subcutaneous 
fluke
Diagnosis
Ova in stool or duodenal aspirate
As for C. sinensis
As for C. sinensis, also serology
Prevention
Cook fish
Cook fish
Avoid contaminated watercress
Treatment
Praziquantel 25 mg/kg 3 times 
daily for 2 days
As for C. sinensis but for 1 day 
only
Triclabendazole 10 mg/kg single 
dose; repeat treatment may be 
required*
*In the UK, available from the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London.
13.69  Diseases caused by flukes in the bile duct
Fig. 13.55  Cysticercosis. Life cycle of Taenia solium. 
Adult
worms
in gut
Pig
Eggs passed in
human faeces
Human pork tapeworm
infection results from
eating undercooked
pork containing cysticerci 
Eggs ingested by pig
become cysticerci
in muscles
If cysticerci
are swallowed
they develop to
adult tapeworms
in the human
intestine
Ingestion
of meat
Faecal–oral
route
Human cysticercosis
results from ingestion of
the tapeworm eggs as
a result of faecal
contamination of food 
If eggs are swallowed
by humans they develop
to cysticerci in various
sites, e.g. brain, muscle
Cysticerci
Infectious disease
13
380
Management and prevention
Albendazole, 15 mg/kg daily for a minimum of 8 days, 
has now become the drug of choice for parenchymal 
neurocysticercosis. Praziquantel is another option, 
50 mg/kg in three divided doses daily for 10 days. Pred-
nisolone, 10 mg 3 times daily, is also given for 14 days, 
starting 1 day before the albendazole or praziquantel. In 
addition, anti-epileptic drugs should be given until the 
reaction in the brain has subsided. Operative interven-
tion is indicated for hydrocephalus. Studies from India 
and Peru suggest that most small, solitary cerebral cysts 
will resolve without treatment.
Echinococcus granulosus (Taenia 
echinococcus) and hydatid disease
Dogs are the definitive hosts of the tiny tapeworm 
E. granulosus. The larval stage, a hydatid cyst, normally 
occurs in sheep, cattle, camels and other animals that are 
infected from contaminated pastures or water. By han-
dling a dog or drinking contaminated water, humans 
may ingest eggs (Fig. 13.56). The embryo is liberated 
from the ovum in the small intestine and gains access to 
the blood stream and thus to the liver. The resultant cyst 
grows very slowly, sometimes intermittently. It is com-
posed of an enveloping fibrous pericyst, laminated 
hyaline membrane (ectocyst) and inner germinal layers 
(endocyst) which gives rise to daughter cysts, or germi-
nating cystic brood capsule in which larvae (protoscol-
ices) develop. Over time, some cysts may calcify and 
become non-viable. The disease is common in the Middle 
East, North and East Africa, Australia and Argentina. 
Foci of infection persist in the UK in rural Wales and 
Scotland. E. multilocularis, which has a cycle between 
foxes and voles, causes a similar but more severe 
Cysticercosis
Human cysticercosis is acquired by ingesting T. solium 
tapeworm ova, from either contaminated fingers or food 
(see Fig. 13.55). The larvae are liberated from eggs in the 
stomach, penetrate the intestinal mucosa and are carried 
to many parts of the body, where they develop and form 
cysticerci, 0.5–1 cm cysts that contain the head of a 
young worm. They do not grow further or migrate. 
Common locations are the subcutaneous tissue, skeletal 
muscles and brain.
Clinical features
When superficially placed, cysts can be palpated under 
the skin or mucosa as pea-like ovoid bodies. Here they 
cause few or no symptoms, and will eventually die and 
become calcified.
Heavy brain infections, especially in children, may 
cause features of encephalitis. More commonly, however, 
cerebral signs do not occur until the larvae die, 
5–20 years later. Epilepsy, personality changes, stagger-
ing gait or signs of hydrocephalus are the most common 
features.
Investigations
Calcified cysts in muscles can be recognised radiologi-
cally. In the brain, however, less calcification takes place 
and larvae are only occasionally visible by plain X-ray; 
usually CT or MRI will show them. Epileptic fits starting 
in adult life suggest the possibility of cysticercosis if the 
patient has lived in or travelled to an endemic area. The 
subcutaneous tissue should be palpated and any nodule 
excised for histology. Radiological examination of the 
skeletal muscles may be helpful. Antibody detection is 
available for serodiagnosis.
Fig. 13.56  Hydatid disease. A  Life cycle of Echinococcus granulosus.  B  Daughter cysts removed at surgery. C  Within the daughter cysts are the 
protoscolices. 
Human
Hydatid cysts in
liver, lung etc.
Sheep etc.
Hydatid cysts in
liver, lung etc.
Ova
Faeces
Dog etc.
Worms in gut
A
B
C
Fungal infections
13
381
lancinating pains. Myiasis is diagnosed clinically and 
should be suspected with any furuncular lesion accom-
panied by pain and a crawling sensation in the skin. The 
larva may be suffocated by blocking the respiratory 
orifice with petroleum jelly and gently removing it with 
tweezers. Secondary infection of myiasis is remarkably 
infrequent and rapid healing follows removal of intact 
larvae.
FUNGAL INFECTIONS
Fungal infections, or mycoses, are classified as superfi-
cial, subcutaneous or systemic (deep), depending on the 
degree of invasion of the host. They are also classified 
by the kind of fungus that causes the infection, which 
may be a filamentous fungus (mould) or a yeast, or may 
vary between these two forms, depending on the envi-
ronmental conditions (dimorphic fungi; Fig. 13.57).
Superficial mycoses
Superficial cutaneous fungal infections caused by der-
matophyte fungi are described in Chapter 28.
Candidiasis (thrush)
Superficial candidiasis is caused by Candida spp., mainly 
C. albicans. Manifestations include oropharyngeal 
(pp. 864 and 399) and vaginal candidiasis (‘thrush’), 
intertrigo and chronic paronychia. Superficial candidia-
sis often follows antibiotic therapy. Intertrigo is charac-
terised by inflammation in skin folds with surrounding 
‘satellite lesions’. Chronic paronychia is associated with 
frequent wetting of the hands. Superficial candidiasis is 
treated mainly with topical azoles (p. 159), oral azoles 
being reserved for refractory or recurrent disease. Severe 
oropharyngeal and oesophageal candidiasis is a conse-
quence of CD4+ T lymphocyte depletion/dysfunction, 
as in HIV infection (p. 399). Recurrent vaginal or penile 
candidiasis may be a manifestation of diabetes mellitus. 
Rarely, mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene, 
AIRE, cause a syndrome of chronic mucocutaneous can-
didiasis (p. 796).
Subcutaneous mycoses
Chromoblastomycosis
Chromoblastomycosis is a predominantly tropical or 
subtropical fungal disease caused by environmental 
dematiaceous (dark-pigmented) fungi, most commonly 
Fonsecaea pedrosoi. Other causes include F. compacta, 
Cladophialophora carrionii and Phialophora verrucosa. The 
disease is a cutaneous/subcutaneous mycosis acquired 
by traumatic inoculation. Consequently, the most com-
monly affected areas are the foot, ankle and lower leg. 
Lesions may start several months after the initial injury, 
and medical attention is often sought several years later. 
The initial lesion is a papule. Further papules develop, 
and coalesce to form irregular plaques. Nodular lesions 
may produce a characteristic ‘cauliflower’ appearance.
Diagnosis is by histopathological examination of 
infected material, which shows dematiaceous, rounded, 
thick-walled ‘sclerotic bodies’ with septa at right angles 
infection, ‘alveolar hydatid disease’, which invades the 
liver like cancer.
Clinical features
A hydatid cyst is typically acquired in childhood and 
may, after growing for some years, cause pressure 
symptoms. These vary, depending on the organ or tissue 
involved. In nearly 75% of patients with hydatid disease, 
the right lobe of the liver is invaded and contains a single 
cyst (p. 956). In others, a cyst may be found in lung, 
bone, brain or elsewhere.
Investigations
The diagnosis depends on the clinical, radiological and 
ultrasound findings in a patient who has lived in close 
contact with dogs in an endemic area. Complement fixa-
tion and ELISA are positive in 70–90% of patients.
Management and prevention
Hydatid cysts should be excised wherever possible. 
Great care is taken to avoid spillage and cavities are 
sterilised with 0.5% silver nitrate or 2.7% sodium chlo-
ride. Albendazole (400 mg twice daily for 3 months) 
should also be used. The drug is now often combined 
with PAIR (percutaneous puncture, aspiration, injection 
of scolicidal agent and re-aspiration) to good effect. 
Praziquantel (20 mg/kg twice daily for 14 days) also 
kills protoscolices perioperatively.
Prevention is difficult in situations where there is a 
close association with dogs and sheep. Personal hygiene, 
satisfactory disposal of carcasses, meat inspection and 
deworming of dogs can greatly reduce the prevalence of 
disease.
Other tapeworms
There are many other cestodes whose adult or larval 
stages may infect humans. Sparganosis is a condition in 
which an immature worm develops in humans, usually 
subcutaneously, as a result of eating or applying to the 
skin the secondary or tertiary intermediate host.
ECTOPARASITES
Ectoparasites only interact with the outermost surfaces 
of the host; see also page 1280.
Jiggers (tungiasis)
This is widespread in tropical America and Africa, and 
is caused by the sand flea Tunga penetrans. The pregnant 
flea burrows into the skin around toes and produces 
large numbers of eggs. The burrows are intensely irritat-
ing and the whole inflammatory nodule should be 
removed with a sterile needle. Secondary infection of 
tunga lesions is common.
Myiasis
Myiasis is due to skin infestation with larvae of the 
South American botfly, Dermatobia hominis, or the 
African Tumbu fly, Cordylobia anthropophaga. The larvae 
develop in a subcutaneous space with a central sinus. 
This orifice is the air source for the larvae, and periodi-
cally the larval respiratory spiracles protrude through 
the sinus. Patients with myiasis feel movement within 
the larval burrow and can experience intermittent sharp, 
Infectious disease
13
382
with scarring, while fresh sinuses appear elsewhere. 
Deeper tissue invasion and bone involvement are less 
rapid and extensive in eumycetoma than actino­
mycetoma. There is little pain and usually no fever or 
lymphadenopathy, but there is progressive disability.
Investigations
Diagnosis is confirmed by demonstration of fungal 
grains in pus, and/or histopathological examination of 
tissue. Culture is necessary for species identification 
and susceptibility testing. Serological tests are not 
available.
Management
Eumycetoma is usually treated with a combination of 
surgery and antifungal therapy. Antifungal susceptibil-
ity testing, if available, is recommended, although 
clinical outcome does not necessarily correspond to in 
vitro test results. Itraconazole and ketoconazole (both 
200–400 mg/day) are used most commonly. Success has 
also been reported with terbinafine monotherapy, and 
refractory cases have responded to both voriconazole 
and posaconazole. Amphotericin B is not generally con-
sidered effective. Therapy is continued for 6–12 months 
or longer. In extreme cases, amputation may be required. 
Management of actinomycetoma is described on 
page 341.
Phaeohyphomycosis
Phaeohyphomycoses are a heterogenous group of fungal 
diseases caused by a large number (more than 70) of 
dematiaceous fungi. In phaeohyphomycosis, the tissue 
form of the fungus is predominantly mycelial (filamen-
tous), as opposed to eumycetoma (grain) or chromoblas-
tomycosis (sclerotic body). Disease may be superficial, 
to each other. The aetiological agent is confirmed by 
culture. Many therapeutic approaches have been 
explored, including antifungal agents, cryosurgery and 
surgical excision, alone or in combination, but the 
optimal therapy is unknown. Of the antifungal agents, 
itraconazole and terbinafine are considered to be the 
most effective. However, posaconazole has also been 
used with a good outcome.
Mycetoma
Mycetoma is a chronic suppurative infection of the deep 
soft tissues and bones, most commonly of the limbs but 
also of the abdominal or chest wall or head. It is caused 
by either aerobic or anaerobic branching Gram-positive 
bacilli, Actinomycetales (actinomycetoma – 60%, p. 135), 
or by true fungi, Eumycetes (eumycetoma – 40%). Many 
fungi cause eumycetomas, the most common being 
Madurella mycetomatis, M. grisea, Leptosphaeria senegalen-
sis and Scedosporium apiospermum. Actinomycetomas are 
caused by Actinomadura, Nocardia and Streptomyces spp. 
Both groups produce characteristically coloured grains, 
the colour depending on the organism (black grains – 
eumycetoma, red and yellow grains – actinomycetoma, 
white grains – either). The disease occurs mostly in the 
tropics and subtropics.
Clinical features
The disease is acquired by inoculation (e.g. from a thorn) 
and most commonly affects the foot (Madura foot). 
Mycetoma begins as a painless swelling at the implanta-
tion site, which becomes chronic and progressive, grows 
and spreads steadily within the soft tissues, eventually 
extending into bone. Nodules develop under the epider-
mis and these rupture, revealing sinuses through which 
grains (fungal colonies) may be discharged. Sinuses heal 
Fig. 13.57  Classification of medically important fungi. Fungal classification is based on simple morphological characteristics. Pneumocystis jirovecii 
(carinii) is morphologically distinct from other fungi and does not fit into this classification. *Although Candida albicans exists in a number of forms, 
including filamentous (hyphae and pseudohyphae), it is generally encountered in its yeast form, so is classified in this category. 
Filamentous fungi (moulds)
Characterised by the production of
elongated, cylindrical, often septate
cells (hyphae) and conidia (spores)
Examples:
• Aspergillus spp. (A. fumigatus
 shown here)
• Fusarium spp.
• Dermatophyte fungi (Tricophyton spp.,
  Microsporum spp. etc.)
• Mucorales
Dimorphic fungi
Yeasts
Exist in filamentous (top) or yeast
(bottom) form, depending on
environmental conditions
Examples:
• Histoplasma capsulatum,
  Coccidioides immitis, Paracoccidioides
  brasiliensis (shown here), Blastomyces
  dermatidis
• Sporothrix schenkii
• Penicillium marneffei
• Malassezia spp.
Characterised by the production of
oval or round cells, which reproduce
by binary fission (budding)
Examples:
• Candida spp.*
• Cryptococcus spp. (C. neoformans
 shown here)
Fungal infections
13
383
subcutaneous or deep. The most serious manifestation 
is cerebral phaeohyphomycosis, which presents with 
a ring-enhancing, space-occupying cerebral lesion. 
Optimal therapy for this condition has not been estab-
lished, but treatment usually consists of neurosurgical 
intervention and antifungal (usually triazole) therapy. 
Causative agents are Cladophialophora bantiana, Fonsecaea 
spp. and Rhinocladiella mackenziei, which occurs in the 
Middle East and is usually fatal.
Sporotrichosis
Sporotrichosis is caused by Sporothrix schenckii, a dimor-
phic fungal saprophyte of plants in tropical and sub-
tropical regions. Disease is caused by dermal inoculation 
of the fungus, usually from a thorn (occasionally from a 
cat scratch). In fixed cutaneous sporotrichosis, a subcu-
taneous nodule develops at the site of infection and 
subsequently ulcerates, with a purulent discharge. The 
disease may then spread along the cutaneous lymphatic 
channels, resulting in multiple cutaneous nodules along 
their route, which ulcerate and discharge (lymphocuta-
neous sporotrichosis). Rarer forms of disease are seen: 
for example, in patients with cutaneous disease present-
ing with arthritis. Later, draining sinuses may form. 
Pulmonary sporotrichosis occurs as a result of inhalation 
of the conidia, and manifests itself as chronic cavitary 
fibronodular disease with haemoptysis and constitu-
tional symptoms. Disseminated disease may occur, 
especially in patients with HIV.
Investigations
Typical yeast forms detected on histology of the biopsy 
confirm the diagnosis but are rarely seen; the fungus can 
be grown from the specimen in culture. A latex aggluti-
nation test is available to detect S. schenkii antibodies in 
serum.
Management
Cutaneous and lymphocutaneous disease is treated with 
oral itraconazole (200–400 mg daily, prescribed as the 
oral solution, which has better bio-availability than the 
capsule formulation) for 3–6 months. Alternative agents 
include a saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI, 
given orally), initiated with 5 drops and increased to 
40–50 drops 3 times daily, or terbinafine (500 mg twice 
daily). Localised hyperthermia may be used in preg-
nancy (to avoid azole use). Osteoarticular disease 
requires a longer course of therapy (at least 12 months). 
Severe or life-threatening disease is treated with ampho-
tericin B (lipid formulation preferred).
Systemic mycoses
Aspergillosis
Aspergillosis is an opportunistic systemic mycosis, 
which affects predominantly the respiratory tract. It is 
described on page 697.
Candidiasis
Systemic candidiasis is an opportunistic mycosis caused 
by Candida spp. The most common cause is C. albicans. 
Other agents include C. dubliniensis, C. glabrata, C. krusei, 
C. parapsilosis and C. tropicalis. Species distribution varies 
geographically. Candida species identification often 
enables prediction of susceptibility to fluconazole: C. 
krusei is universally resistant, many C. glabrata isolates 
have reduced susceptibility or are resistant, and other 
species are mostly susceptible. Candidiasis is usually an 
endogenous disease that originates from oropharyngeal, 
genitourinary or skin colonisation, although nosocomial 
spread has been reported.
Syndromes of systemic candidiasis
Acute disseminated candidiasis
This usually presents as candidaemia (isolation of 
Candida spp. from the blood). The main predisposing 
factor is the presence of a central venous catheter. Other 
major factors include recent abdominal surgery, total 
parenteral nutrition (TPN), recent antibiotic therapy and 
localised Candida colonisation. Up to 40% of cases will 
have ophthalmic involvement, with characteristic retinal 
‘cotton wool’ exudates. As this is a sight-threatening 
condition, candidaemic patients should be assessed by 
detailed ophthalmoscopy. Skin lesions (non-tender 
pink/red nodules) may be seen. Although predomi-
nantly a disease of intensive care and surgical patients, 
acute disseminated candidiasis and/or Candida endoph-
thalmitis is seen occasionally in injection drug-users, 
thought to be due to candidal contamination of citric 
acid or lemon juice used to dissolve heroin.
Chronic disseminated candidiasis  
(hepatosplenic candidiasis)
In this condition, a neutropenic patient has a persistent 
fever, despite antibacterial therapy. The fever persists, 
even though there is neutrophil recovery, and is associ-
ated with the development of abdominal pain, raised 
alkaline phosphatase and multiple lesions in abdominal 
organs (e.g. liver, spleen and/or kidneys) on radiologi-
cal imaging. Chronic disseminated candidiasis is a form 
of immune reconstitution syndrome (p. 138) in patients 
recovering from neutropenia and usually lasts for 
several months, despite appropriate therapy.
Other manifestations
Renal tract candidiasis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, 
peritonitis, meningitis and endocarditis are all well rec-
ognised, and are usually sequelae of acute disseminated 
disease. Diagnosis and treatment of these conditions 
require specialist mycological advice.
Management
Blood cultures positive for Candida spp. must never be 
ignored. Acute disseminated candidiasis is treated with 
antifungal therapy, removal of any in-dwelling central 
venous catheter (whether known to be the source of 
infection or not) and removal of any known source. 
Current evidence suggests that candidaemia should be 
treated initially with an echinocandin (p. 160), with sub-
sequent adjustment (usually to IV or oral fluconazole) 
guided by clinical response, species identification and 
susceptibility testing. Treatment should continue for 
a minimum of 14 days. Other appropriate therapies 
include voriconazole and amphotericin B formulations.
Chronic disseminated candidiasis requires prolonged 
treatment over several months with fluconazole or other 
agents, depending on species and clinical response. The 
duration of the condition may be reduced by adjuvant 
therapy with systemic corticosteroids.
Infectious disease
13
384
Fusariosis
Fusarium spp. cause disseminated disease in patients 
with profound or prolonged neutropenia. The disease 
presents with antibiotic-resistant fever and evidence of 
dissemination (e.g. skin nodules, endophthalmitis, 
septic arthritis, pulmonary disease; Fig. 13.59). In con-
trast to Aspergillus spp., Fusarium spp. is often recovered 
from blood cultures. Treatment is challenging because 
of resistance to several antifungal agents. Voriconazole, 
posaconazole and lipid-formulated amphotericin B are 
the most commonly used antifungal agents.
Mucormycosis
Mucormycosis is a severe but uncommon opportunistic 
systemic mycosis caused by a number of ‘mucoraceous’ 
moulds, most commonly Lichtheimia (formerly Absidia) 
spp., Rhizomucor spp., Mucor spp. and Rhizopus spp. 
Disease patterns include rhinocerebral/craniofacial, 
pulmonary, cutaneous and systemic disease. All are 
characterised by the rapid development of severe tissue 
necrosis, which is almost always fatal if left untreated. 
The most common predisposing factors are profound 
immunosuppression from neutropenia and/or haemato­
poietic stem cell transplantation, uncontrolled diabetes 
mellitus, iron chelation therapy with desferrioxamine 
and severe burns.
Definitive diagnosis is by culture, but histopathologi-
cal confirmation is required as the fungi may be 
environmental contaminants. Treatment requires a com-
bination of antifungal therapy and surgical débride-
ment, with correction of predisposing factor(s) if 
Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcosis is a systemic mycosis caused by two 
environmental yeast species, Cr. neoformans and Cr. 
gattii. Cr. neoformans is distributed worldwide and is 
primarily an opportunistic pathogen, most commonly 
associated with HIV infection. Cr. gattii is a primary 
pathogen with a widespread distribution that includes 
Australasia, Africa, Canada (Vancouver Island) and the 
north-western USA.
Cryptococcosis is acquired by inhalation of yeasts. 
These may disseminate to any organ, most commonly 
the CNS and skin. The manifestations of Cr. neoformans 
are most severe in immunocompromised individuals. 
Conversely, Cr. gattii causes severe disease most often in 
immunocompetent hosts. Disseminated cryptococcosis 
(sepsis with cryptococci present in the blood stream or 
at multiple sites) is largely restricted to immunocompro-
mised patients. CNS manifestations of cryptococcosis 
include meningitis (p. 403) and cryptococcoma (Fig. 
13.58), the latter more likely with Cr. gattii infection. 
Manifestations of pulmonary cryptococcosis range from 
severe pneumonia (in immunocompromised patients) to 
asymptomatic disease with single or multiple pulmo-
nary nodules, sometimes exhibiting cavitation (in 
immunocompetent patients). Cryptococcal nodules may 
mimic other causes of lung pathology, such as tubercu-
losis or malignancy, and diagnosis is often made by 
histopathology and/or culture.
Treatment of severe cryptococcosis is the same as 
for cryptococcal meningitis (p. 403). Mild pulmonary 
disease is usually treated with fluconazole, although, 
for asymptomatic nodules, resection of the lesions is 
likely to be sufficient. Relevant guidelines (e.g. www 
.idsociety.org) should be consulted.
Fig. 13.58  Cryptococcal disease. A 23-year-old HIV-positive male 
developed headache and left-sided weakness. A  MRI scan of the brain 
showed a space-occupying lesion (arrow) with surrounding oedema. 
 B  Histopathological examination of the lesion stained with Grocott’s silver 
stain showed encapsulated yeasts. Cryptococcus neoformans was cultured. 
A
B
Fig. 13.59  Fusarium infection. A patient presented with fever and skin 
nodules after developing neutropenia secondary to haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation and chemotherapy for relapsed leukaemia. Fusarium 
solani was cultured from skin lesions and blood cultures.  A  Tender, 
erythematous papules/nodules on upper arm.  B  Gram stain of Fusarium 
in blood culture medium. 
A
B
Fungal infections
13
385
Patients with pre-existing lung disease, such as 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or 
emphysema, may develop chronic pulmonary histoplas-
mosis. The predominant features of this condition, 
which may easily be mistaken for tuberculosis, are fever, 
cough, dyspnoea, weight loss and night sweats. Radio-
logical findings include fibrosis, nodules, cavitation and 
hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Disease caused by H. capsulatum var. duboisii presents 
more commonly with papulonodular and ulcerating 
lesions of the skin and underlying subcutaneous tissue 
and bone (sometimes referred to as ‘African histoplas-
mosis’). Multiple lesions of the ribs are common and the 
bones of the limbs may be affected. Lung involvement 
is relatively rare. Radiological examination may show 
rounded foci of bone destruction, sometimes associated 
with abscess formation. Other disease patterns include 
a visceral form with liver and splenic invasion, and dis-
seminated disease.
Acute disseminated histoplasmosis is seen in associa-
tion with immunocompromise, including HIV infection. 
Features include fever, pancytopenia, hepatospleno­
megaly, lymphadenopathy and often a papular skin 
eruption. Chronic disseminated disease presents with 
fever, anorexia and weight loss. Cutaneous and mucosal 
lesions, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and 
meningitis may also develop.
Investigations
In areas where the disease occurs, histoplasmosis should 
be suspected in every undiagnosed infection in which 
there are pulmonary signs, enlarged lymph nodes, 
hepatosplenomegaly or characteristic cutaneous/bony 
lesions. Radiological examination in long-standing cases 
may show calcified lesions in the lungs, spleen or other 
organs. In the more acute phases of the disease, single 
or multiple soft pulmonary shadows with enlarged tra-
cheobronchial nodes are seen on chest X-ray.
Laboratory diagnosis is by direct detection (histo­
pathology or antigen detection), culture and serology; 
although antigen detection is the most effective method, 
it is not widely available. Antibody is detected by com-
plement fixation testing or immunodiffusion; the 
pattern of antibody production is complex and the 
results require specialist interpretation. Histoplasma 
antigen may be detectable in blood or urine. Culture is 
definitive but slow (up to 12 weeks). Histopathology 
may show characteristic intracellular yeasts. Diagnosis 
of subcutaneous or bony infection is mainly by histo­
pathological examination and/or culture.
Management
Mild pulmonary disease does not require treatment. 
However, if prolonged, it may be treated with itracona-
zole. More severe pulmonary disease is treated with an 
amphotericin B formulation for 2 weeks, followed by 
itraconazole for 12 weeks, with methylprednisolone 
added for the first 2 weeks of therapy if there is hypoxia 
or ARDS. Chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis is treated 
with itraconazole (prescribed as the oral solution) for 
12–24 months, and disseminated histoplasmosis with an 
amphotericin B formulation followed by itraconazole. 
Lipid formulations of amphotericin B are preferred, but 
their use is subject to availability. Treatment should 
be guided by current evidence-based guidelines (e.g. 
possible. High-dose lipid-formulated amphotericin B is 
used most commonly. Posaconazole is active against 
many mucoraceous moulds in vitro and may be used as 
a second-line agent or as oral ‘step-down’ therapy.
Penicillium marneffei infection
P. marneffei is a thermally dimorphic pathogen (filamen-
tous in environmental conditions and yeast at body 
temperature), which causes disease in South-east Asia, 
mainly in association with HIV infection (although 
immunocompetent patients may also be infected). 
Acquisition is most likely to be by inhalation of environ-
mental spores, with primary lung infection followed by 
haematogenous dissemination. A generalised papular 
rash, which progresses to widespread necrosis and ulcer-
ation, is a characteristic feature. Skin lesions may resem-
ble those of molluscum contagiosum. Diagnosis is by 
histopathology and/or culture of respiratory secretions, 
blood or any infected clinical material (e.g. skin lesions, 
bone marrow, biopsies). Recommended treatment is 
with an amphotericin B formulation followed by itraco-
nazole (in severe infection), or with itraconazole alone.
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis is a primary systemic mycosis caused by 
the dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum. H. capsu-
latum var. capsulatum is endemic to east-central USA 
(especially the Mississippi and Ohio river valleys), parts 
of Canada, Latin America, the Caribbean, East and 
South-east Asia, and Africa. It occurs sporadically in 
Australia and India, and is very rare in Europe. H. cap-
sulatum var. duboisii is found in West Africa and Mada-
gascar. Genetic analysis suggests that H. capsulatum 
may, in fact, be made up of several different species, and 
its taxonomy is under review.
Habitat
The primary reservoir of H. capsulatum is soil enriched 
by bird and bat droppings, in which the fungus remains 
viable for many years. Infection is by inhalation of dust 
from such soil. Natural infections are found in bats, 
which represent a secondary reservoir of infection (via 
bat faeces). Histoplasmosis is a specific hazard for 
explorers of caves and people who clear out bird (includ-
ing chicken) roosts.
Pathology
The organism is inhaled in the form of conidia (spores) 
or hyphal fragments and transforms to the yeast phase 
during infection. Conidia or yeasts are phagocytosed by 
alveolar macrophages and neutrophils, and this may be 
followed by haematogenous dissemination to any organ. 
Subsequent development of a T-lymphocyte response 
brings the infection under control, resulting in a latent 
state in most exposed individuals.
Clinical features
Disease severity depends on the quantity of spores 
inhaled and the immune status of the host. In most cases, 
infection is asymptomatic. Pulmonary symptoms are the 
most common disease presentation, with fever, non-
productive cough and an influenza-like illness. Ery-
thema nodosum, myalgia and joint pain are common, 
and chest radiography may reveal a pneumonitis with 
hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Infectious disease
13
386
Blastomycosis
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus endemic 
to restricted parts of North America, mainly around the 
Mississippi and Ohio rivers. Very occasionally, it is 
reported from Africa. The disease usually presents as a 
chronic pneumonia similar to pulmonary tuberculosis. 
Bones, skin and the genitourinary tract may also be 
affected. Diagnosis is by culture of the organism or 
identification of the characteristic yeast form in a 
clinical specimen. Antibody detection is rarely helpful. 
Treatment is with amphotericin B (severe disease) or 
itraconazole.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.britishinfection.org British Infection Society. Source of 
general information on communicable diseases.
www.cdc.gov Centers for Disease Control, USA. Source 
of general information about infectious diseases.
www.fitfortravel.nhs.uk Scottish site with valuable information 
for travellers.
www.hpa.org.uk Health Protection Agency. Information on 
infectious diseases in the UK.
www.idsociety.org Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Source of general information relating to infectious diseases 
and of authoritative practice guidelines.
www.who.int World Health Organization. Invaluable links on 
travel medicine with updates on outbreaks of infections, 
changing resistance patterns and vaccination requirements.
Figure acknowledgements
Fig. 13.12 Reproduced from Halstead SB. Dengue. Medicine 
1997; 25:1 and Monath TP Yellow fever. Medicine 1997; 
25:1. Copyright Elsevier and Dr TP Monath.
Fig. 13.23 Reproduced by permission of WHO.
Fig. 13.27 Based on Bryceson ADM, Pfaltzgraff RE. Leprosy. 
3rd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1990; 
copyright Elsevier.
Fig. 13.35 Simarro PP, Diarra A, Ruiz Postigo JA, et al. The 
human African trypanosomiasis control and surveillance 
programme of the World Health Organization 2000–2009: 
the way forward. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2011; 5(2): e1007. 
doi 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001007.
Figs 13.39 and 13.45A Knight R. Parasitic disease in man. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1982; copyright 
Elsevier.
Fig. 13.42A Sundar S, Kumar K, Chakravarty J, et al. Cure of 
antimony-unresponsive Indian post-kala-azar dermal 
leishmaniasis with oral miltefosine. Trans R Soc Trop 
Med Hyg 2006; 100(7):698–700.
Fig. 13.47 Gibbons LM. SEM guide to the morphology of 
nematode parasites of vertebrates. Farnham Royal, 
Slough: Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau 
International; 1986.
Fig. 13.53 Cook GC, ed. Manson’s tropical diseases. 
20th edn. London: WB Saunders; 1995; copyright  
Elsevier.
Infectious Diseases Society of America practice guide-
lines: www.idsociety.org). In subcutaneous and bone 
infection, patterns of remission and relapse are more 
common than cure. A solitary bony lesion may require 
local surgical treatment only.
Coccidioidomycosis
This is a primary systemic mycosis caused by the dimor-
phic fungi Coccidioides immitis and C. posadasii, found in 
the south-western USA, and Central and South America. 
The disease is acquired by inhalation of conidia 
(arthrospores). In 60% of cases it is asymptomatic, but in 
the remainder it affects the lungs, lymph nodes and skin. 
Rarely (in approximately 0.5%), it may spread haema-
togenously to bones, adrenal glands, meninges and 
other organs.
Pulmonary coccidioidomycosis has two forms: 
primary and progressive. If symptomatic, primary coc-
cidioidomycosis presents with cough, fever, chest pain, 
dyspnoea and (commonly) arthritis and a rash (erythema 
multiforme). Progressive disease presents with systemic 
upset (e.g. fever, weight loss, anorexia) and features of 
lobar pneumonia, and may resemble tuberculosis.
Coccidioides meningitis (which may be associated 
with CSF eosinophils) is the most severe disease mani-
festation; it is fatal if untreated, and requires life-long 
suppressive therapy with antifungal azoles.
Investigations and management
Diagnosis is by direct detection (histopathological exam-
ination of infected tissue), culture of infected tissue or 
fluids, or antibody detection. IgM may be detected after 
1–3 weeks of disease by precipitin tests. IgG appears 
later and is detected with the complement fixation test. 
Change in IgG titre may be used to monitor clinical 
progress.
Treatment depends on specific disease manifesta-
tions, and ranges from regular clinical re-assessment 
without antifungal therapy (in mild pulmonary, asymp-
tomatic cavitary or single nodular disease) to high-dose 
treatment with an antifungal azole, which may be con-
tinued indefinitely (e.g. in meningitis). Amphotericin B 
is used in diffuse pneumonia, disseminated disease and, 
intrathecally, in meningitis. Posaconazole has been used 
successfully in refractory disease.
Paracoccidioidomycosis
This is a primary systemic mycosis caused by inhalation 
of the dimorphic fungus Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 
which is restricted to South America. The disease affects 
the lungs, mucous membranes (painful destructive 
ulceration in 50% of cases), skin, lymph nodes and 
adrenal glands (hypoadrenalism). Diagnosis is by micro-
scopy and culture of lesions, and antibody detection. 
Oral itraconazole solution (200 mg/day) has demon-
strated 98% efficacy and is currently the treatment of 
choice (mean duration 6 months). Ketoconazole, fluco-
nazole and voriconazole have also been used, as have 
long (2–3-year) courses of sulphonamides. Amphoteri­
cin B may be used in severe or refractory disease, fol-
lowed by an azole or sulphonamide.
387
14 
Clinical examination in HIV disease 388
Epidemiology 390
Global epidemic and regional patterns 390
Modes of transmission 390
Virology and immunology 391
Diagnosis and investigations 392
Diagnosing HIV infection 392
Viral load and CD4 counts 393
Natural history and staging of HIV 394
Presenting problems in HIV infection 395
Lymphadenopathy 395
Weight loss 396
Fever 396
Mucocutaneous disease 396
Gastrointestinal disease 399
Hepatobiliary disease 400
Respiratory disease 400
Nervous system and eye disease 402
Rheumatological disease 404
Haematological abnormalities 404
Renal disease 405
Cardiac disease 405
HIV-related cancers 405
HIV infection and AIDS
Prevention of opportunistic infections 405
Preventing exposure 405
Chemoprophylaxis 406
Immunisation 407
Antiretroviral therapy 407
ART complications 408
ART in special situations 409
Prevention of HIV 410
G. Maartens
HIV infection and AIDS
388
Observation
             Oropharynx
Mucous membranes
Neck
Lymph node enlargement
  Tuberculosis
  Lymphoma
  Kaposi’s sarcoma
  Persistent generalised
  lymphadenopathy
Parotidomegaly
Eyes
Retina
  Toxoplasmosis
  HIV retinopathy
  Progressive outer retinal
  necrosis
• Weight loss
• Tachypnoea
• Fevers and sweats 
Skin
Abdomen
Hepatosplenomegaly
Chest
Lungs
  Pleural effusion
   Tuberculosis
   Kaposi’s sarcoma
   Parapneumonic
Central nervous system
Higher mental function
  HIV dementia
  Progressive multifocal
  leucoencephalopathy
Focal signs
  Toxoplasmosis
  Primary CNS lymphoma
Neck stiffness
  Cryptococcal meningitis
  Tuberculous meningitis
  Pneumococcal meningitis
Anogenital region
Rashes
Legs
Peripheral nerve examination
  Spastic paraparesis
  Peripheral neuropathy
4
2
3
1
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Molluscum contagiosum
Gingivitis/
periodontitis
Cervical lymphadenopathy
Oropharyngeal candidiasis
Teeth
Oral hairy leucoplakia
Cytomegalovirus retinitis
Anal cancer
9
8
7
6
5
Papular pruritic eruption
 
Herpes zoster
Seborrhoeic
dermatitis
Herpes simplex
Aphthous ulcers
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Condylomas
Herpes simplex
Ulcers
CLINICAL EXAMINATION IN HIV DISEASE
Clinical examination in HIV disease
389
World Health Organization (WHO) clinical stage
(used in low- and middle-income countries)
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) clinical categories
(used in high-income countries)
Stage 1
Category A
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy
Primary HIV infection
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy
Stage 2
Category B
Unexplained moderate weight loss (< 10% of body weight)
Recurrent upper respiratory tract infections
Herpes zoster
Angular cheilitis
Recurrent oral ulceration
Papular pruritic eruptions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Fungal nail infections
Bacillary angiomatosis
Candidiasis, oropharyngeal (thrush)
Candidiasis, vulvovaginal; persistent, frequent or poorly responsive 
to therapy
Cervical dysplasia (moderate or severe)/cervical carcinoma in situ
Constitutional symptoms, such as fever (38.5°C) or diarrhoea 
lasting > 1 mth
Oral hairy leucoplakia
Herpes zoster, involving two distinct episodes or more than one 
dermatome
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Listeriosis
Pelvic inflammatory disease, particularly if complicated by 
tubo-ovarian abscess
Peripheral neuropathy
Stage 3
Unexplained severe weight loss (> 10% of body weight)
Unexplained chronic diarrhoea for > 1 mth
Unexplained persistent fever (> 37.5°C for > 1 mth)
Persistent oral candidiasis
Oral hairy leucoplakia
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Severe bacterial infections
Acute necrotising ulcerative stomatitis, gingivitis or periodontitis
Unexplained anaemia (< 80 g/L (8 g/dL)), neutropenia (< 0.5 × 
109/L) and/or chronic thrombocytopenia (< 50 × 109/L)
Stage 4
Category C
Candidiasis of oesophagus, trachea, bronchi or lungs
Cervical carcinoma – invasive
Cryptococcosis – extrapulmonary
Cryptosporidiosis, chronic (> 1 mth)
Cytomegalovirus disease (outside liver, spleen and nodes)
Herpes simplex chronic (> 1 mth) ulcers or visceral
HIV encephalopathy
HIV wasting syndrome
Isosporiasis, chronic (> 1 mth)
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Lymphoma (cerebral or B-cell non-Hodgkin)
Mycobacterial infection, non-tuberculous, extrapulmonary or disseminated
Mycosis – disseminated endemic (coccidiodomycosis or histoplasmosis)
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Pneumonia, recurrent bacterial
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy
Toxoplasmosis – cerebral
Tuberculosis – extrapulmonary (CDC includes pulmonary)
Septicaemia, recurrent (including non-typhoidal Salmonella) (CDC only includes Salmonella)
Symptomatic HIV-associated nephropathy*
Symptomatic HIV-associated cardiomyopathy*
Leishmaniasis, atypical disseminated*
*These conditions are in WHO stage 4 but not in CDC category C.
  HIV clinical staging classifications
HIV infection and AIDS
14
390
infections and the dominant modes of transmission also 
vary regionally (Box 14.1). Expanding access to combi-
nation antiretroviral therapy (ART) has resulted in a 
24% decline in global AIDS-related deaths since the peak 
in 2005. The improved life expectancy on ART has 
resulted in an increase in the number of people living 
with HIV. Despite these encouraging epidemiological 
data, HIV remains an important cause of death globally 
and has caused over 30 million deaths since the epi-
demic started. HIV has had a devastating effect in sub-
Saharan Africa, particularly in southern African where 
average life expectancy of the general population fell to 
below 40 years.
Modes of transmission
HIV is transmitted by sexual contact, by exposure to 
blood (e.g. injection drug use, occupational exposure in 
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) was 
first recognised in 1981, although the earliest docu-
mented case of HIV infection has been traced to a blood 
sample from the Democratic Republic of Congo in 1959. 
AIDS is caused by the human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), which progressively impairs cellular immunity. 
The origin of HIV is a zoonotic infection with simian 
immunodeficiency viruses (SIV) from African primates, 
probably first infecting local hunters. SIVs do not cause 
disease in their natural primate hosts. HIV-1 was trans-
mitted from chimpanzees and HIV-2 from sooty manga-
bey monkeys. HIV-1 is the cause of the global HIV 
pandemic, while HIV-2, which causes a similar illness to 
HIV-1 but progresses more slowly and is less transmis-
sible, is restricted mainly to western Africa. It has been 
estimated from mutation rates of SIV and HIV that 
both HIV-1 and HIV-2 first infected humans about 
100 years ago.
There are three groups of HIV-1 representing three 
separate transmission events from chimpanzees: M 
(‘major’, worldwide distribution), O (‘outlier’) and N 
(‘non-major and non-outlier’). Groups O and N are 
restricted to West Africa. Group M consists of nine sub-
types: A–D, F–H, J and K (subtypes E and I were subse-
quently shown to be recombinants of other subtypes). 
Globally, subtype C (Africa and India) accounts for half 
of strains and appears to be more readily transmitted. 
Subtype B predominates in Western Europe, the Ameri-
cas and Australia. In Europe, the prevalence of non-B 
subtypes is increasing because of migrants (predomi-
nantly from Africa). Subtypes A and D are associated 
with slower and faster disease progression respectively.
Global epidemic and regional patterns
In 2011 it was estimated that there were 34.2 million 
people living with HIV/AIDS, 2.5 million new infec-
tions and 1.7 million deaths (Fig. 14.1). Globally, new 
infections have declined by 20% over the last 10 years. 
Not all regions have experienced reductions in new 
Fig. 14.1  Worldwide distribution of HIV infection in 2011. 
North America
1.4 million
Western and
Central Europe
860000
Eastern Europe
and Central Asia
1.5 million
East Asia
830000
South and
South-east Asia
4.2 million
Oceania
53000
Sub-Saharan Africa
23.5 million
Middle East and
North Africa
330000
Caribbean
230000
Latin America
1.4 million
Region
HIV incidence
Dominant transmission
Sub-Saharan 
Africa
Decreasing
Heterosexual
South, South-east 
and East Asia
Decreasing
IDU, heterosexual
Oceania
Decreasing
Heterosexual
Caribbean
Decreasing
Heterosexual
Latin America
Stable
MSM
North America
Stable
MSM
Western and 
Central Europe
Stable
MSM
Eastern Europe 
and Central Asia
Increasing
IDU
Middle East and 
North Africa
Increasing
IDU, MSM
(IDU = intravenous drug users; MSM = men who have sex with men)
14.1  Regional HIV incidence and transmission, 
2001–2011
Virology and immunology
14
391
health-care workers) and blood products, or to infants 
of HIV-infected mothers (who may be infected in utero, 
perinatally or via breastfeeding). Worldwide, the major 
route of transmission is heterosexual. The risk of con-
tracting HIV after exposure to infected body fluid is 
dependent on the integrity of the exposed site, the type 
and volume of fluid, and the level of viraemia in the 
source person. The approximate transmission risk after 
exposure is given in Box 14.2. Factors that increase the 
risk of transmission are listed in Box 14.3.
A high proportion of patients with haemophilia in 
high-income countries had been infected through con-
taminated blood products by the time HIV antibody 
screening was adopted in 1985. Routine screening of 
blood and blood products for HIV infection using 
antibody and antigen tests (or polymerase chain reac-
tion, PCR) has virtually eliminated this as a mode of 
transmission. However, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) estimates that, because of the lack of adequate 
screening facilities in resource-poor countries, 5–10% of 
blood transfusions globally are with HIV-infected blood.
VIROLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY
HIV is an enveloped ribonucleic acid (RNA) retrovirus 
from the lentivirus family. After mucosal exposure, HIV 
is transported to the lymph nodes via dendritic cells, 
where infection becomes established. This is followed by 
viraemia and dissemination to lymphoid organs, which 
are the main sites of viral replication.
Each mature virion has a lipid membrane lined by a 
matrix protein that is studded with glycoprotein (gp) 
120 and gp41 spikes. The inner cone-shaped protein core 
(p24) houses two copies of the single-stranded RNA 
genome and viral enzymes. The HIV genome consists of 
three characteristic retroviral genes – gag (encodes a 
polyprotein that is processed into structural proteins, 
including p24), pol (codes for the enzymes reverse tran-
scriptase, integrase and protease) and env (codes for 
envelope proteins gp120 and gp41) – as well as six regu-
latory genes (vif, vpr, vpu, nef, tat and rev).
HIV can only infect cells bearing the CD4 receptor; 
these are T-helper lymphocytes, monocyte–macrophages, 
dendritic cells, and microglial cells in the central nervous 
system (CNS). Entry into the cell commences with 
binding of gp120 to the CD4 receptor (stage 1, Fig. 14.2), 
which results in a conformational change in gp120 that 
permits binding to one of two chemokine co-receptors 
(CXCR4 or CCR5: stage 2). The chemokine co-receptor 
CCR5 is utilised during initial infection, but later on the 
virus may adapt to use CXCR4. Individuals who are 
homozygous for the CCR5 delta 32 mutation do not 
express CCR5 on CD4 cells and are immune to HIV 
infection. Chemokine receptor binding is followed by 
membrane fusion and cellular entry involving gp41 
(stage 3). After penetrating the cell and uncoating, a 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) copy is transcribed from 
the RNA genome by the reverse transcriptase (RT) 
enzyme (stage 4) that is carried by the infecting virion. 
Reverse transcription is an error-prone process and mul-
tiple mutations arise with ongoing replication, which 
results in considerable viral genetic heterogeneity. Viral 
DNA is transported into the nucleus and integrated 
within the host cell genome by the integrase enzyme 
(stage 5). Integrated virus is known as proviral DNA and 
persists for the life of the cell. Cells infected with provi-
ral HIV DNA produce new virions only if they undergo 
cellular activation, resulting in the transcription of viral 
messenger RNA (mRNA) copies (stage 6), which are 
then translated into viral peptide chains (stage 7). The 
precursor polyproteins are then cleaved by the viral pro-
tease enzyme to form new viral structural proteins and 
enzymes (stage 8). These then migrate to the cell surface 
and are assembled using the host cellular apparatus to 
produce infectious viral particles, which bud from the 
cell surface, incorporating the host cell membrane into 
the viral envelope (stage 9). The mature virion then 
infects other CD4 cells and the process is repeated. CD4 
lymphocytes that are replicating HIV have a very short 
HIV exposure
Approximate risk
Sexual
Vaginal intercourse: female to male
0.05%
Vaginal intercourse: male to female
0.1%
Anal intercourse: insertive
0.05%
Anal intercourse: receptive
0.5%
Oral intercourse: insertive
0.005%
Oral intercourse: receptive
0.01%
Blood exposure
Blood transfusion
90%
Intravenous drug users sharing needles
0.67%
Percutaneous needle stick injury
0.3%
Mucous membrane splash
0.09%
Mother to child
Vaginal delivery
15%
Breastfeeding (per month)
0.5%
14.2  Risk of HIV transmission after single 
exposure to an HIV-infected source
Common to all transmission categories
•	 High viral load
Sexual transmission
•	 STIs, especially genital 
ulcers
•	 Cervical ectopy
•	 Rectal or vaginal 
lacerations
•	 Menstruation
•	 Uncircumcised male 
partner
•	 Depot intramuscular 
progesterone contraceptive 
use
Injection drug use transmission
•	 Sharing equipment
•	 Linked commercial sex
•	 Intravenous use
•	 Concomitant cocaine use
•	 Incarceration
Occupational transmission
•	 Deep injury
•	 Visible blood on device
•	 Needle was in a blood 
vessel
Vertical transmission
•	 Older gestational  
age
•	 Prolonged rupture of 
membranes
(STIs = sexually transmitted infections)
14.3  Factors increasing the risk of transmission 
of HIV
HIV infection and AIDS
14
392
orchestrating the immune response, the patient becomes 
susceptible to opportunistic diseases. The predominant 
opportunist infections in HIV-infected people are the 
consequences of impaired cell-mediated rather than 
antibody-mediated immunity (e.g. mycobacteria, herpes­
viruses). However, there is also a B lymphocyte 
defect with impaired antibody production to new anti-
gens and dysregulated antibody production with a 
polyclonal increase in gamma globulins, resulting in an 
increased risk of infection with encapsulated bacteria, 
notably Streptococcus pneumoniae.
DIAGNOSIS AND INVESTIGATIONS
Diagnosing HIV infection
Globally, the trend is towards universal HIV testing, 
rather than testing patients at high risk or those with 
manifestations of HIV infection only. However, in the 
UK, testing is still targeted (Box 14.4). HIV is diagnosed 
by detecting host antibodies either by using rapid point-
of-care tests or in the laboratory, where enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests are usually done. 
Most tests detect antibodies to both HIV-1 and HIV-2. A 
positive antibody test from two different immunoassays 
is sufficient to confirm infection. Western blot assays can 
also be used to confirm infection, but they are expensive 
survival time of about 1 day. It has been estimated that 
in asymptomatic HIV-infected people, more than 1010 
virions are produced and 109 CD4 lymphocytes 
destroyed each day.
A small percentage of T-helper lymphocytes enter a 
post-integration latent phase. Latently infected cells are 
important as sanctuary sites from antiretroviral drugs, 
which only act on replicating virus. Current ART is 
unable to eradicate HIV infection due to the persistence 
of proviral DNA in long-lived latent CD4 cells. Novel 
HIV eradication strategies are being devised to target 
latently infected cells.
The host immune response to HIV infection is both 
humoral, with the development of antibodies to a wide 
range of antigens, and cellular, with a dramatic expan-
sion of HIV-specific CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes, 
resulting in a CD8 lymphocytosis and reversal of the 
usual CD4:CD8 ratio. CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes kill 
activated CD4 cells that are replicating HIV, but not 
latently infected CD4 cells. HIV evades destruction 
despite this vigorous immune response in part because 
the highly conserved regions of gp120 and gp41 that are 
necessary for viral attachment and entry are covered by 
highly variable protein loops that change over time as a 
result of mutations selected for by the immune response. 
The initial peak of viraemia in primary infection settles 
to a plateau phase of persistent chronic viraemia. With 
time, there is gradual attrition of the T-helper lym-
phocyte population and, as these cells are pivotal in 
Fig. 14.2  Life cycle of HIV. 
1
Genomic
RNA
Double-stranded
DNA
Viral
mRNA
Viral proteins
Proviral RNA
Cell nucleus
Genomic
RNA
Cell
membrane
Stage
Steps in replication
Attachment to CD4 receptor
Binding to co-receptor CCR5 or CXCR4
Fusion
Reverse transcription
Integration
Transcription
Translation
Cleavage of polypeptides and assembly
Viral release
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CCR5/CXCR4 receptor inhibitors
Fusion inhibitors
Nucleoside and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Integrase inhibitors
Protease inhibitors
Drug targets
9
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Diagnosis and investigations
14
393
A number of baseline investigations should be done 
at the initial medical evaluation (Box 14.7). The extent 
of these investigations will depend on the resources 
available.
Viral load and CD4 counts
CD4 counts
CD4 lymphocyte counts are usually determined by flow 
cytometry, but cheaper methods have been developed 
for low-income countries. The CD4 count is the most 
clinically useful laboratory indicator of the degree of 
immune suppression and is used, together with clinical 
staging, in decisions to start ART and prophylaxis 
against opportunistic infections, and in the differential 
diagnosis of clinical problems.
The CD4 count varies by up to 20% from day to day 
and is also transiently reduced by intercurrent infec-
tions. Due to this variability, major therapeutic decisions 
should not be taken on the basis of a single count. This 
is particularly important when ART is being initiated in 
patients who do not fulfil the clinical criteria to start 
ART. The percentage of lymphocytes that are CD4+, 
rather than the absolute count, is routinely used in 
paedi­atrics, as the normal CD4 counts in infants and 
young children are much higher. In adults, the CD4 
percentage is occasionally useful when evaluating sig-
nificant reductions in an individual’s CD4 count, which 
may be associated with transient lymphopenia due to 
intercurrent infection or pregnancy. In this case, the CD4 
percentage will be unchanged.
and sometimes yield indeterminate results. Screening 
tests often include a test for p24 antigen in addition to 
antibodies, in order to detect patients with primary 
infection before the antibody response occurs. Nucleic 
acid amplification tests (usually PCR) to detect HIV-RNA 
are used to diagnose infections in infants of HIV-infected 
mothers, who carry maternal antibodies to HIV for up 
to 15 months irrespective of whether they are infected, 
and to diagnose primary infection before antibodies 
have developed. (PCR is more sensitive than p24 antigen 
detection, but p24 is more widely available.)
The purpose of HIV testing is not simply to identify 
infected individuals, but also to educate people about 
prevention and transmission of the virus. Counselling is 
essential both before HIV testing and after the result is 
obtained (Boxes 14.5 and 14.6). There are major advan-
tages to using rapid point-of-care HIV tests in that pre- 
and post-test counselling can be done at the same visit. 
Counselling should always be given in the client’s home 
language.
•	 CD4 count
•	 Viral load
•	 Hepatitis B surface antigen
•	 Hepatitis C antibody 
(injection drug users)
•	 Liver function tests
•	 Full blood count
•	 Urinalysis and serum 
creatinine
•	 Syphilis serology
•	 Cervical smear in  
women
•	 Serum cryptococcal  
antigen (if CD4  
< 100)
•	 Tuberculin skin test
•	 STI screen
14.7  Baseline investigations
Settings where recommended to all
•	 Genitourinary medicine or sexual health clinics
•	 Antenatal services
•	 Termination of pregnancy services
•	 Drug dependency programmes
•	 Services for those with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, tuberculosis 
and lymphoma
Patients routinely offered and recommended testing
•	 All those presenting with a possible primary HIV infection or 
where HIV enters the differential diagnosis
•	 All with an STI
•	 All sexual partners of an HIV-positive individual
•	 All MSM and female sexual contacts of MSM
•	 All with a history of injecting drug use
•	 All from a country of high HIV prevalence
•	 All who report sexual contact abroad or in the UK with 
individuals from a country of high HIV prevalence (> 1%)
Settings where testing should be considered, in areas where 
HIV prevalence in the local population is > 2 in 1000 population
•	 All registering with a general practice
•	 All general medical admissions
Groups in whom testing is routinely performed
•	 Blood donors
•	 Dialysis patients
•	 Organ transplant donors and recipients
14.4  HIV testing in the UK
•	 Discuss meaning of positive and negative test results
•	 Realise importance of maintaining confidentiality
•	 Identify person to whom positive result could be disclosed
•	 Explore knowledge and explain natural history of HIV
•	 Discuss transmission and risk reduction
•	 Assess coping strategy
•	 Explain test procedure
•	 Obtain informed consent
14.5  How to carry out pre-test counselling
Test result negative
•	 Discuss transmission and need for behaviour modification
•	 Advise second test 3 mths after last exposure
Test result positive
•	 Explain meaning of result
•	 Organise medical follow-up
•	 Assess coping strategy
•	 Stress importance of disclosure
•	 Explain value of antiretroviral therapy
•	 Provide written information and useful Internet resources
•	 Discuss confidentiality issues
•	 Organise emotional and practical support (provide names/
phone numbers)
•	 Facilitate notification of sexual partners
14.6  How to carry out post-test counselling
HIV infection and AIDS
14
394
NATURAL HISTORY AND  
STAGING OF HIV
Clinical staging of patients should be done at the initial 
medical examination, as it provides prognostic informa-
tion and is a key criterion for initiating ART and prophy-
laxis against opportunistic infections. Two clinical 
staging systems are used internationally (p. 389). In both 
systems, patients are staged according to the most severe 
manifestation and do not improve their classification. 
For example, a patient who is asymptomatic following 
a major opportunistic disease (AIDS) remains at stage 4 
or category C of the WHO and CDC systems respec-
tively, and never reverts to earlier stages. Finally, 
patients do not always progress steadily through all 
stages and may present with AIDS, having previously 
been asymptomatic.
Primary infection
Primary infection is symptomatic in more than 50% of 
cases, but the diagnosis is often missed. The incubation 
period is usually 2–4 weeks after exposure. The duration 
of symptoms is variable, but is seldom longer than 
2 weeks. The clinical manifestations (Box 14.8) resemble 
a glandular fever-type illness, but the presence of 
maculo-papular rash or mucosal ulceration strongly 
suggests primary HIV infection rather than the other 
viral causes of glandular fever (p. 320). In infectious 
mononucleosis due to other viruses, rashes generally 
only occur if aminopenicillins are given. Atypical lym-
phocytosis occurs less frequently than in Epstein–Barr 
virus (EBV) infection. Transient lymphopenia, including 
CD4 lymphocytes, is found in most cases (see Fig. 14.3), 
which may result in opportunistic infections, notably 
oro­pharyngeal candidiasis. Major opportunistic infec-
tions like Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) may 
rarely occur. Thrombocytopenia and moderate elevation 
of liver enzymes are commonly present. The differential 
diagnosis of primary HIV includes acute EBV, primary 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, rubella, primary 
toxo­plasmosis and secondary syphilis.
The normal CD4 count is > 500 cells/mm3. The rate 
of decline in CD4 count is highly variable. People with 
CD4 counts between 200 and 500 cells/mm3 have a low 
risk of developing major opportunistic infections. Mor-
bidity due to inflammatory dermatoses, herpes zoster, 
oral candidiasis, tuberculosis, bacterial pneumonia and 
HIV-related immune disorders (e.g. immune thrombo-
cytopenia) becomes increasingly common as CD4 counts 
decline. Once the count is below 200 cells/mm3, there is 
severe immune suppression and a high risk of AIDS-
defining conditions. It is important to note that patients 
can be asymptomatic despite very low CD4 counts and 
that major opportunistic diseases occasionally present 
with high CD4 counts.
The CD4 count should be performed every 
3–6 months in patients not yet eligible for ART and is 
usually done at similar intervals in patients on ART, 
together with measurement of the viral load.
Viral load
The level of viraemia is measured by quantitative PCR 
of HIV-RNA, known as the viral load. Determining the 
viral load is important for monitoring responses to ART 
(p. 407) and also has some prognostic value before start-
ing ART. However, many low-income countries are 
unable to afford viral load measurements. People with 
high viral loads (e.g. > 100 000 copies/mL) experience 
more rapid declines in CD4 count, while those with low 
viral loads (< 1000 copies/mL) usually have slow or 
even no decline in CD4 counts. There is little point in 
repeated measurements of viral load before starting 
ART, as viral loads remain at a relatively stable plateau 
after primary infection (Fig. 14.3).
Transient increases in viral load occur with intercur-
rent infections and immunisations, so the test should be 
done at least 2 weeks afterwards. Viral load results vary 
because of assay variability and fluctuations within 
patients. Only changes in viral load of more than 
0.5 log10 copies/mL are considered clinically significant. 
The same laboratory and viral load test manufacturer 
should be used for follow-up tests in individual patients 
if possible.
1200
Clinical
latency
Constitutional
symptoms
Opportunistic
diseases
Death
Primary
infection
Acute HIV syndrome
Wide dissemination of virus
Seeding of lymphoid organs
107
106
HIV RNA copies per mL plasma
105
104
103
102
CD4+ T lymphocyte count (cells/mm3)
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0
1
2
3
5
6
7
8
9 10
4
11
3
6
Weeks
CD4
Viral load
Years
9 12
Fig. 14.3  Virological and immunological 
progression of untreated HIV infection. 
Presenting problems in HIV infection 
14
395
more. All body systems can be affected by HIV. The 
CD4 count is useful in differential diagnosis (see 
Box 14.9): opportunistic diseases that may present 
at higher CD4 counts become increasingly common as 
CD4 counts decline, so the CD4 count helps to rule out 
certain disorders. For example, in a patient with a pul-
monary infiltrate and a CD4 count of 350 cells/mm3, 
pulmonary tuberculosis is a likely diagnosis and Pneumo­
cystis infection is very unlikely, but if the patient’s CD4 
count is 50 cells/mm3, both Pneumocystis and tuberculo-
sis are likely.
Globally, tuberculosis is the most common cause of 
morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected patients. Tuber-
culosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis 
of most presenting problems in patients from communi-
ties where tuberculosis is common.
Lymphadenopathy
Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy due to HIV is 
described above under asymptomatic infection. Lymph­
adenopathy may also be due to malignancy (Kaposi’s 
sarcoma or lymphoma) or infections, especially tubercu-
losis, which is an extremely common cause in low- and 
middle-income countries. Rapid enlargement of a node, 
asymmetric enlargement or lymphadenopathy associ-
ated with constitutional symptoms (even if the nodes are 
symmetrical) warrants further investigation. Tubercu-
lous lymph nodes often undergo extensive caseous 
necrosis, causing them to become fluctuant, and inexpe-
rienced clinicians often inappropriately perform incision 
and drainage. Lymphoma typically presents with large 
nodes that are not fluctuant. Lymph node needle aspira-
tion (using a wide-bore needle such as 19G) should be 
undertaken for microscopy. One slide should be air-
dried and sent for staining for acid-fast bacilli, which has 
about a 70% yield in tuberculosis. The other slide should 
be fixed and sent for cytology. If caseous liquid is 
Early diagnosis is made by detecting HIV-RNA on 
PCR or p24 antigenaemia. The appearance of specific 
anti-HIV antibodies in serum (seroconversion) occurs 
2–12 weeks after the development of symptoms. The 
window period during which antibody tests may be 
false-negative is prolonged when post-exposure prophy­
laxis has been used.
Asymptomatic infection
A prolonged period of clinical latency follows primary 
infection, during which infected individuals are asymp-
tomatic. Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy with 
nodes typically < 2 cm diameter is a common finding. 
Eventually the lymph nodes regress, with destruction of 
node architecture as disease advances.
Viraemia peaks during primary infection and then 
drops as the immune response develops, to reach a 
plateau about 3 months later. The level of viraemia post-
seroconversion is a predictor of the rate of decline in 
CD4 counts, which is highly variable and explained in 
part by genetic factors affecting the immune response. 
The median time from infection to the development of 
AIDS in adults is about 9 years (see Fig. 14.3). A small 
proportion of untreated HIV-infected people are long-
term non-progressors with CD4 counts in the reference 
range for 10 years or more. Some long-term non-
progressors have undetectable viral loads and are 
known as ‘elite controllers’.
Minor HIV-associated disorders
A wide range of disorders indicating some impairment 
of cellular immunity occur in most patients before they 
develop AIDS (CDC category B or WHO stages 2 and 3). 
Careful examination of the mouth is important when 
patients are being followed up, as oral candidiasis and 
oral hairy leucoplakia are common and important condi-
tions that require initiation of ART and prophylaxis 
against opportunistic infections, irrespective of the 
CD4 count.
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
AIDS is defined by the development of specified oppor-
tunistic infections, cancers and severe manifestations of 
HIV itself (p. 389). CDC category C is the most widely 
used definition of AIDS. WHO updated its classification 
more recently and added a few conditions of similar 
prognosis to its stage 4 disease. Box 14.9 outlines the 
correlation between CD4 count and HIV-related 
diseases.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS  
IN HIV INFECTION
HIV itself is associated with a wide variety of clinical 
manifestations, and opportunistic diseases add many 
< 500 cells/mm3
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Bacterial pneumonia
•	 Herpes zoster
•	 Oropharyngeal candidiasis
•	 Non-typhoid salmonellosis
•	 Kaposi’s sarcoma
•	 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
•	 HIV-associated idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura
< 200 cells/mm3
•	 Pneumocystis jirovecii 
pneumonia
•	 Chronic herpes simplex 
ulcers
•	 Oesophageal  
candidiasis
•	 Isospora belli diarrhoea
•	 HIV wasting syndrome
•	 HIV-associated dementia
•	 Peripheral neuropathy
•	 Endemic mycoses
< 100 cells/mm3
•	 Cerebral toxoplasmosis
•	 Cryptococcal meningitis
•	 Cryptosporidiosis and 
microsporidiosis
•	 Primary CNS lymphoma
•	 Cytomegalovirus
•	 Disseminated 
Mycobacterium avium 
complex (MAC)
•	 Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy
14.9  CD4 count and risk of common 
HIV-associated diseases
•	 Fever
•	 Maculo-papular rash
•	 Pharyngitis
•	 Lymphadenopathy
•	 Myalgia/arthralgia
•	 Diarrhoea
•	 Headache
•	 Oral and genital ulceration
•	 Meningo-encephalitis
•	 Bell’s palsy
14.8  Clinical features of primary infection
HIV infection and AIDS
14
396
blood cultures will have failed to identify the cause. HIV 
itself can present with prolonged fever, but this is a 
diagnosis of exclusion, as a treatable cause will be 
found in most patients. Abdominal imaging, preferably 
by computed tomography (CT), should be requested. 
Abdominal nodes (especially if they are hypodense in 
the centre) or splenic microabscesses strongly suggest 
tuberculosis. Mycobacterial (or ‘lytic’) blood cultures, 
which can also detect fungi, should be performed. Bone 
marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy are helpful if the 
full blood count shows cytopenias. Liver biopsy may be 
helpful if the liver enzymes are elevated, but is invasive 
and seldom necessary. Mycobacterial and fungal stains 
and cultures should be done on all biopsies. Chest X-rays 
should be repeated after about a week, as micronodular 
or interstitial infiltrates may have become apparent (see 
p. 401 for differential diagnosis).
Tuberculosis is by far the most common cause of PUO 
in low- and middle-income countries, and in these set-
tings an early trial of empiric therapy is warranted after 
cultures have been sent. In high-income countries, dis-
seminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) infec-
tion is an important cause of PUO, often with diarrhoea 
and splenomegaly. Disseminated endemic mycoses 
(histoplasmosis, coccidiodomycosis and penicilliosis) 
present with PUO, often with papular skin eruptions. 
Skin biopsy for histology and fungal culture is often 
diagnostic.
Mucocutaneous disease
The skin and mouth must be carefully examined, as 
mucocutaneous manifestations are extremely common 
in HIV and many prognostically important conditions 
can be diagnosed by simple inspection. The differential 
diagnosis of dermatological conditions is simplified by 
categorising disorders according to the lesion type (Box 
14.10). Some common dermatological diseases, notably 
psoriasis, are exacerbated by HIV. The risk of drug 
aspirated, this should be sent for mycobacterial culture. 
If needle aspiration is unhelpful, or if lymphoma or 
Kaposi’s sarcoma is suspected, excision biopsy should 
be performed.
Weight loss
Weight loss is a very common finding in advanced HIV 
infection. The HIV wasting syndrome is an AIDS-
defining condition and is defined as weight loss of 
more than 10% of body weight, plus either unex-
plained chronic diarrhoea (lasting > 1 month) or chronic 
weakness and unexplained prolonged fever (lasting 
> 1 month). This is a diagnosis of exclusion. If the weight 
loss is rapid (more than 1 kg a month), then major 
opportunistic infections or cancers become more likely. 
Painful oral conditions and nausea from drugs contrib-
ute by limiting intake. Depression is very common and 
can cause significant weight loss. Measurement of 
C-reactive protein is helpful in the work-up of weight 
loss, as this is markedly raised with most opportunistic 
diseases but not with HIV itself. Erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate (ESR) is elevated by HIV infection and is there-
fore not useful. The presence of fever or diarrhoea is 
helpful in the differential diagnosis (Fig. 14.4).
Fever
Fever is a very common presenting feature. Common 
causes of prolonged fever with weight loss are listed in 
Figure 14.4. Non-typhoid Salmonella bacteraemia, which 
commonly presents with fever in low-income countries, 
presents without diarrhoea in about 50% of patients. 
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) in HIV infection is 
defined as temperature over 38°C with no cause found 
after 4 weeks in outpatients or 3 days in inpatients, and 
initial investigations such as chest X-rays, urinalysis and 
Fig. 14.4  Presentation and differential diagnosis of weight loss. (AZT = zidovudine; CMV = cytomegalovirus; d4T = stavudine; KS = Kaposi’s 
sarcoma; MAC = Mycobacterium avium complex; NHL = non-Hodgkin lymphoma; PI = protease inhibitor) 
Loss of weight
?Fever
?Diarrhoea
Yes
No
Yes
No
Tuberculosis
MAC
Disseminated mycoses
NHL
CMV
HIV wasting
Depression
HIV
Painful oral/oesophageal disorder
Lipoatrophy (d4T and AZT)
Symptomatic hyperlactataemia
GI side-effects of ART
Small bowel
(large-volume,
watery)
Large bowel
(small-volume, blood/mucus,
tenesmus)
Cryptosporidiosis
Microsporidiosis
Isosporiasis
HIV enteropathy
PI-induced
MAC
CMV
Salmonella
Shigella
Campylobacter
Clostridium difficile
Presenting problems in HIV infection 
14
397
Herpes zoster
This usually presents with a pathognomonic vesicular 
rash on an erythematous base in a dermatomal dis­
tribution (p. 318). The median CD4 count at the first 
episode of zoster is 350 cells/mm3. In patients with 
advanced disease, the rash may be multiderma­tomal 
and recurrent episodes may occur. Disseminated zoster 
is rare. In HIV-infected patients, zoster is generally more 
extensive, has a longer duration, and there is a higher 
risk of developing post-herpetic neuralgia. High doses 
of aciclovir or its congeners should be given for all cases 
with active disease, irrespective of the time since the 
onset of the rash. Post-herpetic neur­algia is difficult to 
manage. Analgesic adjuvants, e.g. amitriptyline and pre-
gabalin, should be commenced in all patients with pro-
longed pain. Topical capsaicin has modest efficacy.
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) is a spindle-cell tumour of 
lympho-endothelial origin. All forms of KS are due 
to sexually transmitted human herpesvirus 8, also 
known as KS-associated herpesvirus. KS occurs in four 
patterns:
•	 classic KS: rare, indolent and restricted largely to 
elderly Mediterranean or Jewish men
•	 endemic KS: occurs in sub-Saharan Africa, is more 
aggressive, presents at earlier ages than classic KS, 
and affects men more than women
•	 KS in patients on immunosuppressant drugs: 
usually transplant recipients, who experience 
disseminated disease
•	 AIDS-associated KS.
In Africa, the male : female ratio of AIDS-associated KS 
is much lower than is seen with endemic KS, but men 
are still more affected than women despite the fact that 
the seroprevalence of human herpesvirus 8 is the same 
in both sexes.
AIDS-associated KS is always a multicentric disease. 
Early mucocutaneous lesions are macular and may be 
difficult to diagnose. Subsequently, lesions become 
papular or nodular, and may ulcerate. KS lesions typi-
cally have a red–purple colour (Fig. 14.6 and p. 388), 
but may become hyperpigmented, especially in dark-
skinned patients. As the disease progresses, the skin 
rashes is greatly increased in HIV-infected patients. Skin 
biopsy should be taken, and sent for histology and 
culture for mycobacteria and fungi in patients with 
unusual rashes or if there are constitutional symptoms 
coinciding with the development of the rash.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis is very common in HIV. The 
severity increases as the CD4 count falls. It presents as 
scaly red patches, typically in the nasolabial folds and 
in hairy areas. Fungal infections are thought to play 
a role in the pathogenesis of this condition. It responds 
well to a combined topical antifungal and steroid. 
Selenium sulphide shampoo is helpful for scalp 
involvement.
Herpes simplex infections
Recurrences of herpes simplex infection are very common 
and primarily affect the nasolabial and anogenital areas 
(Fig. 14.5). As immune suppression worsens, the ulcers 
take longer to heal and become more extensive. Ulcers 
that persist for more than 4 weeks are AIDS-defining. 
The diagnosis is clinical, but PCR of vesicle fluid or from 
ulcer swabs may be diagnostic with unusual presenta-
tions. Response to a course of aciclovir or a related drug 
is good, but relapses are common. Frequent relapses that 
persist despite ART should be treated with aciclovir 
400 mg twice daily for 6–12 months.
Fig. 14.5  Severe mucocutaneous herpes simplex. Chronic 
anogenital or perioral ulcers are very common in advanced HIV infection. 
Scaly rashes
•	 Seborrhoeic dermatitis
•	 Psoriasis* (exacerbated  
by HIV)
•	 Tinea corporis*
•	 Dry skin/icthyosis
•	 Norwegian scabies*
•	 Drug rashes*
Pruritic papules
•	 Pruritic papular eruption 
(‘itchy red bump disease’)
•	 Eosinophilic folliculitis
•	 Scabies*
Papules and nodules (non-pruritic)
•	 Molluscum contagiosum*
•	 Secondary syphilis
•	 Kaposi’s sarcoma
•	 Bacillary angiomatosis
•	 Cryptococcosis
•	 Warts*
•	 Disseminated endemic 
mycoses (histoplasmosis, 
coccidiodomycosis and 
penicilliosis)
Blisters
•	 Herpes simplex
•	 Herpes zoster
•	 Fixed drug eruptions
•	 Drug rashes (especially 
toxic epidermal necrolysis)
Mucocutaneous ulcers
•	 Ecthyma
•	 Herpes simplex
•	 Aphthous ulcers (minor and 
major)
•	 Histoplasmosis
•	 Drug rashes (Stevens–
Johnson syndrome)
Hyperpigmentation
•	 Post-inflammatory 
(especially pruritic papular 
eruption)
•	 Zidovudine
•	 Emtricitabine (palms and 
soles)
*See Chapter 28 for more information.
14.10  Differential diagnosis of skin conditions 
by lesion type
HIV infection and AIDS
14
398
blistering (when this affects more than 30% of surface 
area it is known as toxic epidermal necrolysis), 
involvement of mucous membranes (Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome, pp. 1264 and 1302), or systemic involvement 
with fever or organ dysfunction (especially hepatitis, 
which is often delayed for a few days after the rash 
develops). Because sulphonamides are important in the 
treatment and prophylaxis of opportunistic infections, 
rechallenge or desensitisation is often attempted in 
patients who have previously experienced rashes, pro-
vided the reaction was not life-threatening. Details of 
rashes caused by ART are given below.
Oral conditions
Oropharyngeal candidiasis is very common. It is nearly 
always caused by C. albicans (p. 381), but other 
azole-resistant Candida species may be selected for if 
there have been repeated courses of azole drugs. 
Pseudomembranous candidiasis is the most common 
manifestation, with white patches on the buccal mucosa 
(p. 388) that can be scraped off to reveal a red raw 
surface. Erythematous candidiasis is more difficult to 
diagnose and presents with a reddened mucosa and a 
smooth shiny tongue. Angular cheilitis due to Candida 
is a common manifestation. Topical antifungals are 
usually effective. Antifungal lozenges and gentian violet 
are both more effective than antifungal solutions. Sys-
temic azole therapy, usually fluconazole, should be 
given if topical therapy fails or if there are oesophageal 
symptoms.
Oral hairy leucoplakia (p. 388) appears as corrugated 
white plaques running vertically on the side of the 
tongue, and is virtually pathognomonic of HIV disease. 
It is usually asymptomatic and is due to EBV. If high 
doses of aciclovir or a related drug are given for varicella 
zoster virus infections, the lesions may temporarily 
regress.
Oral ulcers are common. Herpetiform oral ulcers 
occur in primary infection. Herpes simplex typically 
affects the nasolabial area, but may cause oral ulcers. In 
early disease, minor aphthous ulcers are common. In 
advanced disease, giant aphthous ulcers occur. These 
destroy tissue, are painful and need to be differentiated 
from herpes simplex and CMV ulcers by biopsy. They 
respond to systemic steroids. Histoplasmosis (p. 385) is 
an uncommon cause of oral ulcers, usually associated 
with constitutional symptoms. Finally, superficial oral 
ulcers may occur as part of the Stevens–Johnson syn-
drome, usually caused by sulphonamides or NNRTIs.
KS often involves the mouth, especially the hard 
palate (see above and Fig. 14.6). Nodular oral lesions are 
associated with a worse prognosis.
Gingivitis is very common. Good oral hygiene and 
regular dental checkups are important. Acute necrotis-
ing ulcerative gingivitis and periostitis (p. 388) can result 
in loss of teeth; they should be treated with a course of 
metronidazole and a dental referral should be made.
Nail disorders
Fungal infections (onychomycosis, p. 1280) are very 
common and often involve multiple nails. Blue discol-
oration of nails is common and may be due to HIV or to 
the antiretroviral drug zidovudine.
lesions become more numerous and larger. Lymph­
oedema is common, as lymphatic vessels are infiltrated. 
KS also commonly spreads to lymph nodes and viscer-
ally, especially to the lungs and gastrointestinal tract. 
Visceral disease occasionally occurs in the absence of 
mucocutaneous involvement. B symptoms of fever, 
night sweats and weight loss may occur.
KS may respond to ART. Chemotherapy should be 
reserved for those patients who fail to remit on ART, or 
given together with ART if there are poor prognostic 
features such as visceral involvement, oedema, ulcer-
ated lesions and B symptoms.
Bacillary angiomatosis
Bacillary angiomatosis is a bacterial infection caused by 
Bartonella henselae or B. quintana. Skin lesions range from 
solitary superficial red–purple lesions resembling 
Kaposi’s sarcoma or pyogenic granuloma, to multiple 
subcutaneous nodules or plaques. Lesions are painful 
and may bleed or ulcerate. The infection may become 
disseminated with fevers, lymphadenopathy and hepato­
splenomegaly. Diagnosis is made by biopsy of a lesion 
and Warthin–Starry silver staining, which reveals aggre-
gates of bacilli. Treatment with doxycycline or azithro-
mycin is effective.
Papular pruritic eruption
Papular pruritic eruption (‘itchy red bump disease’) is 
an intensely itchy, symmetrical rash affecting the trunk 
and extremities. It thought to be due to an allergic reac-
tion to insect bites. In sub-Saharan Africa, it is the most 
common skin manifestation of HIV. Post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation is common. Topical steroids, emol-
lients and antihistamines are useful but response is vari-
able. Measures to reduce insect bites are logical, but 
difficult to implement in low-income settings.
Drug rashes
Cutaneous hypersensitivity to drugs is said to occur 
100 times more frequently in HIV infection. The most 
common type is an erythematous maculo-papular rash, 
which may be scaly. The drugs most commonly associ-
ated with rashes are sulphonamides and non-nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs – see below). 
Severe, life-threatening features of drug rashes include 
Fig. 14.6  Oral Kaposi’s sarcoma. A full examination is important to 
detect disease that may affect the palate, gums, fauces or tongue. 
Presenting problems in HIV infection 
14
399
Large-bowel diarrhoea
Acute diarrhoea caused by the bacterial enteric patho-
gens Campylobacter, Shigella and Salmonella occurs more 
frequently than in HIV-uninfected people and the illness 
is more severe. Bacteraemia is much more common, 
notably due to non-typhoid Salmonella. Diarrhoea caused 
by Clostridium difficile should be considered if there has 
been prior exposure to antibiotics, as is often the case in 
patients with symptomatic HIV.
CMV colitis presents with chronic large-bowel symp-
toms and fever in patients with CD4 counts below 
100 cells/mm3. On colonoscopy, ulcers are seen, mostly 
involving the left side of the colon. Biopsy of ulcers 
shows typical ‘owl’s-eye’ inclusion bodies.
Small-bowel diarrhoea
Chronic small-bowel diarrhoea may be due to HIV 
enteropathy, but this is a diagnosis of exclusion. It 
typically presents with chronic watery diarrhoea and 
wasting without fever. Infection with one of three uni-
cellular organisms is responsible for most cases: crypto­
sporidiosis, microsporidiosis and isosporiasis (Box 
14.11). All three are intracellular parasites that invade 
enterocytes. If the diagnosis is not made by stool micro-
scopy on at least two specimens, a duodenal biopsy 
should be performed (Fig. 14.8). Electron microscopy is 
essential for speciation of microsporidia.
Gastrointestinal disease
Oesophageal diseases
Oesophageal candidiasis (Fig. 14.7) is the most common 
cause of pain on swallowing (odynophagia), dysphagia 
and regurgitation. Concomitant oral candidiasis is 
present in about 70% of patients. Systemic azole therapy, 
e.g. fluconazole 200 mg daily for 14 days, is usually 
curative, but relapses are common. Patients whose 
oesophageal symptoms fail to respond to azoles should 
be investigated with oesophagoscopy. Major aphthous 
ulceration and CMV ulcers are the most likely causes 
and need to be differentiated by biopsy. Occasionally, 
herpes simplex oesophagitis or obstructive KS is 
responsible.
Diarrhoea
Chronic diarrhoea is a very common presenting problem 
in patients with advanced HIV, especially in areas where 
there is no access to safe water. It is a major cause of 
wasting. The differential diagnosis of diarrhoea depends 
on whether the presentation is with large- or small-
bowel symptoms (see Fig. 14.4, p. 396). The presentation 
and aetiology of acute diarrhoea are similar to those in 
HIV-uninfected patients.
Fig. 14.7  Oesophageal candidiasis. Endoscopy showing typical 
pseudomembranous candidiasis. 
Fig. 14.8  Cryptosporidiosis. Duodenal biopsy may be necessary to 
confirm cryptosporidiosis or microsporidiosis. Arrow indicates an öocyst. 
Cryptosporidiosis
Microsporidiosis
Isosporiasis
Organism
Protozoan
Fungus
Protozoan
Species
Cryptosporidium parvum
C. hominis
Encephalitozoon bieneusi
E. intestinalis, etc.
Isospora belli
Animal host
Multiple
Multiple
No
Distribution
Global
Global
Tropics
Stool examination
Acid-fast stain
Trichrome stain
PCR
Acid-fast stain
Specific treatment
No established therapy
Albendazole (some species)
Co-trimoxazole
14.11  Common causes of chronic watery diarrhoea
HIV infection and AIDS
14
400
microsporidiosis is present, but it is uncertain if these 
organisms play an aetiological role. Papillary stenosis is 
common and is amenable to cautery via endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), which 
provides symptomatic relief. Acalculous cholecystitis is 
a common complication of cholangiopathy. ART may 
improve the condition.
Respiratory disease
Pulmonary disease is very common and is the major 
reason for hospital admission. More than 90% of patients 
who are admitted for respiratory diseases will have 
either bacterial pneumonia, pulmonary tuberculosis or 
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP). PJP is more 
common in high-income countries, while tuberculosis is 
more common in low- and middle-income countries. An 
approach to the differential diagnosis of all three condi-
tions is given in Box 14.12.
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
The key presenting feature of PJP is progressive dys­
pnoea. Dry cough and fever are common. The chest 
X-ray typically shows a bilateral interstitial infiltrate 
spreading out from the hilar regions (Fig. 14.9), but may 
be normal initially. High-resolution CT scan is more sen-
sitive than chest X-ray, usually showing typical ‘ground-
glass’ interstitial infiltrates. Pneumatocoeles may occur 
and may rupture, resulting in a pneumothorax. The 
diagnosis is made with silver stains, PCR or immuno­
fluorescence of broncho-alveolar lavage or induced 
sputum. Treatment is with high-dose co-trimoxazole, 
together with adjunctive steroids if the patient is hypoxic.
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is the most common cause of admission 
in countries with a high tuberculosis incidence. Pulmo-
nary tuberculosis in patients with mild immune sup-
pression typically presents as in HIV-uninfected patients, 
with a chronic illness and apical pulmonary cavities 
(p. 688). However, in patients with CD4 counts below 
200 cells/mm3, there are four important differences in 
the clinical presentation of pulmonary tuberculosis.
About 40% of patients with disseminated MAC 
infections have watery diarrhoea. Unlike in crypto­
sporidiosis, microsporidiosis and isosporiasis, fever is 
a prominent feature of MAC infection. Intestinal tuber-
culosis typically involves the ileocaecal area and may 
present with fever and diarrhoea, but the diarrhoea is 
seldom profuse.
Hepatobiliary disease
Chronic viral hepatitis
Hepatitis B and/or C (HBV and HCV) co-infection is 
common in HIV-infected people due to shared risk 
factors for transmission. The natural history of both 
HBV and HCV is altered by HIV co-infection. In the ART 
era, chronic liver disease from viral hepatitis has emerged 
as a major cause of morbidity and mortality. HBV and 
HCV are further described on pages 950 and 954.
Hepatitis B
HBV infection is common in several groups of people at 
risk of HIV infection: residents of low- and middle-
income countries, injection drug users, haemophiliacs 
and MSM. HIV co-infection increases HBV viraemia, is 
associated with less elevation of transaminase (presum-
ably due to immune suppression), and increases the risk 
of liver fibrosis and hepatoma. Several NRTIs (lamivu-
dine, emtricitabine and tenofovir) are also effective 
against HBV. HBV status should be checked at baseline 
in all HIV-infected patients. Treatment with anti-HBV 
drugs should be considered for all patients who have 
active HBV replication (HBeAg-positive or HBV DNA 
> 2000 U/mL) and/or evidence of inflammation or 
fibrosis on liver biopsy. This is best achieved by starting 
an ART regimen that includes tenofovir with either 
lamivudine or emtricitabine. Interferon is seldom used, 
but may be considered in patients with CD4 counts 
above 500 cells/mm3. A flare of hepatitis may be associ-
ated with improved immune function after starting 
ART or discontinuing antiretrovirals that have anti-HBV 
activity. There is an increased risk of antiretroviral 
hepatotoxicity.
Hepatitis C
HCV infection is extremely common in injection drug 
users and haemophiliacs. HIV co-infection increases 
HCV viraemia and increases the risk of liver fibrosis and 
hepatoma. Treatment for HCV should preferably be 
deferred in patients with low CD4 counts until the CD4 
count has risen to 350 cells/mm3 or more. As with HBV, 
a flare of hepatitis may be associated with improved 
immune function after starting ART, and there is an 
increased risk of antiretroviral hepatotoxicity. Response 
to anti-HCV therapy is similar to that seen in HIV-
uninfected people, but there is more toxicity and there 
are important drug–drug interactions between several 
antiretrovirals and both ribavirin and the newer HCV 
protease inhibitors.
HIV cholangiopathy
HIV cholangiopathy, a form of secondary sclerosing 
cholangitis (p. 965), is seen in patients with severe 
immune suppression. In some patients, co-existing 
intestinal infection with CMV, cryptosporidiosis or 
Bacterial 
pneumonia
PJP
Pulmonary TB
Duration
Acute
Subacute
Variable
Dyspnoea
Common
Prominent
Occasional
White cell 
count
Increased
Normal
Variable
Chest X-ray
Infiltrate
Consolidation
Interstitial
Variable
Bilateral 
infiltrate
Occasional
Yes
Common
Effusion
Occasional
No
Common
Nodes
Uncommon
No
Common
C-reactive 
protein
Markedly 
increased
Variable
Increased
14.12  Characteristic features of bacterial 
pneumonia, PJP and pulmonary TB
Presenting problems in HIV infection 
14
401
•	 Sputum smears, which are positive in most 
HIV-uninfected adults with pulmonary tuberculosis, 
are negative in more than half of patients. The main 
reason for this is the absence of pulmonary  
cavities.
•	 Many patients have disseminated tuberculosis, 
sometimes with a classic miliary pattern on chest 
X-ray, but more commonly presenting with 
pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis. The 
most common sites of concomitant extrapulmonary 
tuberculosis are the pleura and lymph nodes. 
Acid-fast bacilli are more often found on wide-
needle aspirate of nodes than on sputum (p. 395). 
Pleural aspirate showing a lymphocytic exudate 
suggests tuberculosis as a likely cause and pleural 
biopsy will usually confirm the diagnosis.
Tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients responds well 
to standard short-course therapy (p. 693).
Bacterial pneumonia
The incidence of bacterial pneumonia is increased about 
100-fold by HIV infection. The severity, likelihood 
of bacteraemia, risk of recurrent pneumonia, and mor-
tality are all increased compared with HIV-uninfected 
patients. The aetiology is similar to that of community-
acquired pneumonia in HIV-uninfected patients with 
co-morbidity: S. pneumoniae is the commonest, followed 
by Haemophilus influenzae, enterobacteriaceae (e.g. Kleb­
siella pneumoniae) and Staphylococcus aureus. The preva-
lence of atypical bacteria in HIV-infected patients with 
pneumonia is probably similar to that in the general 
population, but the data are limited. Treatment is with 
a broad-spectrum β-lactam (e.g. ceftriaxone, amoxicillin–
clavulanate), with the addition of a macrolide if the 
pneumonia is severe.
Uncommon bacteria causing pneumonia include 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Nocardia (which mimics tuber-
culosis) and Rhodococcus equi (which can cause pulmo-
nary cavities).
Miscellaneous causes of 
pulmonary infiltrates
Pulmonary cryptococcosis may present as a component 
of disseminated disease or be limited to the lungs. The 
chest X-ray appearances are variable. Cryptococcomas 
occur less commonly than in HIV-uninfected people. 
The commonest radiographic pattern seen in HIV infec-
tion is patchy consolidation, often with small areas 
of cavitation resembling tuberculosis. Pleural involve-
ment is rare. The endemic mycoses (histoplasmosis, 
coccidioido­mycosis and penicilliosis) often also cause 
non-specific pulmonary infiltrates.
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis is a slowly pro-
gressive disorder with a diffuse reticulonodular infil-
trate. It is caused by a benign polyclonal lymphocytic 
interstitial infiltrate and is part of the diffuse infiltra-
tive lymphocytosis syndrome (DILS – see p. 404). 
Patients may have other features of DILS, notably 
parotidomegaly.
Kaposi’s sarcoma often spreads to the lungs. Typical 
chest X-ray appearances are large, irregular nodules, 
linear reticular pattern and pleural effusions. Bronch­
oscopy is diagnostic.
•	 Tuberculosis progresses more rapidly, with a 
subacute or even acute presentation. Therefore the 
diagnosis needs to be made and therapy 
commenced promptly. A trial of empirical therapy 
is often started while awaiting the results of 
mycobacterial cultures.
•	 The chest X-ray appearance alters: cavities are 
rarely seen, pulmonary infiltrates are no longer 
predominantly in apical areas, and pleural effusions 
and hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy are 
common (Fig. 14.10). A normal chest X-ray is not 
unusual in symptomatic patients with tuberculosis 
confirmed on sputum culture. These atypical 
findings can result in delayed or missed diagnosis.
Fig. 14.9  Pneumocystis pneumonia: typical chest X-ray 
appearance. Note the interstitial bilateral infiltrate. 
Fig. 14.10  Chest X-ray of pulmonary tuberculosis in advanced 
HIV infection. Lower-zone infiltrates and hilar or mediastinal nodes in a 
patient with a CD4 count of less than 200 cells/mm3. 
HIV infection and AIDS
14
402
CMV encephalitis
This presents with behavioural disturbance, cognitive 
impairment and a reduced level of consciousness. Focal 
signs may also occur. Detection of CMV DNA in the CSF 
supports the diagnosis. Response to anti-CMV therapy 
is poor.
Space-occupying lesions
Space-occupying lesions in AIDS patients typically 
present over days to weeks. The most common cause is 
toxoplasmosis. As toxoplasmosis responds rapidly to 
therapy, a trial of anti-toxoplasmosis therapy should be 
given to all patients presenting with space-occupying 
lesions while the results of diagnostic tests are being 
awaited.
Cerebral toxoplasmosis
Cerebral toxoplasmosis is caused by reactivation of 
residual Toxoplasma gondii cysts from past infection, 
which results in the development of space-occupying 
lesions. The characteristic findings on imaging are 
multiple space-occupying lesions with ring enhance-
ment on contrast and surrounding oedema (Fig. 14.13). 
Toxoplasma serology shows evidence of previous expo-
sure (positive immunoglobulin (Ig)G antibodies). The 
standard therapy for toxoplasmosis is sulfadiazine 
with pyrimethamine, together with folinic acid, to 
reduce the risk of bone marrow suppression. However, 
co-trimoxazole has been shown to be as effective and 
less toxic, and is also more widely available. Response 
to a trial of therapy is usually diagnostic, with clinical 
improvement in 1–2 weeks and shrinkage of lesions on 
imaging in 2–4 weeks. Definitive diagnosis is by brain 
biopsy but this is seldom necessary.
Primary CNS lymphoma (PCNSL)
Primary CNS lymphomas (PCNSLs) are high-grade 
B-cell lymphomas associated with EBV infection. 
Characteristically, imaging demonstrates a single, 
Nervous system and eye disease
The central and peripheral nervous systems are com-
monly involved in HIV, either as a direct consequence 
of HIV infection or due to opportunistic diseases. Pres-
entations are outlined in Figure 14.11.
Cognitive impairment
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders
HIV is a neurotropic virus and invades the CNS early 
during infection. Meningo-encephalitis may occur at 
seroconversion. About 50% of HIV-infected people 
have abnormal neuropsychiatric testing, the proportion 
increasing with declining CD4 counts. The term HIV-
associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) describes 
a spectrum of disorders: asymptomatic neurocognitive 
impairment (which is the most common), minor neuro-
cognitive disorder and HIV-associated dementia (also 
called HIV encephalopathy). Dementia occurs in late 
disease and is a subcortical dementia characterised by 
impairment of executive function, psychomotor retarda-
tion and impaired memory. There is no diagnostic test 
for HIV-associated dementia. CT or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) shows diffuse cerebral atrophy out of 
keeping with age. It is important to exclude depression, 
cryptococcal meningitis and neurosyphilis. ART usually 
improves HIV-associated dementia, but milder forms of 
HAND often persist.
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy (PML) is a 
progressive disease that presents with stroke-like epi-
sodes and cognitive impairment. Vision is often impaired 
due to involvement of the occipital cortex. PML is caused 
by the JC virus. A combination of characteristic appear-
ances on MRI (Fig. 14.12) and detection of JC virus DNA 
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by PCR is diagnostic. No 
specific treatment exists and prognosis remains poor 
despite ART.
Fig. 14.11  Presentation and differential diagnosis of HIV-related 
neurological disorders. (CMV = cytomegalovirus; HAND = HIV-
associated neurocognitive disorder; PCNSL = primary CNS lymphoma; 
PML = progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy; TB = tuberculosis) 
Neurological presentation
Space-occupying
lesion
Cognitive
impairment
Meningitis
Toxoplasmosis
PCNSL
Tuberculoma
Cryptococcoma
Cryptococcal
Tuberculous
Pneumococcal
HIV
HAND
Depression
Neurosyphilis
Cryptococcal
meningitis
PML
CMV
encephalitis
Fig. 14.12  Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy. 
Non-enhancing white-matter lesions without surrounding oedema are seen. 
Presenting problems in HIV infection 
14
403
elsewhere. The CSF may show features consistent with 
tuberculous meningitis. Response to antituberculosis 
therapy is slow and paradoxical expansion of lesions 
despite therapy is not uncommon.
Stroke
There is a higher incidence of stroke in patients with HIV 
disease. Atherosclerosis is accelerated by HIV-associated 
inflammation and by some antiretroviral drugs. HIV 
vasculopathy with occlusion can cause a stroke. The 
aetiology is thought to be a vasculitis. It is important to 
exclude tuberculous meningitis and meningovascular 
syphilis in all patients who present with a stroke.
Meningitis
Cryptococcal meningitis
Cryptococcus neoformans is the most common cause of 
meningitis in AIDS patients. Patients usually present 
subacutely with headache, vomiting and mild confu-
sion. Neck stiffness is present in less than half. CSF pleo-
cytosis is often mild or even absent, and protein and 
glucose concentrations are variable. It is important to 
request CSF cryptococcal antigen tests in all HIV-infected 
patients undergoing lumbar puncture, as this test has a 
sensitivity and specificity of almost 100%. Treatment is 
with amphotericin B (plus flucytosine if available) for 
2 weeks, followed by fluconazole. Raised intracranial 
pressure is common and should be treated with repeated 
therapeutic lumbar punctures, removing sufficient CSF 
to reduce pressure to less than 20 cmH2O. (Most experts 
would be reluctant to withdraw more than 30 mL at 
a time.)
Tuberculous meningitis
The presentation and CSF findings of tuberculous men-
ingitis are similar to those in HIV-uninfected patients 
(p. 1201), except that concomitant tuberculosis at other 
sites is more common in HIV infection.
Peripheral nerve disease
HIV infection causes axonal degeneration, resulting in a 
sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy in about one-third 
of AIDS patients. The incidence is increased with lower 
CD4 counts, older age and increased height. Sensory 
symptoms predominate. Treatment involves foot care, 
analgesia and analgesic adjuvants. ART has minimal 
effect on halting or reversing the process. The NRTIs 
stavudine and didanosine can cause drug-induced 
peripheral neuropathy, which is typically more painful 
and more rapidly progressive than HIV neuropathy. It 
may remit if the offending drug is withdrawn early.
Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
is an uncommon manifestation, usually occurring in 
primary infection. It resembles Guillain–Barré syndrome 
(p. 1224), except that CSF pleocytosis is more prominent. 
Mononeuritis may also occur, commonly involving the 
facial nerve.
Myelopathy and radiculopathy
Globally, the most common cause of myelopathy in HIV 
infection is cord compression from tuberculous spondyl­
itis. Vacuolar myelopathy is seen in advanced disease 
and is due to HIV. It presents with a slowly progressive 
homogeneously enhancing, periventricular lesion with 
surrounding oedema (Fig. 14.14). If it is considered safe 
to perform a lumbar puncture, PCR for EBV DNA in the 
CSF has a high sensitivity and specificity for PCNSL. 
Brain biopsy is definitive, but carries a risk of morbidity 
and may be non-diagnostic in up to one-third. The prog-
nosis is very poor.
Tuberculoma
Lesions resemble toxoplasmosis on imaging, except that 
oedema tends to be less marked and single lesions occur 
more commonly. There may be evidence of tuberculosis 
Fig. 14.13  Cerebral toxoplasmosis. Multiple ring-enhancing lesions 
with surrounding oedema are characteristic. 
Fig. 14.14  Primary CNS lymphoma. A single enhancing periventricular 
lesion with moderate oedema is typical. 
HIV infection and AIDS
14
404
infiltration of tissues, which has some features in 
common with Sjögren’s syndrome (p. 1114). It is linked 
to human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-DRB1. Most patients 
have a CD8 lymphocytosis. DILS usually presents in 
patients with mild immune suppression. The most 
common manifestation is bilateral parotid gland enlarge-
ment; the glands are often massive, with lymphoepithe-
lial cysts on histology (Fig. 14.15). Other salivary glands 
may also be enlarged. Sicca symptoms are common but 
usually mild. Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis is 
the most common manifestation outside the salivary 
glands. Generalised lymphadenopathy with nodes, 
larger than those seen with persistent generalised lym-
phadenopathy of HIV, may occur. Hepatitis, mono­
neuritis, polyarthritis and polymyositis may also occur. 
The manifestations outside the salivary glands usually 
respond to steroids. The parotid glands are treated for 
cosmetic reasons but surgery is best avoided. Aspiration 
of parotid cysts and instillation of a sclerosant are of 
some benefit. Low-dose irradiation has also been used 
successfully. DILS may regress on ART but response is 
variable.
Haematological abnormalities
Disorders of all three major cell lines may occur in 
HIV. In advanced disease, haematopoiesis is impaired 
due to the direct effect of HIV and by cytokines. Pan­
cytopenia may occur as a consequence of HIV but it is 
important to exclude a disorder infiltrating the bone 
marrow, such as mycobacterial or fungal infections, or 
lymphoma.
Anaemia
Normochromic, normocytic anaemia is very common in 
advanced HIV disease. Opportunistic diseases may 
cause anaemia of chronic disease (e.g. tuberculosis) or 
marrow infiltration (e.g. MAC, tuberculosis, lymphoma, 
fungi). Anaemia is a common adverse effect of zidovu-
dine, which also causes a macrocytosis. Red cell aplasia 
paraparesis with no sensory level. MRI of the spine is 
normal, but is an important investigation to exclude 
other causes. Most patients have concomitant HIV-
associated dementia.
CMV polyradiculitis presents with painful legs, pro-
gressive flaccid paraparesis, saddle anaesthesia, absent 
reflexes and sphincter dysfunction. CSF shows a neutro­
phil pleocytosis (which is unusual for a viral infection), 
and the detection of CMV DNA by PCR confirms the 
diagnosis. Despite treatment with ganciclovir or valgan-
ciclovir, functional recovery is poor.
Psychiatric disease
Significant psychiatric morbidity is very common and is 
a major risk factor for poor adherence. Reactive depres-
sion is the most common disorder. Diagnosis is often 
difficult, as many patients have concomitant HAND. 
Substance misuse is common in many groups of people 
at risk of HIV. Some forms of ART can cause psychiatric 
adverse effects and these are detailed on page 409.
Retinopathy
CMV retinitis presents with painless, progressive visual 
loss in patients with severe immune suppression. On 
fundoscopy the vitreous is clear. Haemorrhages and 
exudates are seen in the retina (p. 388), often with 
sheathing of vessels (‘frosted branch angiitis’). The 
disease usually starts unilaterally, but progressive bilat-
eral involvement occurs in most untreated patients. 
Diagnosis is usually clinical, but if there is doubt, dem-
onstrating CMV DNA by PCR of vitreous fluid is diag-
nostic. Treatment with ganciclovir or valganciclovir 
stops progression of the disease, but vision does not 
recover. Some patients may develop immune recovery 
uveitis in response to ART, with intraocular inflamma-
tion, macular oedema and cataract formation that 
requires prompt treatment with oral and intraocular cor-
ticosteroids to prevent visual loss.
Three other conditions may mimic CMV retinitis. 
Like CMV, they all occur in patients with CD4 counts 
below 100 cells/mm3. Ocular toxoplasmosis typically 
presents with a vitritis and retinitis without retinal 
haemorrhages. HIV retinopathy is a microangiopathy 
that causes cotton wool spots, which are not sight-
threatening. Varicella zoster virus can cause rapidly pro-
gressive outer retinal necrosis.
Rheumatological disease
The immune dysregulation associated with HIV infec-
tion may result in autoantibody formation, usually in 
low titres. Mild arthralgias and a fibromyalgia-like syn-
drome are common in HIV-infected people.
Arthritis
HIV can cause a seronegative arthritis, which resembles 
rheumatoid arthritis. A more benign oligoarthritis may 
also occur. Reactive arthritis and Reiter’s syndrome are 
more severe in HIV infection (Ch. 25).
Diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis 
syndrome
Diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis syndrome (DILS) is a 
benign disorder involving polyclonal CD8 lymphocytic 
Fig. 14.15  CT scan of parotid glands showing multiple cysts 
(arrows) in a patient with the diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis 
syndrome. 
Prevention of opportunistic infections
14
405
HIV-related cancers
The AIDS-defining cancers are Kaposi’s sarcoma (see 
above), cervical cancer and non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
(NHL – p. 1043). NHL may occur at any CD4 count but 
is more commonly seen below 200 cells/mm3. Almost 
all NHL are B-cell tumours and most are stage 4 when 
the patient presents. Long-term remission rates of about 
50% can be achieved with NHL in AIDS patients using 
ART and chemotherapy (including the anti-B-cell mono-
clonal antibody rituximab if it is a B-cell tumour).
The incidence of a number of other cancers induced 
by viruses is also increased in HIV-infected people (Box 
14.13). Regular cytological examination of the cervix, 
and of the anus in people who practise anal sex, should 
be performed to detect pre-malignant lesions, which are 
easier to treat. In general, the incidence of cancers that 
are not induced by viruses is similar to that in the general 
population.
PREVENTION OF OPPORTUNISTIC 
INFECTIONS
The best way to prevent opportunistic infections is to 
improve the CD4 count with ART. However, infections 
continue to occur in the ART era; CD4 counts take time 
to improve if ART is initiated in patients with profound 
immune suppression, immune reconstitution on ART is 
often suboptimal, and CD4 counts may decline because 
antiretroviral resistance develops.
Preventing exposure
The best method for avoiding infection is to prevent 
exposure to the infectious agent. However, this is only 
possible for a few opportunistic infections. The patho-
genesis of several of these is thought to be reactivation 
of latent/dormant infection after prior exposure – exam-
ples include herpes simplex virus, zoster, CMV and 
toxoplasmosis. Preventing exposure to some of these 
infections is thus only of benefit if exposure has not 
already occurred.
is rare and may be caused either by parvovirus B19 
infection or by lamivudine.
Neutropenia
Isolated neutropenia is occasionally due to HIV but is 
nearly always caused by drug toxicity (e.g. zidovudine, 
co-trimoxazole, ganciclovir).
Thrombocytopenia
Mild thrombocytopenia is common in HIV-infected 
people. The most common disorder causing severe 
thrombocytopenia is immune-mediated platelet destruc-
tion resembling idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(p. 1050). This responds to steroids or intravenous 
immunoglobulin, together with ART. Splenectomy 
should be avoided if possible because it further 
increases the risk of infection with encapsulated bacte-
ria. Severe thrombocytopenia with a microangiopathic 
anaemia also occurs in a thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura-like illness (p. 1056), which seems to have a 
better prognosis than the classical disease. Transient 
thrombocytopenia is common in primary infection.
Renal disease
Acute renal failure is common, usually due to acute 
infection or nephrotoxicity of drugs (e.g. tenofovir, 
p. 481), amphotericin B). HIV-associated nephropathy 
(HIVAN) is the most important cause of chronic renal 
failure and is seen most frequently in patients of African 
descent and those with low CD4 counts. Progression to 
end-stage renal failure is more rapid than with most 
other causes of chronic renal failure, and renal size may 
be preserved even when it is severe. HIVAN usually 
presents with nephrotic syndrome, chronic renal failure 
or a combination of both. ART has some effect in slowing 
progression of HIVAN. Other important HIV-associated 
renal diseases include HIV immune complex kidney dis-
eases and thrombotic microangiopathy. With the overall 
improvement in life expectancy from ART, conditions 
such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension and vascular 
disease add to the burden of chronic kidney disease. 
Outcomes of renal transplantation are good in patients 
on ART.
Cardiac disease
HIV-associated cardiomyopathy resembles idiopathic 
dilated cardiomyopathy (p. 636) but progresses more 
rapidly. ART may improve cardiac failure but does not 
reverse established cardiomyopathy. Pericardial disease 
due to opportunistic diseases is not uncommon. Glo-
bally, the most common cause is tuberculous pericardial 
effusions. Tuberculous constrictive pericarditis is less 
common than in HIV-uninfected people. Kaposi’s 
sarcoma and lymphoma may cause pericardial effu-
sions. Septic pericarditis, usually due to S. pneumoniae, 
is uncommon.
HIV is associated with an increased risk of myocar-
dial infarction due to accelerated atherogenesis caused 
by the inflammatory state. Certain protease inhibitors 
(p. 407) that cause dyslipidaemia have been associated 
with an increased risk of myocardial infarction.
Viral cancers
Incidence ratio
Human herpesvirus 8-related
Kaposi’s sarcoma
3600
Epstein–Barr virus-related
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
80
Hodgkin lymphoma
10
Human papillomavirus-related
Cervical cancer
6
Vulval cancer
6
Anal cancer
30
Penile cancer
4
Hepatitis B/C virus-related
Hepatoma
5
14.13  Approximate incidence ratio of virus-related 
cancers compared to the general population
HIV infection and AIDS
14
406
evidence of immune suppression (CD4 count below 
200 cells/mm3). In low-income countries, there is con-
siderable morbidity from infectious diseases (including 
malaria) in earlier HIV disease, and the WHO recom-
mends initiating co-trimoxazole at a CD4 count of less 
than 350 cells/mm3, or at WHO stages 2–4. The recom-
mended dose of co-trimoxazole is 960 mg daily, but 
trials have shown that half this dose is as effective and 
may be associated with less toxicity. Co-trimoxazole 
prophylaxis can be discontinued when CD4 counts 
increase to more than 200 cells/mm3 on ART.
Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis is well tolerated. The 
most common side-effect is hypersensitivity, causing a 
maculo-papular rash. If therapy is discontinued, desen-
sitisation or rechallenge under antihistamine cover 
should be attempted, unless the rash was accompanied 
by systemic symptoms or mucosal involvement. Pro-
phylactic doses of co-trimoxazole can also cause neutro-
penia, but this is very uncommon and routine monitoring 
of blood counts is not necessary. If co-trimoxazole 
cannot be tolerated, then dapsone 100 mg daily should 
be substituted. Dapsone is equally effective at reducing 
the incidence of P. jirovecii pneumonia, but has little or 
no effect on reducing the other opportunistic infections 
prevented by co-trimoxazole.
Isoniazid preventive therapy
Isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) has been shown to 
reduce the risk of tuberculosis only in HIV-infected 
patients with a positive tuberculin skin test, which 
should be done in all patients at baseline. There is no 
CD4 count or clinical threshold for starting or stopping 
IPT. In HIV infection, induration of 5 mm or more on a 
Mantoux test is regarded as positive. It is important to 
rule out active tuberculosis before starting IPT, and 
symptom screening has been shown to be adequate to 
achieve this (Box 14.16). The usual duration of IPT is 
Safe water and food
Cryptosporidiosis, microsporidiosis and isosporiasis 
may be water-borne. If there is no access to safe water, 
then water should be boiled before drinking. Food-
borne illnesses are also important in HIV infection, 
notably Salmonella species. Toxoplasma exposure is 
related to eating raw or undercooked meat. People 
living with HIV infection need to be informed about 
food hygiene and the importance of adequately cooked 
meat.
Tuberculosis
Preventing exposure to tuberculosis is important when 
there is an infectious case in the household, in clinics 
and in hospitals. Adequate ventilation, masks and safe 
coughing procedures reduce the risk of exposure.
Malaria vector control
All HIV-infected individuals living in malarious areas 
should practise vector control, as malaria occurs more 
frequently and is more severe in HIV-infected people. 
The most cost-effective way to achieve this is by using 
insecticide-impregnated bed nets. Other modalities of 
vector control that are of benefit to the community, such 
as reducing standing water and spraying with residual 
insecticides and larvicides, should also be implemented.
Safer sex
HIV-infected individuals should practise safer sex in 
order to reduce the transmission of HIV. Even if their 
partners are HIV-infected, condoms should be used, as 
HIV mutants that are more virulent or have developed 
antiretroviral drug resistance can be transmitted. Safer 
sex will also lower the risk of acquiring herpes simplex 
virus and human herpesvirus 8.
Pets
Toxoplasma gondii can be acquired from kittens or cat 
litter, and people living with HIV infection should avoid 
handling either. Cryptosporidiosis can be transmitted 
from animals, and patients should be advised to wash 
their hands after handling animals.
Chemoprophylaxis
Chemoprophylaxis is the use of antimicrobial agents 
to prevent infections. Primary prophylaxis is used to 
prevent opportunistic infections that have not yet 
occurred. Secondary prophylaxis is used to prevent 
recurrence of opportunistic infections because many 
may recur after an initial response to therapy. Secondary 
prophylaxis (Box 14.14) can be discontinued when ART 
results in immune reconstitution, with CD4 counts 
increasing to over 200 cells/mm3, but for CMV and 
MAC, prophylaxis can be stopped if CD4 counts increase 
to more than 100 cells/mm3.
Co-trimoxazole primary prophylaxis
Co-trimoxazole reduces the incidence of a number of 
opportunistic infections (Box 14.15), as well as hospitali-
sation and mortality rates. The indications for initiating 
co-trimoxazole are either clinical evidence of immune 
suppression (WHO clinical stages 3 or 4) or laboratory 
Infection
Drug regimen
Pneumocystis jirovecii 
pneumonia
Co-trimoxazole 960 mg daily
Toxoplasmosis
Co-trimoxazole 960 mg daily
Cryptococcosis
Fluconazole 200 mg daily
Cytomegalovirus infection
Valganciclovir 900 mg daily
Mycobacterium avium 
complex
Clarithromycin 500 mg twice 
daily +
Ethambutol 800 mg daily
Isospora belli infection
Co-trimoxazole 960 mg daily
14.14  Secondary prophylaxis of 
opportunistic infections
•	 Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
•	 Cerebral toxoplasmosis
•	 Bacterial pneumonia
•	 Bacteraemia
•	 Isosporiasis
•	 Malaria
14.15  Opportunistic infections reduced 
by co-trimoxazole
Antiretroviral therapy
14
407
6 months but this does not provide long-term reduction 
in the risk of tuberculosis. Continuation for 36 months 
has been shown to be much more effective (Box 14.17).
Mycobacterium avium complex
In high-income countries, a macrolide (azithromycin or 
clarithromycin) is recommended to prevent MAC in 
patients with a CD4 count below 50 cells/mm3. This can 
be discontinued once the CD4 count has risen to over 
100 cells/mm3 on ART.
Immunisation
There are significant problems associated with vaccina-
tion in HIV infection. First, vaccination with live organ-
isms is contraindicated in patients with severe immune 
suppression, as this may result in disease from the atten-
uated organisms. Second, immune responses to vaccina-
tion are impaired in HIV-infected patients. If the CD4 
count is below 200 cells/mm3, then immune responses 
to immunisation are very poor. Therefore it is preferable 
to wait until the CD4 count has increased to more than 
200 cells/mm3 on ART before immunisation is given. All 
patients should be given a conjugate pneumococcal 
vaccine (not the polysaccharide vaccine, which has been 
shown to be harmful) and annual influenza vaccination. 
Hepatitis B vaccination should be given to those who are 
not immune.
ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY
ART that is capable of suppressing viral replication has 
been available since 1996. ART has transformed HIV 
from a progressive illness with a fatal outcome into a 
chronic manageable disease (Box 14.18).
The goals of ART are to:
•	 reduce the viral load to an undetectable level for as 
long as possible
•	 improve the CD4 count to over 200 cells/mm3 so 
that severe HIV-related disease is unlikely
•	 improve the quantity and quality of life without 
unacceptable drug toxicity
•	 reduce HIV transmission.
Many of the antiretroviral drugs which were used 
initially have been largely abandoned because of toxicity 
or poor efficacy. The drugs that are currently most com-
monly used are shown in Box 14.19, and their targets in 
the HIV life cycle in Figure 14.2 (p. 392).
Selecting antiretroviral regimens
The standard combination antiretroviral regimens are 
two NRTIs together with an NNRTI, protease inhibitor 
(PI) or integrase inhibitor. Dual NRTI combinations are 
usually emtricitabine or lamivudine (they are closely 
related and so are never combined) together with one of 
abacavir, tenofovir or zidovudine. It is possible to con-
struct effective regimens without NRTIs if there is intol-
erance or resistance to the NRTIs. Currently used PIs 
should always be administered with ritonavir, which 
itself is a PI that is toxic in therapeutic doses. Low doses 
of ritonavir dramatically increase the concentrations and 
elimination half-lives of other PIs by inhibiting their 
metabolism by cytochrome P450. This increases drug 
exposure, thereby prolonging the PI’s half-life, allowing 
reduction in pill burden and dosing frequency, and so 
optimising adherence.
Most guidelines from high-income countries allow 
clinicians to choose a starting regimen of dual NRTIs 
combined with an NNRTI, or a PI or an integrase inhibi-
tor, as these three regimens have similar efficacy. Subse-
quent ART regimen switches for virological failure are 
guided by the results of resistance testing (p. 408). For 
low- and middle-income countries, the WHO recom-
mends a public health approach to using ART with 
standardised first-line (NNRTI plus dual NRTIs) and 
second-line (ritonavir-boosted PI plus dual NRTIs) regi-
mens. NNRTIs are preferred by the WHO in first-line 
regimens, as they are cheaper than PIs and better toler-
ated. Furthermore, NNRTIs need to be given with two 
fully active NRTIs because they have a low genetic 
All of the following must be absent:
•	 Active cough
•	 Weight loss
•	 Night sweats
•	 Fever
14.16  Symptom screen for tuberculosis before 
isoniazid preventive therapy
‘Thirty-six months’ isoniazid prophylaxis was more effective for 
prevention of tuberculosis than 6-month prophylaxis in 
individuals with HIV infection, and chiefly benefited those who 
were tuberculin skin test-positive.’
•	 Samandari T, et al. Lancet 2011; 377:1588–1598.
14.17  Duration of isoniazid preventive therapy
‘A mathematical model predicted that people with HIV who can 
access ART will have life expectancy shortened by only 7 or  
10.5 years, depending on whether ART is started early (CD4 
count 432) or late (CD4 count 140) respectively.’
•	 Nakagawa F, et al. AIDS 2012; 26:335–343.
14.18  Life expectancy on ART
Classes
Drugs
Nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors 
(NRTIs)
Abacavir, emtricitabine, 
lamivudine, tenofovir, 
zidovudine
Non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors 
(NNRTIs)
Efavirenz, nevirapine, 
etravirine
Protease inhibitors (PIs)
Atazanavir, darunavir, lopinavir
Integrase inhibitors
Raltegravir
Chemokine receptor 
inhibitor
Maraviroc
14.19  Commonly used antiretroviral drugs
HIV infection and AIDS
14
408
typically increases by 100–150 cells/mm3, and about 
80 cells/mm3 per annum thereafter until the reference 
range is reached, provided the viral load is suppressed. 
If ART is stopped, the CD4 count rapidly falls to the 
baseline value before ART was commenced. For coun-
tries where viral load monitoring is unavailable, the 
WHO has defined immunological failure as a fall in CD4 
count to baseline, or a 50% fall from peak on ART, or 
persistent count below 100 cells/mm3. However, CD4 
responses are highly variable: in about 15–30% of 
patients the CD4 count does not increase despite viro-
logical suppression, and in a similar proportion of 
patients the CD4 response is good despite the presence 
of virological failure. Therefore it is not surprising that 
both unnecessary switches to second-line ART and con-
tinuation of failing first-line ART regimens (which will 
increase the number of resistance mutations) are 
common in settings where viral load monitoring is not 
available.
Antiretroviral resistance
Reverse transcription is error-prone, generating a large 
number of mutations. If the viral load is suppressed on 
ART, viral replication is suppressed and resistance 
mutations will not be selected. If ART is taken and there 
is ongoing replication, due to either resistant mutations 
or suboptimal adherence, mutations conferring resist-
ance to antiretroviral drugs will be selected. Antiretro-
viral drugs differ in their ability to select for resistant 
mutations. Some drugs (e.g. emtricitabine, lamivudine, 
efavirenz, nevirapine) have a low genetic barrier to 
resistance, rapidly selecting for a single mutation confer-
ring high-level resistance. PIs and some NRTIs (e.g. 
zidovudine) select for resistance mutations slowly, and 
multiple resistant mutations often need to accumulate 
before the drug’s efficacy is lost. Patients who develop 
antiretroviral resistance may transmit resistant virus to 
others and will eventually develop clinical failure.
Antiretroviral resistance is assessed by sequencing 
the relevant viral genes to detect mutations that are 
known to confer resistance. The resistant proviral DNA 
is archived in latent CD4 cells and will re-emerge rapidly 
on exposure to the antiretroviral. The patient must 
therefore be taking ART when the test is performed, as 
otherwise the wild-type virus will predominate and 
resistant mutations will not be detected. In regions 
where resistance testing is affordable, it is recommended 
at baseline (to detect primary resistance) and at every 
confirmed virological failure, in order to select the most 
appropriate antiretrovirals in a new regimen.
ART complications
Immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) 
is a common (15–20%) early complication of ART, espe-
cially in patients who start it with CD4 counts below 
50 cells/mm3. IRIS presents either with paradoxical 
deterioration of an existing opportunistic disease (includ­
ing infections that are responding to appropriate 
therapy) or with the unmasking of a new infection. The 
clinical presentation of IRIS events is often characterised 
barrier to resistance (see below), whereas PI-containing 
regimens are effective even when there are some muta-
tions conferring resistance to the NRTIs. Therefore PIs 
in second-line regimens are preferable in settings where 
resistance testing is unavailable. The public health 
approach to using ART can be implemented by nurses 
and has been successfully implemented in resource-poor 
settings.
Criteria for starting ART
The 2010 WHO guidelines recommend starting ART 
in adults with either a CD4 count below 350 cells/mm3 
or clinical stage 3–4. Other international guidelines 
are very similar, but criteria are updated regularly 
and it is likely that starting ART at higher CD4 
counts will be recommended in the near future. HIV-
infected partners in serodiscordant couples should com-
mence ART irrespective of their CD4 count or clinical 
stage to reduce the risk of transmission to the uninfected 
partner (Box 14.20). Other categories of patients who 
should start ART earlier include those with chronic liver 
disease from viral hepatitis, non-AIDS malignancies, 
and conditions requiring long-term immunosuppres-
sant therapy.
It is seldom necessary to start ART urgently. Several 
consultations are required to give patients insight into 
the need for life-long ART, to stress the importance of 
adherence, and to formulate a personal treatment plan. 
Disclosure of HIV status, joining support groups and 
using patient-nominated treatment supporters should 
be encouraged, as these have been shown to improve 
adherence. Management of depression and substance 
abuse is also important.
‘In serodiscordant couples, early initiation of ART reduced rates 
of sexual transmission of HIV-1 by 96%, and led to a 41% 
reduction in the combined end point of major clinical events or 
death.’
•	 Cohen MS, et al. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:493–505.
14.20  When should ART be started?
Monitoring efficacy
The most important measure of ART efficacy is the viral 
load. A baseline viral load should be measured prior to 
initiating treatment. The viral load should be repeated 
4–8 weeks after starting a new ART regimen when the 
count should show at least a tenfold decrease. Thereafter 
it should be checked every 3–6 months. After 6 months 
of ART, the viral load should be suppressed, defined as 
below the limit of detection of the assay (usually less 
than 50 copies/mL), and this is achieved in 80–90% of 
patients. Failure of ART is defined by the viral load 
becoming detectable after suppression. (In most guide-
lines a threshold is used – typically more than 400 or 
more than 1000 copies/mL.) Adherence support should 
be enhanced if virological failure is detected, and the 
viral load repeated to confirm failure before switching 
to a new ART regimen.
CD4 
counts 
are 
generally 
monitored 
every 
3–6 months together with the viral load. Typically, the 
CD4 count increases rapidly in the first month, followed 
by a more gradual increase. In the first year, the count 
Antiretroviral therapy
14
409
is HLA-associated. HLA-B*5701 has a 100% negative 
predictive value for abacavir hypersensitivity. HLA 
testing should be done before abacavir is given and the 
drug should not be prescribed for people who are 
HLA-B*5701-positive. This is rare in people of African 
descent. Rechallenge must never be attempted after 
abacavir hypersensitivity, as fatal reactions may occur.
Drug rashes are very common with NNRTIs. When 
the NNRTI rash is mild and not accompanied by sys-
temic involvement, the suspected drug is often con­
tinued and antihistamines are administered. The rash 
usually resolves. If it worsens or if systemic features 
develop, the NNRTI should be discontinued.
Other adverse effects
The NNRTI efavirenz causes insomnia, agitation, eupho-
ria or dysphoria in many patients, but tolerance to its 
neuropsychiatric effects develops in a few weeks in 
most. The NRTI zidovudine can cause anaemia and neu-
tropenia, and tenofovir may cause nephrotoxicity. PIs 
are associated with dyslipidaemias and may increase the 
risk of myocardial infarction.
ART in special situations
Pregnancy
All pregnant women should routinely be recommended 
for HIV testing at an early stage in pregnancy, with 
rapid tests for those presenting in or just after labour. 
The CD4 count falls by about 25% during pregnancy due 
to haemodilution. The course of HIV disease progres-
sion is not altered by pregnancy. Pre-ART, the rate of 
mother-to-child transmission was 15–40%, with rates 
being influenced by several factors (see Box 14.3, p. 391). 
ART has dramatically reduced the risk of mother- 
to-child transmission of HIV to less than 1%. All preg-
nant women who qualify for ART for their own health 
should start treatment at the beginning of the second 
trimester. If they have severe disease, they should start 
ART in the first trimester. Two ART strategies are cur-
rently used to prevent mother-to-child transmission for 
women who do not yet require ongoing ART: commence 
standard ART and discontinue at delivery or after 
weaning; or zidovudine monotherapy, usually started 
at 28 weeks, augmented with single-dose nevirapine 
at delivery. The latter approach is widely used in 
low- and middle-income countries. A randomised con-
trolled trial is under way in order to assess which strat-
egy is more effective.
Caesarean section is associated with a lower risk of 
mother-to-child transmission than vaginal delivery, but 
the mode of delivery does not affect transmission risk if 
the viral load is suppressed on ART.
HIV is also transmitted by breastfeeding. In high-
income countries, exclusive formula feeding is generally 
recommended. However in resource-poor settings, 
formula feeding is associated with a risk of infant mor-
bidity and mortality, which may negate the benefit of 
not transmitting HIV to the infant. Furthermore, provid-
ing antiretrovirals to the infant (usually nevirapine 
mono­therapy) while they are breastfeeding has been 
shown to reduce the risk of transmission. Therefore 
breastfeeding is now encouraged in resource-poor set-
tings. Infants should be exclusively breastfed for the first 
by an exaggerated immune response, with pronounced 
inflammatory features. For example, patients with CMV 
retinitis developing IRIS on ART develop a uveitis; and 
inflammatory haloes occur around KS lesions. Paradoxi-
cal tuberculosis IRIS events are common and it is impor-
tant to exclude multidrug resistance, which could be 
responsible for the deterioration. IRIS is associated with 
a mortality of around 5%, but this is higher when it 
complicates CNS infections.
The management of IRIS is to continue ART and to 
ensure that the opportunistic disease is adequately 
treated. Symptomatic treatments are helpful. Cortico­
steroids are often used for more severe IRIS manifesta-
tions, but they should not be given to patients with KS, 
as this can result in rapid progression of KS lesions.
Lipodystrophy
Long-term use of ART may cause changes in body fat 
distribution. This can present either with fat accumula-
tion (e.g. visceral fat, breast enlargement, ‘buffalo 
hump’) or with subcutaneous fat loss (‘lipoatrophy’ – 
Fig 14.16) or with both fat loss and accumulation. 
The thymidine analogue NRTIs (stavudine and, to a 
lesser extent, zidovudine) are associated with fat loss. 
Switching to the non-thymidine NRTIs abacavir or 
tenofovir will result in very gradual improvement of 
lipoatrophy.
Fig. 14.16  Fat loss complicating long-term use of the thymidine 
analogue NRTIs stavudine and zidovudine. 
Previously, PIs were thought to be the cause of fat 
accumulation. However, recent studies have shown that 
all classes of antiretrovirals are associated with fat gain 
to the same extent. Furthermore, longitudinal studies 
comparing HIV-uninfected people with HIV-infected 
people on long-term ART show that the extent and dis-
tribution of fat gain are similar. These data suggest that 
fat gain is a consequence of treating HIV rather than a 
side-effect of ART.
Rashes
These are common but must be differentiated from the 
other causes described above. The NRTI abacavir typi-
cally causes a systemic hypersensitivity reaction, which 
HIV infection and AIDS
14
410
should be performed at 6, 12 and 24 weeks after 
exposure.
Prevention of HIV
An effective HIV vaccine remains elusive due to the 
extensive genetic diversity of HIV and the lack of a safe 
attenuated virus. Measures for the prevention of HIV 
transmission are shown in Box 14.22.
6 months, as mixed feeding (with formula or solids) is 
associated with a higher risk of transmission.
Diagnosis of HIV in infancy requires the detection of 
HIV RNA by PCR as maternal antibodies to HIV, which 
persist for up to 15 months, will give a false-positive 
result on antibody assays. PCR should ideally be carried 
out within 6 weeks of birth to facilitate early ART initia-
tion, which is recommended for all infants irrespective 
of their CD4 percentage or clinical stage. If the baby is 
breastfed, the PCR should be repeated 2 weeks after 
weaning.
Post-exposure prophylaxis
Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) is recommended when 
the risk is deemed to be significant after a careful risk 
assessment, in both occupational and non-occupational 
settings. The first dose should be given as soon as pos-
sible, preferably within 6–8 hours. There is no point in 
starting PEP after 72 hours. Most guidelines recommend 
dual NRTIs for low-risk exposures, with the addition of 
either a PI or efavirenz in high-risk exposures (see Boxes 
14.2 and 14.3, p. 391). Tenofovir together with emtricit-
abine is the most widely used dual NRTI combination, 
as it is well tolerated and well studied in pre-exposure 
prophylaxis trials. PEP should not be given if the 
exposed person is HIV-infected. HIV antibody testing 
•	 Epidemiology: the HIV-infected population is ageing due to 
the life-prolonging effects of ART.
•	 Immunity: age-related decline increases the risk of 
infections. CD4 counts decline more rapidly as age increases 
over 40 years, resulting in faster disease progression. CD4 
responses to ART decrease with increasing age.
•	 Dementia: HIV causes cerebral atrophy and neurocognitive 
disorders; therefore dementia is more common and more 
severe than in the HIV-uninfected elderly.
•	 Vascular disease: HIV is associated with an increased risk, 
exacerbated by some antiretrovirals that increase the risk of 
vascular disease by causing dyslipidaemia or insulin 
resistance.
•	 Polypharmacy: treating co-morbidities is complex due to the 
many drug interactions with antiretrovirals.
14.21  HIV infection in old age
Sexual
•	 Sex education programmes in schools
•	 Easily accessible voluntary counselling and testing centres
•	 Promotion of safer sex practices (delaying sexual debut, 
condom use, fewer sexual partners)
•	 Effective ART treatment of HIV-infected individuals
•	 Pre-exposure prophylaxis for high-risk groups
•	 Male circumcision
Parenteral
•	 Blood product transmission: donor questionnaire, routine 
screening of donated blood
•	 Injection drug use: education, needle/syringe exchange, 
avoidance of ‘shooting galleries’, methadone maintenance 
programmes
Perinatal
•	 Routine ‘opt-out’ antenatal HIV antibody testing
•	 Measures to reduce vertical transmission (p. 409)
Occupational
•	 Education/training: universal precautions, needlestick injury 
avoidance
•	 Post-exposure prophylaxis
14.22  Prevention measures for HIV transmission
Further information
Websites with updated clinical guidelines
http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines/
http://www.bhiva.org/ClinicalGuidelines.aspx
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/en/
411
15 
Clinical examination in men 412
Clinical examination in women 413
Approach to patients with a  
suspected STI 414
Presenting problems in men 415
Urethral discharge 415
Genital itch and/or rash 415
Genital ulceration 415
Genital lumps 416
Proctitis in men who have sex with men 417
Presenting problems in women 417
Vaginal discharge 417
Lower abdominal pain 418
Genital ulceration 418
Genital lumps 418
Chronic vulval pain and/or itch 418
Sexually transmitted 
infections
G.R. Scott
Prevention of STI 419
Sexually transmitted bacterial infections 419
Syphilis 419
Gonorrhoea 422
Chlamydial infection 423
Other sexually transmitted bacterial  
infections 423
Sexually transmitted viral infections 423
Genital herpes simplex 423
Human papillomavirus and anogenital  
warts 425
Molluscum contagiosum 426
Viral hepatitis 426
Sexually transmitted infections
412
HIV testing
It should always be standard prac-
tice to offer HIV testing as part of 
screening for STI (sexually transmit-
ted infection) because the benefits 
of early diagnosis outweigh other 
considerations. Extensive pre-test 
counselling is not required in most 
instances, but it is important to 
establish 
efficient 
pathways 
for 
referral of patients at high risk for 
whom the clinician wishes specialist 
support, and for those diagnosed as 
HIV-positive.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION IN MEN
Observation
Rectum
(men who have sex with
men practising receptive
anal intercourse)
Perianal area
(Men who have sex with men,
and heterosexual men)
Urethral meatus
Skin of penis
(Retract prepuce if present)
Genital warts
Ulcers
Be aware of normal anatomical
features such as coronal papillae,
or prominent sebaceous or
parafrenal glands
Pubic area
Pthirus pubis (crab louse)
Scrotal contents
Abnormal masses or tenderness
(epididymo-orchitis)
• Mouth
• Eyes
• Joints
• Skin:
    Rash of secondary syphilis
    Scabies
    Manifestations of HIV
    infection (Ch. 14)
Skin around groin
and scrotum
Warts
Tinea cruris
Discharge
Warts
5
8
4
3
2
7
6
Inguinal glands
Significant enlargement
1
Coronal papillae
Proctoscope
Proctitis
• First void urine (FVU)* is the 
specimen of choice for the combined 
nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) 
for gonorrhoea and chlamydia
• Alternatively, for gonorrhoea, a 
urethral swab plated directly on a 
selective medium such as modified 
New York City (MNYC), or sent in an 
appropriate transport medium, can be 
cultured to allow for assessment of 
antimicrobial sensitivities
• Serological test for syphilis (STS), e.g. 
enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for 
antitreponemal immunoglobulin (Ig) G 
antibody
• Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
test (see note)
Investigations for STIs in 
heterosexual males
*A urethral swab can be submitted if the patient 
is unable to pass urine.
• FVU,* and pharyngeal and rectal 
swabs for combined NAAT for 
gonorrhoea and chlamydia
• STS (repeat testing may be necessary 
in the event of negative test results in 
the first few weeks following 
exposure)
• Serological tests for hepatitis A/B 
(with a view to vaccination if 
seronegative)
• HIV test (see note)
Investigations for STIs in 
men who have sex with men
*A urethral swab can be submitted if the patient 
is unable to pass urine.
Clinical examination in women
413
CLINICAL EXAMINATION IN WOMEN
Observation
Vagina and cervix
Abnormal discharge
Warts
Ulcers
Inflammation
In women with lower abdominal
pain, bimanual examination for
adnexal tenderness
(pelvic inflammatory disease)
Perineum and perianal skin
Warts
Ulcers
Pubic area
Abdomen
Abnormal masses or tenderness
Inguinal glands
Significant enlargement
• Mouth
• Eyes
• Joints
• Skin:
    Rash of secondary syphilis
    Scabies
    Manifestations of HIV
    infection (Ch. 14)
Inflammation
3
6
2
1
5
Pthirus pubis (crab louse)
4
Warts
Labia majora and minora
Ulcers
Vulvitis
Speculum
Insets on pp. 412–413 (Perianal warts, coronal papillae, mucopus, inflammation) – see p. 426. 
• Clinician-obtained cervical or vaginal 
swab, or self-taken vaginal swab for 
combined NAAT for gonorrhoea and 
chlamydia
• Alternatively, for gonorrhoea, cervical 
and urethral swabs plated directly on 
a selective medium such as MNYC, or 
sent in appropriate transport medium, 
can be cultured to allow for 
assessment of antimicrobial 
sensitivities
• Wet mount for microscopy or high 
vaginal swab (HVS) for culture of 
Trichomonas
• STS, e.g. EIA for antitreponemal IgG 
antibody
• HIV test (see note)
Investigations for STIs 
in women
• Relief of any symptoms
• Screening for treatable STI that may 
not be causing symptoms
• Tracing and treatment of sexual 
contacts who may also be  
infected
• Advice to reduce risk of infection in 
the future
Management goals in 
suspected STI
• Sex workers, male and female
• Clients of sex workers
• Men who have sex with men
• Injecting drug users (sex for money or 
drugs) and their partners
• Frequent travellers
Those at particular risk 
from STIs*
*Adapted from WHO/UNAIDS, 1997.
Sexually transmitted infections
15
414
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are a group of 
contagious conditions whose principal mode of trans-
mission is by intimate sexual activity involving the 
moist mucous membranes of the penis, vulva, vagina, 
cervix, anus, rectum, mouth and pharynx, along with 
their adjacent skin surfaces. A wide range of infections 
may be sexually transmitted, including syphilis, gonor-
rhoea, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), genital 
herpes, genital warts, chlamydia and trichomoniasis. 
Bacterial vaginosis and genital candidiasis are not 
regarded as STIs, although they are common causes of 
vaginal discharge in sexually active women. Chancroid, 
lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) and granuloma 
inguinale are usually seen in tropical countries. Hepati-
tis viruses A, B, C and D (p. 948) may be acquired sexu-
ally, as well as by other routes.
The World Health Organization estimates that 448 
million curable STIs (Trichomonas vaginalis, Chlamydia 
trachomatis, gonorrhoea and syphilis) occur world-wide 
each year. In the UK in 2010, the most common treatable 
STIs diagnosed were chlamydia (more than 200 000 
cases) and gonorrhoea (19 000 cases). Genital warts are 
the second most common complaint seen in genito­
urinary medicine (GUM) departments. In addition to 
causing morbidity themselves, STIs may increase the 
risk of transmitting or acquiring HIV infection (Ch. 14).
As coincident infection with more than one STI is 
seen frequently, GUM clinics routinely offer a full set of 
investigations at the patient’s first visit (pp. 412–413), 
regardless of the reason for attendance. In other settings, 
less comprehensive investigation may be appropriate.
The extent of the examination largely reflects the like-
lihood of HIV infection or syphilis. Most heterosexuals 
in the UK are at such low risk of these infections that 
routine extragenital examination is unnecessary. This is 
not the case in parts of the world where HIV is endemic, 
or for men who have sex with men (MSM) in the UK. In 
other words, the extent of the examination is determined 
by the sexual history (Box 15.1).
APPROACH TO PATIENTS WITH  
A SUSPECTED STI
Patients concerned about the possible acquisition of an 
STI are often anxious. Staff must be friendly, sympa-
thetic and reassuring; they should have the ability to put 
patients at ease, whilst emphasising that clinic attend-
ance is confidential. The history focuses on genital 
symptoms, with reference to genital ulceration, rash, 
irritation, pain, swelling and urinary symptoms, espe-
cially dysuria. In men, the clinician should ask about 
urethral discharge, and in women, vaginal discharge, 
pelvic pain or dyspareunia. Enquiry about general 
health should include menstrual and obstetric history, 
cervical cytology, recent medication, especially with 
antimicrobial or antiviral agents, previous STI and 
allergy. Immunisation status for hepatitis A and B 
should be noted, as should information about recrea-
tional drug use and alcohol intake.
A detailed sexual history is imperative (see Box 15.1), 
as this informs the clinician of the degree of risk for 
certain infections, as well as specific sites that should be 
sampled; for example, rectal samples should be taken 
from men who have had unprotected anal sex with other 
men. Sexual partners, whether male or female, and 
casual or regular, should be recorded. Sexual practices 
– insertive or receptive vaginal, anal, orogenital or oro­
anal – should be noted, as should choice of contraception 
for women, and condom use for both sexes.
STI during pregnancy
Many STIs can be transmitted from mother to child in 
pregnancy, either transplacentally or during delivery. 
Possible outcomes are highlighted in Box 15.2.
STI in children
The presence of an STI in a child may be indicative of 
sexual abuse, although vertical transmission may explain 
some presentations in the first 2 years. In an older child 
and in adolescents, STI may be the result of voluntary 
• In your lifetime, have your sexual partners been male, female 
or both?
• Do you have a regular sexual partner at present?
• If yes:
How long have you been together?
When did you last have sex with anyone else?
• If no:
When did you last have sex?
Was this a regular or a casual partner?
• Do/did you use a condom?
15.1  How to take a sexual history
Organism
Mode of transmission
Outcome for fetus/neonate
Outcome for mother
Treponema pallidum
Transplacental
Ranges from no effect to severe 
stigmata or miscarriage/stillbirth
None directly relating to the pregnancy
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Intrapartum
Severe conjunctivitis
Possibility of ascending infection 
postpartum
Chlamydia trachomatis
Intrapartum
Conjunctivitis, pneumonia
Possibility of ascending infection 
postpartum
Herpes simplex
Usually intrapartum, but 
transplacental infection 
may occur rarely
Ranges from no effect to severe 
disseminated infection
Rarely, primary infection during 2nd/3rd 
trimesters becomes disseminated, with 
high maternal mortality
Human papillomaviruses
Intrapartum
Anogenital warts or laryngeal 
papillomas are very rare
Warts may become more florid during 
pregnancy, but usually regress postpartum
15.2  Possible outcomes of STI in pregnancy
Presenting problems in men
15
415
gonorrhoea and chlamydia should be taken from the 
rectum.
Management
This depends on local epidemiology and the availability 
of diagnostic resources. Treatment is often presumptive, 
with prescription of multiple antimicrobials to cover the 
possibility of gonorrhoea and/or chlamydia. This is 
likely to include a single-dose treatment for gonorrhoea, 
which is desirable because it eliminates the risk of non-
adherence. The recommended agents for treating gonor-
rhoea vary according to local antimicrobial resistance 
patterns (p. 422). Appropriate treatment for chlamydia 
(p. 423) should also be prescribed because concurrent 
infection is present in up to 50% of men with gonor-
rhoea. Non-gonococcal, non-chlamydial urethritis is 
treated as for chlamydia.
Patients should be advised to avoid sexual contact 
until it is confirmed that any infection has resolved and, 
whenever possible, recent sexual contacts should be 
traced. The task of contact tracing – also called partner 
notification – is best performed by trained nurses based 
in GUM clinics; it is standard practice in the UK to treat 
current sexual partners of men with gonococcal or non-
specific urethritis without waiting for microbiological 
confirmation.
If symptoms clear, a routine test of cure is not 
necessary, but patients should be re-interviewed to 
confirm that there was no immediate vomiting or diar-
rhoea after treatment, that there has been no risk of re-
infection, and that traceable partners have sought 
medical advice.
Genital itch and/or rash
Patients may present with many combinations of penile/
genital symptoms, which may be acute or chronic, and 
infectious or non-infectious. Box 15.3 provides a guide 
to diagnosis.
Balanitis refers to inflammation of the glans penis, 
often extending to the under-surface of the prepuce, in 
which case it is called balanoposthitis. Tight prepuce 
and poor hygiene may be aggravating factors. Candidia-
sis is sometimes associated with immune deficiency, 
diabetes mellitus, and the use of broad-spectrum anti­
microbials, corticosteroids or antimitotic drugs. Local 
saline bathing is usually helpful, especially when no 
cause is found.
Genital ulceration
The most common cause of ulceration is genital herpes. 
Classically, multiple painful ulcers affect the glans, 
coronal sulcus or shaft of penis (Fig. 15.2), but solitary 
lesions occur rarely. Perianal ulcers may be seen in 
MSM. The diagnosis is made by gently scraping material 
from lesions and sending this in an appropriate trans-
port medium for culture or detection of HSV DNA by 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Increasingly, laborato-
ries will also test for Treponema pallidum by PCR.
In the UK, the possibility of syphilis or any other 
ulcerating STI is much less likely unless the patient is an 
MSM and/or has had a sexual partner from a region 
where tropical STIs are more common. The classic lesion 
sexual activity. Specific issues regarding the manage-
ment of STI and other infections in adolescence are dis-
cussed in Box 13.27 (p. 313).
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN MEN
Urethral discharge
In the UK the most important causes of urethral dis-
charge are gonorrhoea and chlamydia. In a significant 
minority of cases, tests for both of these infections are 
negative, a scenario often referred to as non-specific 
urethritis (NSU). Some of these cases may be caused 
by Trichomonas vaginalis, herpes simplex virus (HSV), 
mycoplasmas or ureaplasmas. A small minority seem 
not to have an infectious aetiology.
Gonococcal urethritis usually causes symptoms 
within 7 days of exposure. The discharge is typically 
profuse and purulent. Chlamydial urethritis has an incu-
bation period of 1–4 weeks, and tends to result in milder 
symptoms than gonorrhoea; there is overlap, however, 
and microbiological confirmation should always be 
sought.
Investigations
A presumptive diagnosis of urethritis can be made 
from a Gram-stained smear of the urethral exudate 
(Fig. 15.1), which will demonstrate significant numbers 
of polymorphonuclear leucocytes (≥ 5 per high-power 
field). A working diagnosis of gonococcal urethritis is 
made if Gram-negative intracellular diplococci (GNDC) 
are seen; if no GNDC are seen, a label of NSU is applied.
If microscopy is not available, urine samples and/or 
swabs should be taken and empirical antimicrobials pre-
scribed. A first-void urine (FVU) sample should be sub-
mitted for a combined nucleic acid amplification test 
(NAAT) for gonorrhoea and chlamydia; a urethral swab 
is an alternative if the patient cannot pass urine. When 
gonorrhoea is suspected, a urethral swab should be sent 
for culture and antimicrobial sensitivities of Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae. Tests for other potential causes of urethritis 
are not performed routinely.
A swab should also be taken from the pharynx 
because gonococcal infection here is not reliably 
eradicated by single-dose therapy. In MSM, swabs for 
Fig. 15.1  A Gram-stained urethral smear from a man with 
gonococcal urethritis. Gram-negative diplococci are seen within 
polymorphonuclear leucocytes. 
Sexually transmitted infections
15
416
Fig. 15.2  Penile herpes simplex (HSV-2) infection. 
of primary syphilis (chancre) is single, painless and 
indurated; however, multiple lesions are seen rarely and 
anal chancres are often painful. Diagnosis is made in 
GUM clinics by dark-ground microscopy and/or PCR 
on a swab from a chancre, but in other settings by sero-
logical tests for syphilis (p. 420). Other rare infective 
causes seen in the UK include varicella zoster virus 
(p. 316) and trauma with secondary infection. Tropical 
STI, such as chancroid, LGV and granuloma inguinale, 
are described in Box 15.12 (p. 424). Inflammatory causes 
include Stevens–Johnson syndrome (pp. 1264 and 1302), 
Behçet’s syndrome (p. 1107) and fixed drug reactions. In 
older patients, malignant and pre-malignant conditions, 
such as squamous cell carcinoma and erythroplasia 
of Queyrat (intra-epidermal carcinoma), should be 
considered.
Genital lumps
The most common cause of genital ‘lumps’ is warts 
(p. 425). These are classically found in areas of friction 
during sex, such as the parafrenal skin and prepuce of 
the penis. Warts may also be seen in the urethral meatus, 
and less commonly on the shaft or around the base of 
the penis. Perianal warts are surprisingly common in 
men who do not have anal sex.
Likely 
diagnosis
Acute or 
chronic
Itch
Pain
Discharge 
(non-urethral)
Specific characteristics
Diagnostic test
Treatment
Subclinical 
urethritis
Either
±
−
±
Often intermittent
Gram stain and 
urethral swabs
As for urethral discharge
Candidiasis
Acute
✓
−
White
Postcoital
Microscopy
Antifungal cream, e.g. 
clotrimazole
Anaerobic 
(erosive) 
balanitis
Acute
±
−
Yellow
Offensive
Microscopy
Saline bathing ± 
metronidazole
Pthirus pubis 
(‘crab lice’) 
infection
Either
✓
−
−
Lice and nits seen 
attached to pubic hairs
Can be by 
microscopy, but 
usually visual
According to local policy – 
often permethrin
Lichen 
planus 
(p. 1289)
Either
±
−
−
Violaceous papules ± 
Wickham’s striae
Clinical
None or mild topical 
corticosteroid, e.g. 
hydrocortisone
Lichen 
sclerosus
Chronic
±
−
−
Ivory-white plaques, 
scarring
Clinical or 
biopsy
Strong topical corticosteroid, 
e.g. clobetasol
Plasma cell 
balanitis of 
Zoon
Chronic
✓
−
±
Shiny, inflamed 
circumscribed areas
Clinical or 
biopsy
Strong topical corticosteroid, 
e.g. clobetasol
Dermatoses, 
e.g. eczema 
or psoriasis
Either
✓
−
−
Similar to lesions 
elsewhere on skin
Clinical
Mild topical corticosteroid, 
e.g. hydrocortisone
Genital 
herpes
Acute
±
✓
−
Atypical ulcers are not 
uncommon
Swab for HSV 
PCR
Oral antiviral, e.g. aciclovir
Circinate 
balanitis
Either
−
−
−
Painless erosions with 
raised edges; usually 
as part of Reiter’s 
syndrome (p. 1107)
Clinical
Mild topical steroid, e.g. 
hydrocortisone
(HSV PSR = herpes simplex virus polymerase chain reaction)
15.3  Differential diagnosis of genital itch and/or rash in men
Presenting problems in women
15
417
The differential diagnosis includes molluscum conta-
giosum and skin tags. Adolescent boys may confuse 
normal anatomical features such as coronal papillae 
(p. 412), parafrenal glands or sebaceous glands (Fordyce 
spots) with warts.
Proctitis in men who have sex with men
STIs that may cause proctitis in MSM include gonor-
rhoea, chlamydia, herpes and syphilis. The substrains 
of Chlamydia trachomatis that cause LGV (L1–3) have 
been associated with outbreaks of severe proctitis in 
Northern Europe, including the UK. Symptoms include 
mucopurulent anal discharge, rectal bleeding, pain and 
tenesmus.
Examination may show mucopus and erythema with 
contact bleeding (p. 412). In addition to the diagnostic 
tests on page 412, a PCR test for HSV and a request for 
identification of the LGV substrain should be arranged 
if chlamydial infection is detected. Treatment is directed 
at the individual infections (see below).
MSM may also present with gastrointestinal symp-
toms from infection with organisms such as Entamoeba 
histolytica (p. 367), Shigella spp. (p. 345), Campylobacter 
spp. (p. 342) and Cryptosporidium spp. (p. 369).
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN WOMEN
Vaginal discharge
The natural vaginal discharge may vary considerably, 
especially under differing hormonal influences such 
as puberty, pregnancy or prescribed contraception. A 
sudden or recent change in discharge, especially if asso-
ciated with alteration of colour and/or smell, or vulval 
itch/irritation, is more likely to indicate an infective 
cause than a gradual or long-standing change.
Local epidemiology is particularly important when 
assessing possible causes. In the UK, most cases of 
vaginal discharge are not sexually transmitted, being 
due to either candidal infection or bacterial vaginosis 
(BV). World-wide, the most common treatable STI 
causing vaginal discharge is trichomoniasis; other pos-
sibilities include gonorrhoea and chlamydia. HSV may 
cause increased discharge, although vulval pain and 
dysuria are usually the predominant symptoms. Non-
infective causes include retained tampons, malignancy 
and/or fistulae.
Speculum examination often allows a relatively accu-
rate diagnosis, with appropriate treatment to follow 
(Box 15.4). If the discharge is homogeneous and off-
white in colour, vaginal pH is greater than 4.5, and Gram 
stain microscopy reveals scanty or absent lactobacilli 
with significant numbers of Gram-variable organisms, 
some of which may be coating vaginal squamous cells 
(so-called Clue cells, Fig. 15.3), the likely diagnosis is BV. 
If there is vulval and vaginal erythema, the discharge is 
curdy in nature, vaginal pH is less than 4.5, and Gram 
stain microscopy reveals fungal spores and pseudo­
hyphae, the diagnosis is candidiasis. Trichomoniasis 
tends to cause a profuse yellow or green discharge and 
is usually associated with significant vulvovaginal 
inflammation. Diagnosis is made by observing motile 
Fig. 15.3  Gram stain of a Clue cell from a patient with bacterial 
vaginosis. The margin of this vaginal epithelial cell is obscured by a 
coating of anaerobic organisms. From McMillan, et al. 2002 – see p. 426. 
Cause
Clinical features
Treatment (in pregnancy seek specialist advice)
Candidiasis
Vulval and vaginal inflammation
Curdy white discharge adherent 
to walls of vagina
Low vaginal pH
Clotrimazole1 500 mg pessary once at night and clotrimazole 
cream twice daily or
Econazole1 pessary 150 mg for 3 nights and econazole cream 
twice daily (topical creams for 7 days) or
Fluconazole2 150 mg orally stat
Trichomoniasis
Vulval and vaginal inflammation
Metronidazole3 400 mg twice daily orally for 5–7 days or
Frothy yellow/green discharge
Metronidazole3 2 g orally as a single dose
Bacterial vaginosis
No inflammation
Metronidazole3 2 g stat or 400 mg twice daily orally for 
5–7 days
White homogeneous discharge
Metronidazole3 vaginal gel 0.75% daily for 5 days
High vaginal pH
Clindamycin1,4 vaginal cream 2% daily for 7 days
Streptococcal/staphylococcal 
infection
Purulent vaginal discharge
Choice of antibiotic depends on sensitivity tests
1Clotrimazole, econazole and clindamycin damage latex condoms and diaphragms. 2Avoid in pregnancy and breastfeeding.
3Avoid alcoholic drinks until 48 hours after finishing treatment. Avoid high-dose regimens in pregnancy or breastfeeding.
4Pseudomembranous colitis has been reported with the use of clindamycin cream.
15.4  Infections that cause vaginal discharge
Sexually transmitted infections
15
418
such as abscess formation, and tubal scarring that may 
lead to ectopic pregnancy or infertility. Hospital 
admission may be indicated for severe symptoms.
Genital ulceration
The most common cause of ulceration is genital herpes. 
Classically, multiple painful ulcers affect the introitus, 
labia and perineum, but solitary lesions occur rarely. 
Inguinal lymphadenopathy and systemic features, such 
as fever and malaise, are more common than in men. 
Diagnosis is made by gently scraping material from 
lesions and sending this in an appropriate transport 
medium for culture or detection of HSV DNA by PCR. 
Increasingly, laboratories will also test such samples for 
Treponema pallidum by PCR. In the UK, the possibility of 
any other ulcerating STI is unlikely unless the patient 
has had a sexual partner from a region where tropical 
STIs are more common (see Box 15.12, p. 424).
Inflammatory 
causes 
include 
lichen 
sclerosus, 
Stevens–Johnson syndrome (pp. 1264 and 1302), Behçet’s 
syndrome (p. 1119) and fixed drug reactions. In older 
patients, malignant and pre-malignant conditions, such 
as squamous cell carcinoma, should be considered.
Genital lumps
The most common cause of genital ‘lumps’ is warts. 
These are classically found in areas of friction during 
sex, such as the fourchette and perineum. Perianal warts 
are surprisingly common in women who do not have 
anal sex.
The differential diagnosis includes molluscum conta-
giosum, skin tags and normal papillae or sebaceous 
glands.
Chronic vulval pain and/or itch
Women may present with a range of chronic symptoms 
that may be intermittent or continuous (Box 15.5).
Recurrent candidiasis may lead to hypersensitivity to 
candidal antigens, with itch and erythema becoming 
more prominent than increased discharge. Effective 
flagellate protozoa on a wet-mount microscopy slide of 
vaginal material.
If examination reveals the discharge to be cervical in 
origin, the possibility of chlamydial or gonococcal infec-
tion is increased and appropriate cervical or vaginal 
swabs should be taken (p. 413). In addition, Gram stain 
of cervical and urethral material may reveal GNDC, 
allowing presumptive treatment for gonorrhoea to be 
given. If gonococcal cervicitis is suspected, swabs should 
also be taken from the pharynx and rectum; infections 
at these sites are not reliably eradicated by single-dose 
therapy and a test of cure will therefore be required.
GUM clinics in the UK may offer sexually active 
women presenting with vaginal discharge an STI screen 
(p. 413). In other settings, such as primary care or gynae-
cology, testing for chlamydia and gonorrhoea may be 
considered in young women (< 25 years old), those who 
have changed partner recently, and those not using a 
barrier method of contraception, even if a non-STI cause 
of discharge is suspected clinically.
Treatment of infections causing vaginal discharge is 
shown in Box 15.4.
Lower abdominal pain
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID, infection or inflam-
mation of the Fallopian tubes and surrounding struc-
tures) is part of the extensive differential diagnosis 
of lower abdominal pain in women, especially those 
who are sexually active. The possibility of PID is 
increased if, in addition to acute/subacute pain, there is 
dyspareunia, abnormal vaginal discharge and/or bleed-
ing. There may also be systemic features, such as fever 
and malaise. On examination, lower abdominal pain is 
usually bilateral, and vaginal examination reveals 
adnexal tenderness with or without cervical excitation. 
Unfortunately, a definitive diagnosis can only be made 
by laparoscopy. A pregnancy test should be performed 
(as well as the diagnostic tests on p. 413) because the 
differential diagnosis includes ectopic pregnancy.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics, including those active 
against gonorrhoea and chlamydia, such as ofloxacin 
and metronidazole, should be prescribed if PID is 
suspected, along with appropriate analgesia. Delaying 
treatment increases the likelihood of adverse sequelae, 
Likely diagnosis
Itch
Pain
Specific characteristics
Diagnostic test
Treatment
Candidiasis
✓
±
Usually cyclical
Microscopy
Oral antifungal, e.g. fluconazole 150 mg
Lichen planus
±
−
Violaceous papules ± Wickham’s 
striae
Clinical
No treatment, or mild topical 
corticosteroid, e.g. hydrocortisone
Lichen sclerosus
±
−
Ivory-white plaques, scarring ± 
labial resorption
Clinical or biopsy
Strong topical corticosteroid, e.g. 
clobetasol
Vestibulitis
−
✓
Dyspareunia common, pain on 
touching erythematous area
Clinical
Refer to specialist vulva clinic
Vulvodynia
−
✓
Pain usually neuropathic in nature
Clinical
Refer to specialist vulva clinic
Dermatoses, e.g. 
eczema or psoriasis
✓
−
Similar to lesions elsewhere on 
skin
Clinical
Mild topical corticosteroid, e.g. 
hydrocortisone
Genital herpes
±
✓
Atypical ulcers are not uncommon
Swab for HSV PCR
Oral antiviral, e.g. aciclovir
15.5  Chronic vulval pain and/or itch
Sexually transmitted bacterial infections
15
419
Acquired syphilis
Early syphilis
Primary syphilis
The incubation period is usually between 14 and 28 
days, with a range of 9–90 days. The primary lesion or 
chancre (Fig. 15.4) develops at the site of infection, 
usually in the genital area. A dull red macule develops, 
becomes papular and then erodes to form an indurated 
ulcer (chancre). The draining inguinal lymph nodes 
may become moderately enlarged, mobile, discrete and 
rubbery. The chancre and the lymph nodes are both 
painless and non-tender, unless there is concurrent or 
secondary infection. Without treatment, the chancre will 
resolve within 2–6 weeks to leave a thin atrophic scar.
Chancres may develop on the vaginal wall and on the 
cervix. Extragenital chancres are found in about 10% of 
patients, affecting sites such as the finger, lip, tongue, 
tonsil, nipple, anus or rectum. Anal chancres often 
resemble fissures and may be painful.
Secondary syphilis
This occurs 6–8 weeks after the development of the 
chancre, when treponemes disseminate to produce a 
multisystem disease. Constitutional features, such as 
mild fever, malaise and headache, are common. Over 
75% of patients present with a rash on the trunk and 
limbs that may later involve the palms and soles; this is 
initially macular but evolves to maculopapular or 
papular forms, which are generalised, symmetrical and 
non-irritable. Scales may form on the papules later. The 
rash affects the trunk and proximal limbs, and charac-
teristically involves the palms, soles and face. Lesions 
treatment may require regular oral antifungals, e.g. flu-
conazole 150 g once every 2–4 weeks plus a combined 
antifungal/corticosteroid cream such as Daktacort or 
Canesten HC.
PREVENTION OF STI
Case-finding
Early diagnosis and treatment facilitated by active case-
finding will help to reduce the spread of infection by 
limiting the period of infectivity; tracing and treating 
sexual partners will also reduce the risk of re-infection. 
Unfortunately, the majority of individuals with an STI 
are asymptomatic and therefore unlikely to seek medical 
attention. Improving access to diagnosis in primary care 
or non-medical settings, especially through opportunis-
tic testing, may help. However, the impact of medical 
intervention through improved access alone is likely to 
be small.
Changing behaviour
The prevalence of STIs is driven largely by sexual behav-
iour. Primary prevention encompasses efforts to delay 
the onset of sexual activity and limit the number of 
sexual partners thereafter. Encouraging the use of barrier 
methods of contraception will also help to reduce the 
risk of transmitting or acquiring STIs. This is especially 
important in the setting of ‘sexual concurrency’, where 
sexual relationships overlap.
Unfortunately, there is contradictory evidence as to 
which (if any) interventions can reduce sexual activity. 
Knowledge alone does not translate into behaviour 
change, and broader issues, such as poor parental role 
modelling, low self-esteem, peer group pressure in the 
context of the increased sexualisation of our societies, 
gender power imbalance and homophobia, all need to 
be addressed. Throughout the world there is a critical 
need to enable women to protect themselves from undis-
ciplined and coercive male sexual activity. Economic 
collapse and the turmoil of war regularly lead to situa-
tions where women are raped or must turn to prostitu-
tion to feed themselves and their children, and an 
inability to negotiate safe sex increases their risk of 
acquiring STI, including HIV.
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED BACTERIAL 
INFECTIONS
Syphilis
Syphilis is caused by infection, through abrasions in the 
skin or mucous membranes, with the spirochaete 
Treponema pallidum. In adults the infection is usually 
sexually acquired; however, transmission by kissing, 
blood transfusion and percutaneous injury has been 
reported. Transplacental infection of the fetus can occur.
The natural history of untreated syphilis is variable. 
Infection may remain latent throughout, or clinical fea-
tures may develop at any time. The classification of 
syphilis is shown in Box 15.6. All infected patients 
should be treated. Penicillin remains the drug of choice 
for all stages of infection.
Stage
Acquired
Congenital
Early
Primary
Secondary
Latent
Clinical and latent
Late
Latent
Benign tertiary
Cardiovascular
Neurosyphilis
Clinical and latent
15.6  Classification of syphilis
Fig. 15.4  Primary syphilis. A painless ulcer (chancre) is shown in the 
coronal sulcus of the penis. This is usually associated with inguinal 
lymphadenopathy. 
Sexually transmitted infections
15
420
cord, liver, testis and, rarely, other organs. Resolution of 
active disease should follow treatment, though some 
tissue damage may be permanent. Paroxysmal cold 
haemo­globinuria (p. 1031) may be seen.
Cardiovascular syphilis
This may present many years after initial infection. Aor-
titis, which may involve the aortic valve and/or the 
coronary ostia, is the key feature. Clinical features 
include aortic incompetence, angina and aortic aneu-
rysm (p. 603). The condition typically affects the ascend-
ing aorta and sometimes the aortic arch; aneurysm of the 
descending aorta is rare. Treatment with penicillin will 
not correct anatomical damage and surgical intervention 
may be required.
Neurosyphilis
This may also take years to develop. Asymptomatic 
infection is associated with CSF abnormalities in the 
absence of clinical signs. Meningovascular disease, tabes 
dorsalis and general paralysis of the insane constitute 
the symptomatic forms (p. 1209). Neurosyphilis and car-
diovascular syphilis may coexist and are sometimes 
referred to as quaternary syphilis.
Congenital syphilis
Congenital syphilis is rare where antenatal serological 
screening is practised. Antisyphilitic treatment in preg-
nancy treats the fetus, if infected, as well as the mother.
Treponemal infection may give rise to a variety of 
outcomes after 4 months of gestation, when the fetus 
becomes immunocompetent:
•	 miscarriage or stillbirth, prematurely or at term
•	 birth of a syphilitic baby (a very sick baby with 
hepatosplenomegaly, bullous rash and perhaps 
pneumonia)
•	 birth of a baby who develops signs of early 
congenital syphilis during the first few weeks of life 
(Box 15.7)
•	 birth of a baby with latent infection who either 
remains well or develops congenital syphilis/
stigmata later in life (see Box 15.7).
Investigations in adult cases
Treponema pallidum may be identified in serum collected 
from chancres, or from moist or eroded lesions in sec-
ondary syphilis using a dark-field microscope, a direct 
fluorescent antibody test or PCR.
The serological tests for syphilis are listed in Box 15.8. 
Many centres use treponemal EIAs for IgG and IgM 
antibodies to screen for syphilis. EIA for antitreponemal 
IgM becomes positive at approximately 2 weeks, whilst 
non-treponemal tests become positive about 4 weeks 
after primary syphilis. All positive results in asympto-
matic patients must be confirmed by repeat tests.
Biological false positive reactions occur occasionally; 
these are most commonly seen with Venereal Diseases 
Research Laboratory (VDRL) or rapid plasma reagin 
(RPR) tests (when treponemal tests will be negative). 
Acute false-positive reactions may be associated with 
infections, such as infectious mononucleosis, chickenpox 
and malaria, and may also occur in pregnancy. Chronic 
false-positive reactions may be associated with auto­
immune diseases. False-negative results for non-
treponemal tests may be found in secondary syphilis 
are red, changing to a ‘gun-metal’ grey as they resolve. 
Without treatment, the rash may last for up to 12 weeks. 
Condylomata lata (papules coalescing to plaques) may 
develop in warm, moist sites such as the vulva or peri-
anal area. Generalised non-tender lymphadenopathy is 
present in over 50% of patients. Mucosal lesions, known 
as mucous patches, may affect the genitalia, mouth, 
pharynx or larynx and are essentially modified papules, 
which become eroded. Rarely, confluence produces 
characteristic ‘snail track ulcers’ in the mouth.
Other features, such as meningitis, cranial nerve 
palsies, anterior or posterior uveitis, hepatitis, gastritis, 
glomerulonephritis or periostitis, are sometimes seen. 
Neurological involvement may be more common in 
HIV-positive patients.
The differential diagnosis of secondary syphilis can 
be extensive, but in the context of a suspected STI, 
primary HIV infection is the most important alternative 
condition to consider (see Ch. 14). Non-STI conditions 
that mimic the rash include psoriasis, pityriasis rosea, 
scabies, allergic drug reaction, erythema multiforme and 
tinea versicolor.
The clinical manifestations of secondary syphilis will 
resolve without treatment but relapse may occur, usually 
within the first year of infection. Thereafter, the disease 
enters the phase of latency.
Latent syphilis
This phase is characterised by the presence of positive 
syphilis serology or the diagnostic cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) abnormalities of neurosyphilis in an untreated 
patient with no evidence of clinical disease. It is divided 
into early latency (within 2 years of infection), when 
syphilis may be transmitted sexually, and late latency, 
when the patient is no longer sexually infectious. Trans-
mission of syphilis from a pregnant woman to her fetus, 
and rarely by blood transfusion, is possible for several 
years following infection.
Late syphilis
Late latent syphilis
This may persist for many years or for life. Without treat-
ment, over 60% of patients might be expected to suffer 
little or no ill health. Coincidental prescription of antibi-
otics for other illnesses, such as respiratory tract or skin 
infections, may treat latent syphilis serendipitously.
Benign tertiary syphilis
This may develop between 3 and 10 years after infection 
but is now rarely seen in the UK. Skin, mucous mem-
branes, bone, muscle or viscera can be involved. The 
characteristic feature is a chronic granulomatous lesion 
called a gumma, which may be single or multiple. 
Healing with scar formation may impair the function 
of the structure affected. Skin lesions may take the 
form of nodules or ulcers, whilst subcutaneous lesions 
may ulcerate with a gummy discharge. Healing occurs 
slowly, with the formation of characteristic tissue paper 
scars. Mucosal lesions may occur in the mouth, pharynx, 
larynx or nasal septum, appearing as punched-out 
ulcers. Of particular importance is gummatous involve-
ment of the tongue, healing of which may lead to leuco-
plakia with the attendant risk of malignant change. 
Gummas of the tibia, skull, clavicle and sternum have 
been described, as has involvement of the brain, spinal 
Sexually transmitted bacterial infections
15
421
tests should become negative within 3–6 months of 
birth. A positive EIA test for antitreponemal IgM sug-
gests early congenital syphilis. A diagnosis of congenital 
syphilis mandates investigation of the mother, her 
partner and any siblings.
Management
Penicillin is the drug of choice. Currently, a single dose 
of 2.4 megaunits of intramuscular benzathine penicillin 
is recommended for early syphilis (< 2 years’ duration), 
with three doses at weekly intervals being recommended 
in late syphilis. Doxycycline is indicated for patients 
allergic to penicillin, except in pregnancy (see below). 
Azithromycin is a further alternative. All patients must 
be followed up to ensure cure, and partner notification 
is of particular importance. Resolution of clinical signs 
in early syphilis with declining titres for non-treponemal 
tests, usually to undetectable levels within 6 months 
for primary syphilis and 12–18 months for secondary 
syphilis, is an indicator of successful treatment. Specific 
treponemal antibody tests may remain positive for life. 
In patients who have had syphilis for many years there 
may be little serological response following treatment.
Pregnancy
Penicillin is the treatment of choice in pregnancy. 
Erythromycin stearate can be given if there is penicillin 
hypersensitivity, but crosses the placenta poorly; the 
newborn baby must therefore be treated with a course 
of penicillin and consideration given to retreating the 
mother. Some specialists recommend penicillin desensi-
tisation for pregnant mothers so that penicillin can be 
given during temporary tolerance. The author has suc-
cessfully prescribed ceftriaxone 250 mg IM for 10 days 
in this situation. Babies should be treated in hospital 
with the help of a paediatrician.
Treatment reactions
•	 Anaphylaxis. Penicillin is a common cause; on-site 
facilities should be available for management (p. 91).
•	 Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction. This is an acute febrile 
reaction that follows treatment and is characterised 
by headache, malaise and myalgia; it resolves 
within 24 hours. It is common in early syphilis and 
rare in late syphilis. Fetal distress or premature 
labour can occur in pregnancy. The reaction may 
also cause worsening of neurological (cerebral 
artery occlusion) or ophthalmic (uveitis, optic 
neuritis) disease, myocardial ischaemia 
(inflammation of the coronary ostia) and laryngeal 
stenosis (swelling of a gumma). Prednisolone 
because extremely high antibody levels can prevent the 
formation of the antibody–antigen lattice necessary for 
the visualisation of the flocculation reaction (the prozone 
phenomenon).
In benign tertiary and cardiovascular syphilis, exami-
nation of CSF should be considered because asympto-
matic neurological disease may coexist. The CSF should 
also be examined in patients with clinical signs of neuro­
syphilis (p. 1209) and in both early and late congenital 
syphilis. Positive STS may be found in patients who are 
being investigated for neurological disease, especially 
dementia. In many instances, the serology reflects pre­
vious infection unrelated to the presenting complaint, 
especially when titres are low. Examination of CSF is 
occasionally necessary.
Chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocar-
diogram are useful in the investigation of cardiovascular 
syphilis. Biopsy may be required to diagnose gumma.
Endemic treponematoses, such as yaws, endemic 
(non-venereal) syphilis (bejel) and pinta (pp. 332–333), 
are caused by treponemes that are morphologically 
indistinguishable from T. pallidum and cannot be dif-
ferentiated by serological tests. A VDRL or RPR test may 
help to elucidate the correct diagnosis because adults 
with late yaws usually have low titres.
Investigations in suspected  
congenital syphilis
Passively transferred maternal antibodies from an ade-
quately treated mother may give rise to positive sero-
logical tests in her baby. In this situation, non-treponemal 
Early congenital syphilis (neonatal period)
• Maculopapular rash
• Condylomata lata
• Mucous patches
• Fissures around mouth, 
nose and anus
• Rhinitis with nasal 
discharge (snuffles)
• Hepatosplenomegaly
• Osteochondritis/periostitis
• Generalised 
lymphadenopathy
• Choroiditis
• Meningitis
• Anaemia/thrombocytopenia
Late congenital syphilis
• Benign tertiary syphilis
• Periostitis
• Paroxysmal cold 
haemoglobinuria
• Neurosyphilis
• 8th nerve deafness
• Interstitial keratitis
• Clutton’s joints (painless 
effusion into knee joints)
Stigmata
• Hutchinson’s incisors (anterior–posterior thickening with 
notch on narrowed cutting edge)
• Mulberry molars (imperfectly formed cusps/deficient dental 
enamel)
• High arched palate
• Maxillary hypoplasia
• Saddle nose (following snuffles)
• Rhagades (radiating scars around mouth, nose and anus 
following rash)
• Salt and pepper scars on retina (from choroiditis)
• Corneal scars (from interstitial keratitis)
• Sabre tibia (from periostitis)
• Bossing of frontal and parietal bones (healed periosteal 
nodes)
15.7  Clinical features of congenital syphilis
Non-treponemal (non-specific) tests
• Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory (VDRL) test
• Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test
Treponemal (specific) antibody tests
• Treponemal antigen-based enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for 
IgG and IgM
• T. pallidum haemagglutination assay (TPHA)
• T. pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA)
• Fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA-ABS) test
15.8  Serological tests for syphilis
Sexually transmitted infections
15
422
About 80% of women who have gonorrhoea are asymp-
tomatic. There may be vaginal discharge or dysuria but 
these symptoms are often due to additional infections, 
such as chlamydia (see below), trichomoniasis or candi-
diasis, making full investigation essential (p. 413). Lower 
abdominal pain, dyspareunia and intermenstrual bleed-
ing may be indicative of PID. Clinical examination may 
show no abnormality, or pus may be expressed from 
urethra, paraurethral ducts or Bartholin’s ducts. The 
cervix may be inflamed, with mucopurulent discharge 
and contact bleeding.
Pharyngeal gonorrhoea is the result of receptive oro-
genital sex and is usually symptomless. Gonococcal con-
junctivitis is an uncommon complication, presenting 
with purulent discharge from the eye(s), severe inflam-
mation of the conjunctivae and oedema of the eyelids, 
pain and photophobia. Gonococcal ophthalmia neonato-
rum presents similarly with purulent conjunctivitis and 
oedema of the eyelids. Conjunctivitis must be treated 
urgently to prevent corneal damage.
Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) is seen 
rarely, and typically affects women with asymptomatic 
genital infection. Symptoms include arthritis of one or 
more joints, pustular skin lesions and fever. Gonococcal 
endocarditis has been described.
Investigations
Gram-negative diplococci may be seen on microscopy of 
smears from infected sites (see Fig. 15.1, p. 415). Pharyn-
geal smears are difficult to analyse due to the presence 
of other diplococci, so the diagnosis must be confirmed 
by culture or NAAT.
Management of adults
Emerging resistance is making it increasingly difficult 
to cure gonorrhoea with a single oral dose of 
10–20 mg orally three times daily for 3 days is 
recommended to prevent the reaction in patients 
with these forms of the disease; antisyphilitic 
treatment can be started 24 hours after introducing 
corticosteroids. In high-risk situations it is wise to 
initiate therapy in hospital.
•	 Procaine reaction. Fear of impending death occurs 
immediately after the accidental intravenous 
injection of procaine penicillin and may be 
associated with hallucinations or fits. Symptoms are 
short-lived, but verbal assurance and sometimes 
physical restraint are needed. The reaction can be 
prevented by aspiration before intramuscular 
injection to ensure the needle is not in a blood vessel.
Gonorrhoea
Gonorrhoea is caused by infection with Neisseria gonor-
rhoeae and may involve columnar epithelium in the 
lower genital tract, rectum, pharynx and eyes. Transmis-
sion is usually the result of vaginal, anal or oral sex. 
Gonococcal conjunctivitis may be caused by accidental 
infection from contaminated fingers. Untreated mothers 
may infect babies during delivery, resulting in ophthal-
mia neonatorum (Fig. 15.5). Infection of children beyond 
the neonatal period usually indicates sexual abuse.
Clinical features
The incubation period is usually 2–10 days. In men the 
anterior urethra is commonly infected, causing urethral 
discharge and dysuria, but symptoms are absent in 
about 10% of cases. Examination will usually show a 
mucopurulent or purulent urethral discharge. Rectal 
infection in MSM is usually asymptomatic but may 
present with anal discomfort, discharge or rectal bleed-
ing. Proctoscopy may reveal either no abnormality, or 
clinical evidence of proctitis (see p. 417) such as inflamed 
rectal mucosa and mucopus.
In women, the urethra, paraurethral glands/ducts, 
Bartholin’s glands/ducts or endocervical canal may be 
infected. The rectum may also be involved either due to 
contamination from a urogenital site or as a result of anal 
sex. Occasionally, the rectum is the only site infected. 
Fig. 15.5  Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum. From McMillan and 
Scott 2000 – see p. 426. 
Uncomplicated infection
• Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM or
• Cefixime 400 mg stat or
• Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally stat1,2 or
• Ofloxacin 400 mg orally stat1,2 or
• Amoxicillin 3 g plus probenecid 1 g orally stat3
Quinolone resistance
• Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM stat or
• Spectinomycin 2 g IM stat4
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
• Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM stat or
• Cefixime 400 mg stat or
• Amoxicillin 3 g plus probenecid 1 g orally stat3 or
• Spectinomycin 2 g IM stat4
Pharyngeal gonorrhoea
• Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM stat or
• Cefixime 400 mg stat or
• Ciprofloxacin 500 mg1,2 orally stat or
• Ofloxacin 400 mg1,2 orally stat
15.9  Treatment of uncomplicated anogenital 
gonorrhoea
2If prevalence of quinolone resistance for N. gonorrhoeae < 5%.
1Contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding.
3If prevalence of penicillin resistance for N. gonorrhoeae < 5%.
4May only be available in specialist clinics.
Sexually transmitted viral infections
15
423
Other sexually transmitted bacterial 
infections
Chancroid, granuloma inguinale and LGV as causes of 
genital ulcers in the tropics are described in Box 15.12. 
LGV is also a cause of proctitis in MSM (p. 417).
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED VIRAL 
INFECTIONS
Genital herpes simplex
Infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) or 
type 2 (HSV-2) produces a wide spectrum of clinical 
problems (p. 325), and may facilitate HIV transmission. 
Infection is usually acquired sexually (vaginal, anal, oro-
genital or oro-anal), but perinatal transmission to the 
neonate may also occur. Primary infection at the site of 
HSV entry, which may be symptomatic or asympto-
matic, establishes latency in local sensory ganglia. 
Recurrences, either symptomatic or asymptomatic viral 
shedding, are a consequence of HSV reactivation. The 
first symptomatic episode is usually the most severe. 
Although HSV-1 is classically associated with orolabial 
herpes and HSV-2 with anogenital herpes, HSV-1 now 
accounts for more than 50% of anogenital infections in 
the UK.
Clinical features
The first symptomatic episode presents with irritable 
vesicles that soon rupture to form small, tender ulcers 
on the external genitalia (see Figs 15.6 and 15.2, p. 416). 
Lesions at other sites (e.g. urethra, vagina, cervix, peri-
anal area, anus or rectum) may cause dysuria, urethral 
or vaginal discharge, or anal, perianal or rectal pain. 
Constitutional symptoms, such as fever, headache and 
malaise, are common. Inguinal lymph nodes become 
enlarged and tender, and there may be nerve root pain 
in the 2nd and 3rd sacral dermatomes.
Extragenital lesions may develop at other sites, such 
as the buttock, finger or eye, due to auto-inoculation. 
Oropharyngeal infection may result from orogenital sex. 
Complications, such as urinary retention due to auto-
nomic neuropathy, and aseptic meningitis, are occasion-
ally seen.
First episodes usually heal within 2–4 weeks without 
treatment; recurrences are usually milder and of shorter 
duration than the initial attack. They occur more often 
antimicrobials, and recommended treatment in the UK 
has changed to intramuscular ceftriaxone 500 mg. The 
alternatives listed in Box 15.9 are less likely to be 
effective.
Longer courses of antibiotics are required for compli-
cated infection. Partner(s) of patients with gonorrhoea 
should be seen as soon as possible. Delay in treatment 
may lead to complications (Box 15.10).
Chlamydial infection
Chlamydial infection in men
Chlamydia is transmitted and presents in a similar way 
to gonorrhoea; however, urethral symptoms are usually 
milder and may be absent in over 50% of cases. Conjunc-
tivitis is also milder than in gonorrhoea; pharyngitis 
does not occur. The incubation period varies from 1 
week to a few months. Without treatment, symptoms 
may resolve but the patient remains infectious for 
several months. Complications, such as epididymo-
orchitis and Reiter’s syndrome, or sexually acquired 
reactive arthropathy (SARA, p. 1107), are rare. Sexually 
transmitted pathogens, such as chlamydia or gonococci, 
are usually responsible for epididymo-orchitis in men 
aged less than 35 years, whereas bacteria such as Gram-
negative enteric organisms are more commonly impli-
cated in older men.
Treatments for chlamydia are listed in Box 15.11. 
NSU is treated identically. The partner(s) of men with 
chlamydia should be treated, even if laboratory tests for 
chlamydia are negative. Investigation is not mandatory 
but serves a useful epidemiological purpose; more­
over, positive results encourage further attempts at 
contact-tracing.
Chlamydial infection in women
The cervix and urethra are commonly involved. Infec-
tion is asymptomatic in about 80% of patients but may 
cause vaginal discharge, dysuria and intermenstrual 
and/or postcoital bleeding. Lower abdominal pain and 
dyspareunia are features of PID. Examination may 
reveal mucopurulent cervicitis, contact bleeding from 
the cervix, evidence of PID or no obvious clinical signs. 
Treatment options are listed in Box 15.11. The patient’s 
male partner(s) should be investigated and treated.
Some infections may clear spontaneously but others 
persist. PID, with the risk of tubal damage and subse-
quent infertility or ectopic pregnancy, is a rare but 
important long-term complication. Other complications 
include perihepatitis, chronic pelvic pain, conjunctivitis 
and Reiter’s syndrome or SARA. Perinatal transmission 
may lead to ophthalmia neonatorum and/or pneumonia 
in the neonate.
• Acute prostatitis
• Epididymo-orchitis
• Bartholin’s gland abscess
• PID (may lead to infertility or ectopic pregnancy)
• Disseminated gonococcal infection
15.10  Complications of delayed therapy in 
gonorrhoea
Standard regimens
• Azithromycin 1 g orally as a single dose1 or
• Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily orally for 7 days2
Alternative regimens
• Erythromycin 500 mg four times daily orally for 7 days or 
500 mg twice daily for 2 weeks or
• Ofloxacin 200 mg twice daily orally for 7 days2
15.11  Treatment of chlamydial infection
2Contraindlcated in pregnancy and breastfeeding.
1Safety in pregnancy and breastfeeding has not been fully assessed.
Sexually transmitted infections
15
424
in HSV-2 infection and their frequency tends to decrease 
with time. Prodromal symptoms, such as irritation or 
burning at the subsequent site of recurrence, or neural-
gic pains affecting buttocks, legs or hips, are commonly 
seen. The first symptomatic episode may be a recurrence 
of a previously undiagnosed primary infection. Recur-
rent episodes of asymptomatic viral shedding are impor-
tant in the transmission of HSV.
Diagnosis
Swabs are taken from vesicular fluid or ulcers for detec-
tion of DNA by PCR, or tissue culture and typing 
as either HSV-1 or 2. Electron microscopy of such 
material will only give a presumptive diagnosis, as 
herpes group viruses appear similar. Type-specific anti-
body tests are available but are not sufficiently accurate 
for general use.
Management
First episode
The following 5-day oral regimens are all recommended 
and should be started within 5 days of the beginning of 
the episode, or whilst lesions are still forming:
•	 aciclovir 200 mg five times daily
•	 famciclovir 250 mg three times daily
•	 valaciclovir 500 mg twice daily.
Analgesia may be required and saline bathing can be 
soothing. Treatment may be continued for longer than 5 
days if new lesions develop. Occasionally, intravenous 
Fig. 15.6  Herpetic ulceration of the vulva. From McMillan and Scott 
2000 – see p. 426. 
Infection and 
distribution
Organism
Incubation 
period
Genital lesion
Lymph nodes
Diagnosis
Management
Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV)
E/W Africa, 
India, SE Asia, 
S America, 
Caribbean
Chlamydia 
trachomatis 
types L1, 2, 3
3–30 days
Small, transient, 
painless ulcer, 
vesicle, papule; 
often unnoticed
Tender, usually 
unilateral, matted, 
suppurative bubo; 
inguinal/femoral 
nodes involved1
Serological tests 
for L1–3 
serotypes; swab 
from ulcer or 
bubo pus for 
Chlamydia
Doxycycline2 twice daily 
orally for 21 days or
Erythromycin 500 mg 
four times daily orally
Chancroid
Africa, Asia, 
Central and  
S America
Haemophilus 
ducreyi (short 
Gram-
negative 
bacillus)
3–10 days
Single or multiple 
painful ulcers 
with ragged 
undermined 
edges
As above but 
unilocular, 
suppurative bubo; 
inguinal nodes 
involved in ~50%
Microscopy and 
culture of 
scrapings from 
ulcer or pus 
from bubo
Azithromycin3 1 g orally 
once or
Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM 
once or
Ciprofloxacin2 500 mg 
twice daily orally for  
3 days 
Granuloma inguinale
Australia, 
Caribbean, 
India, S Africa, 
S America, 
Papua New 
Guinea
Klebsiella 
granulomatis 
(Donovan 
bodies)
3–40 days
Ulcers or 
hypertrophic 
granulomatous 
lesions; usually 
painless4
Initial swelling of 
inguinal nodes, 
then spread of 
infection to form 
abscess or 
ulceration 
through adjacent 
skin
Microscopy of 
cellular material 
for intracellular 
bipolar-staining 
Donovan bodies
Azithromycin3 1 g 
weekly orally or 500 mg 
daily orally or
Doxycycline2 100 mg 
twice daily orally or
Ceftriaxone 1 g IM daily 
1The genito-ano-rectal syndrome is a late manifestation of LGV. 2Doxycycline and ciprofloxacin are contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding.
3The safety of azithromycin in pregnancy and breastfeeding has not been fully assessed. 4Mother-to-baby transmission of granuloma inguinale may rarely occur.
15.12  Salient features of lymphogranuloma venereum, chancroid and granuloma inguinale (Donovanosis)
N.B. Partners of patients with LGV, chancroid and granuloma inguinale should be investigated and treated, even if asymptomatic.
Sexually transmitted viral infections
15
425
therapy may be indicated if oral therapy is poorly toler-
ated or aseptic meningitis occurs.
Catheterisation via the suprapubic route is advisable 
for urinary retention due to autonomic neuropathy 
because the transurethral route may introduce HSV into 
the bladder.
Recurrent genital herpes
Symptomatic recurrences are usually mild and may 
require no specific treatment other than saline bathing. 
For more severe episodes, patient-initiated treatment at 
onset, with one of the following 5-day oral regimens, 
should reduce the duration of the recurrence:
•	 aciclovir 200 mg five times daily
•	 famciclovir 125–250 mg twice daily
•	 valaciclovir 500 mg twice daily.
In a few patients, treatment started at the onset of 
prodromal symptoms may abort recurrence.
Suppressive therapy may be required for patients 
with frequent recurrences, especially if these occur at 
intervals of less than 4 weeks. Treatment should be 
given for a minimum of 1 year before stopping to assess 
recurrence rate. About 20% of patients will experience 
reduced attack rates thereafter, but for those whose 
recurrences remain unchanged, resumption of suppres-
sive therapy is justified. Aciclovir 400 mg twice daily is 
most commonly prescribed.
Management in pregnancy
If her partner is known to be infected with HSV, a preg-
nant woman with no previous anogenital herpes should 
be advised to protect herself during sexual intercourse 
because the risk of disseminated infection is increased 
in pregnancy. Consistent condom use during preg-
nancy may reduce transmission of HSV. Genital herpes 
acquired during the first or second trimester of preg-
nancy is treated with aciclovir as clinically indicated. 
Although aciclovir is not licensed for use in preg-
nancy in the UK, there is considerable clinical evidence 
to support its safety. Third-trimester acquisition of 
infection has been associated with life-threatening hae-
matogenous dissemination and should be treated with 
aciclovir.
Vaginal delivery should be routine in women who 
are symptomless in late pregnancy. Caesarean section is 
sometimes considered if there is a recurrence at the 
beginning of labour, although the risk of neonatal herpes 
through vaginal transmission is very low. Caesarean 
section is often recommended if primary infection occurs 
after 34 weeks because the risk of viral shedding is very 
high in labour.
Human papillomavirus and  
anogenital warts
Human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA typing has demon-
strated over 90 genotypes (p. 1278), of which HPV-6, 
HPV-11, HPV-16 and HPV-18 most commonly infect the 
genital tract through sexual transmission. It is important 
to differentiate between the benign genotypes (HPV-6 
and 11) that cause anogenital warts, and genotypes such 
as 16 and 18 that are associated with dysplastic condi-
tions and cancers of the genital tract but are not a cause 
of benign warts. All genotypes usually result in subclini-
cal infection of the genital tract rather than clinically 
obvious lesions affecting penis, vulva, vagina, cervix, 
perineum or anus.
Clinical features
Anogenital warts caused by HPV may be single or mul-
tiple, exophytic, papular or flat. Perianal warts (p. 412), 
whilst being more commonly found in MSM, are also 
found in heterosexual men and in women. Rarely, a 
giant condyloma (Buschke–Löwenstein tumour) devel-
ops with local tissue destruction. Atypical warts should 
be biopsied. In pregnancy, warts may dramatically 
increase in size and number, making treatment difficult. 
Rarely, they are large enough to obstruct labour and, 
in this case, delivery by Caesarean section will be 
required. Rarely, perinatal transmission of HPV leads to 
anogenital warts, or possibly laryngeal papillomas, in 
the neonate.
Management
The use of condoms can help prevent the transmission 
of HPV to non-infected partners, but HPV may affect 
parts of the genital area not protected by condoms. Vac-
cination against HPV infection has been introduced and 
is in routine use in several countries. There are two types 
of vaccine:
•	 A bivalent vaccine (Cervarix®) offers protection 
against HPV types 16 and 18, which account for 
approximately 75% of cervical cancers in the UK.
•	 A quadrivalent vaccine (Gardasil®) offers additional 
protection against HPV types 6 and 11, which 
account for over 90% of genital warts.
Both types of vaccine have been shown to be highly 
effective in the prevention of cervical intra-epithelial 
neoplasia in young women, and the quadrivalent vaccine 
has also been shown to be highly effective in protecting 
against HPV-associated genital warts (Box 15.13). It is 
currently recommended that HPV vaccination should be 
administered prior to the onset of sexual activity, typi-
cally at age 11–13, in a course of three injections. In the 
UK, only girls are offered vaccination, and it should be 
noted that this approach will not protect HPV transmis-
sion for MSM. As neither vaccine protects against all 
oncogenic types of HPV, cervical screening programmes 
will still be necessary.
A variety of treatments are available for established 
disease, including the following:
•	 Podophyllotoxin, 0.5% solution or 0.15% cream 
(contraindicated in pregnancy), applied twice daily 
for 3 days, followed by 4 days’ rest, for up to  
4 weeks is suitable for home treatment of external 
warts.
‘Prophylactic HPV vaccination in women aged 15–25 years is 
highly effective at preventing precancerous cervical intra-
epithelial neoplasia in young women who have not previously 
been infected with HPV.’
• Garland SM, et al. New Engl J Med 2007; 356:1928–1943.
• Paavonen J, et al. Lancet 2007; 369:2161–2170.
15.13  HPV vaccination and precancerous cervical 
intra-epithelial neoplasia
Sexually transmitted infections
15
426
Viral hepatitis
The hepatitis viruses A–D (p. 948) may be sexually 
transmitted:
•	 Hepatitis A (HAV). Insertive oro-anal sex, insertive 
digital sex, insertive anal sex and multiple sexual 
partners have been linked with HAV transmission 
in MSM. HAV transmission in heterosexual men 
and women is also possible through oro-anal sex.
•	 Hepatitis B (HBV). Insertive oro-anal sex, anal sex 
and multiple sexual partners are linked with HBV 
infection in MSM. Heterosexual transmission of 
HBV is well documented and commercial sex 
workers are at particular risk. Hepatitis D (HDV) 
may also be sexually transmitted.
•	 Hepatitis C (HCV). Sexual transmission of HCV is 
well documented in MSM, but less so in 
heterosexuals. Sexual transmission is less efficient 
than for HBV.
The sexual partner(s) of patients with HAV and HBV 
should be seen as soon as possible and offered immuni-
sation where appropriate. Patients with HAV should 
abstain from all forms of unprotected sex until non-
infectious. Those with HBV should likewise abstain 
from unprotected sex until they are non-infectious or 
until their partners have been vaccinated successfully. 
No active or passive immunisation is available for pro-
tection against HCV but the consistent use of condoms 
is likely to protect susceptible partners. Active immuni-
sation against HAV and HBV should be offered to sus-
ceptible people at risk of infection. Many STI clinics offer 
HAV immunisation to MSM along with routine HBV 
immunisation; a combined HAV and HBV vaccine is 
available.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Books and journal articles
Clutterbuck D. Specialist training in sexually transmitted 
infections and HIV. London: Mosby; 2004.
Low N, Aral S, Cassell J (eds). Global aspects of STI and 
HIV. Sexually Transmitted Infections 2007; 83:501–589.
McMillan A, Young H, Ogilvie MM, Scott GR. Clinical 
practice in sexually transmissible infections. London: 
Saunders; 2002.
Rogstad KE (ed.). ABC of sexually transmitted infections, 
6th edn. Oxford: Wiley–Blackwell; 2011.
Website
www.bashh.org/guidelines Updates on treatment of all STIs.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 412 inset (Perianal warts), Figs 15.5, 15.6, 15.7 McMillan 
A, Scott GR. Sexually transmitted infections: a colour 
guide. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2000; copyright 
Elsevier.
Page 412 insets (Coronal papillae, mucopus), page 413 inset 
(Inflammation), Fig. 15.3 McMillan A, Young H, Ogilvie 
MM, Scott GR. Clinical practice in sexually transmissible 
infections. Edinburgh: Saunders; 2002; copyright Elsevier.
•	 Imiquimod cream (contraindicated in pregnancy), 
applied 3 times weekly (and washed off after 6–10 
hours) for up to 16 weeks, is also suitable for home 
treatment of external warts.
•	 Cryotherapy using liquid nitrogen to freeze warty 
tissue is suitable for external and internal warts but 
often requires repeated clinic visits.
•	 Hyfrecation – electrofulguration that causes 
superficial charring – is suitable for external and 
internal warts. Hyfrecation results in smoke plume 
which contains HPV DNA and has the potential to 
cause respiratory infection in the operator/patient. 
Masks should be worn during the procedure and 
adequate extraction of fumes should be provided.
•	 Surgical removal. Refractory warts, especially 
pedunculated perianal lesions, may be excised 
under local or general anaesthesia.
Molluscum contagiosum
Infection by molluscum contagiosum virus, both sexual 
and non-sexual, produces flesh-coloured umbilicated 
hemispherical papules usually up to 5 mm in diameter 
after an incubation period of 3–12 weeks (Fig. 15.7). 
Larger lesions may be seen in HIV infection (p. 388). 
Lesions are often multiple and, once established in an 
individual, may spread by auto-inoculation. They are 
found on the genitalia, lower abdomen and upper thighs 
when sexually acquired. Facial lesions are highly sug-
gestive of underlying HIV infection. Diagnosis is made 
on clinical grounds and by expression of the central core, 
in which the typical pox-like viral particles can be seen 
on electron microscopy (differentiating molluscum con-
tagiosum from genital warts). Typically, lesions persist 
for an average of 2 years before spontaneous resolution 
occurs. Treatment regimens are therefore cosmetic; they 
include cryotherapy, hyfrecation, topical applications of 
0.15% podophyllotoxin cream (contraindicated in preg-
nancy) or expression of the central core.
Fig. 15.7  Molluscum contagiosum of the shaft of the penis. From 
McMillan and Scott 2000 – see right. 
427
16 
Biochemical investigations 428
Integrated water and electrolyte  
balance 429
Water and electrolyte distribution 429
Investigation of water and electrolytes 429
Disorders of sodium balance 430
Functional anatomy and physiology of renal 
sodium handling 430
Presenting problems in disorders of sodium 
balance 432
Sodium depletion 432
Sodium excess 434
Diuretic therapy 434
Disorders of water balance 436
Functional anatomy and physiology of renal 
water handling 436
Presenting problems in disorders of water 
balance 437
Hyponatraemia 437
Hypernatraemia 439
Disorders of potassium balance 439
Functional anatomy and physiology of renal 
potassium handling 440
Presenting problems in disorders of potassium 
balance 440
Hypokalaemia 440
Hyperkalaemia 442
Clinical biochemistry 
and metabolism
Disorders of amino acid metabolism 449
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism 449
Disorders of complex lipid metabolism 450
Disorders of blood lipids and lipoproteins 450
Functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigation of lipid metabolism 450
Presenting problems in disorders of lipids 453
Disorders of haem synthesis – the 
porphyrias 458
M.J. Field
L. Burnett
D.R. Sullivan
P. Stewart
Disorders of acid–base balance 443
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
acid–base homeostasis 443
Presenting problems in disorders of acid–base 
balance 444
Metabolic acidosis 445
Metabolic alkalosis 446
Respiratory acidosis 447
Respiratory alkalosis 447
Mixed acid-base disorders 447
Disorders of divalent ion metabolism 447
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
magnesium metabolism 447
Presenting problems in disorders of 
magnesium metabolism 448
Hypomagnesaemia 448
Hypermagnesaemia 448
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
phosphate metabolism 448
Presenting problems in disorders of phosphate 
metabolism 448
Hypophosphataemia 448
Hyperphosphataemia 449
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
428
There is a worldwide trend towards increased use of 
laboratory-based diagnostic investigations, and biochem­
ical investigations in particular. In the health-care sys­
tems of developed countries, it has been estimated that 
60–70% of all critical decisions taken in regard to patients, 
and over 90% of data stored in electronic medical records 
systems, involve a laboratory service or result.
This chapter covers a diverse group of disorders 
affecting adults not considered elsewhere in this book, 
whose primary manifestation is in abnormalities of 
biochemistry laboratory results, or whose underlying 
pathophysiology involves disturbance in specific bio-
chemical pathways.
BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS
There are three broad reasons why a clinician may 
request a biochemical laboratory investigation:
•	 to screen an asymptomatic subject for the presence 
of disease
•	 to assist in diagnosis of a patient’s presenting 
complaint
•	 to monitor changes in test results, as a marker of 
disease progression or response to treatment.
Contemporary medical practice has become increas-
ingly reliant on laboratory investigation, and in par­
ticular, on biochemical investigation. This has been 
associated with extraordinary improvements in the 
analytical capacity and speed of laboratory instrumenta-
tion and the following operational trends:
•	 Large central biochemistry laboratories feature 
extensive use of automation and information 
technology. Specimens are transported from clinical 
areas to the laboratory using high-speed transport 
systems (such as pneumatic tubes) and identified 
with machine-readable labels (such as bar codes). 
Laboratory instruments have been miniaturised and 
integrated with robot transport systems to enable 
multiple rapid analyses of a single sample. 
Statistical process control techniques are used to 
assure the quality of analytical results, and 
increasingly to monitor other aspects of the 
laboratory, such as the time taken to complete the 
analysis (‘turn-around time’).
•	 Point-of-care testing (POCT) brings selected 
laboratory analytical systems into clinical areas, to 
the patient’s bedside or even connected to an 
individual patient. These systems allow the clinician 
to receive results almost instantaneously for 
immediate treatment of the patient, although often 
with less precision or at greater cost than using a 
central laboratory.
•	 The diversity of analyses has widened considerably 
with the introduction of many techniques borrowed 
from the chemical or other industries (Box 16.1).
Good medical practice involves the appropriate 
ordering of laboratory investigations and correct 
Analytical modality
Analyte
Typical applications
Ion-selective electrodes
Blood gases, electrolytes (e.g. Na, K, Cl)
Point-of-care testing (POCT)
High-throughput analysers
Colorimetric chemical reaction or 
coupled enzymatic reaction
Simple mass or concentration 
measurement (e.g. creatinine, phosphate)
Simple enzyme activity
High-throughput analysers
Ligand assay
(usually immunoassay)
Specific proteins
Hormones
Drugs
Increasingly available for POCT or  
high-throughput analysers
Chromatography: gas chromatography 
(GC), high-pressure liquid chromatography 
(HPLC), thin-layer chromatography (TLC)
Organic compounds
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM)
Mass spectroscopy (MS)
Drug screening (e.g. drugs of misuse)
Vitamins
Biochemical metabolites
Spectrophotometry, turbidimetry, 
nephelometry, fluorimetry
Haemoglobin derivatives
Specific proteins
Immunoglobulins
Xanthochromia
Lipoproteins
Paraproteins
Electrophoresis
Proteins
Some enzymes
Paraproteins
Isoenzyme analysis
Atomic absorption (AA)
Inductively coupled plasma/mass 
spectroscopy (ICP-MS)
Trace elements and metals
Quantitation of heavy metals
Molecular diagnostics
Nucleic acid quantification and/or 
sequence
Inherited and somatic cell mutations (Ch. 3)
Genetic polymorphisms (Ch. 3)
Variations in rates of drug metabolism (Ch. 2)
Microbial diagnosis (Ch. 6)
16.1  Range of analytical modalities used in the clinical biochemistry laboratory
Integrated water and electrolyte balance
16
429
TBW is about 40 L. Approximately 25 L is located inside 
cells (the intracellular fluid or ICF), while the remaining 
15 L is in the extracellular fluid (ECF) compartment 
(Fig. 16.1). Most of the ECF (approximately 12 L) is inter-
stitial fluid, which is within the tissues but outside 
cells, whereas the remainder (about 3 L) is in the 
plasma compartment.
Figure 16.1 illustrates some of the major differences 
in composition between the main body fluid compart-
ments. The dominant cation in the ICF is potassium, 
while the dominant cation in the ECF is sodium. Phos-
phates and negatively charged proteins constitute the 
major intracellular anions, while chloride and, to a lesser 
extent, bicarbonate dominate the ECF anions. An impor-
tant difference between the plasma and interstitial 
compartments of the ECF is that only plasma contains 
significant concentrations of protein.
The major force maintaining the difference in cation 
concentration between the ICF and ECF is the sodium–
potassium pump (Na,K-activated ATPase), which is 
present in all cell membranes. Maintenance of the cation 
gradients across cell membranes is essential for many 
cell processes, including the excitability of conducting 
tissues such as nerve and muscle. The difference in 
protein content between the plasma and the interstitial 
fluid compartment is maintained by the impermeability 
of the capillary wall to protein. This protein concentra-
tion gradient (the colloid osmotic, or oncotic, pressure 
of the plasma) contributes to the balance of forces across 
the capillary wall that favour fluid retention within the 
plasma compartment.
Investigation of water and electrolytes
The most common biochemical test in plasma is called 
the urea and electrolytes (U&E) test in some parts of the 
world, and the electrolytes/urea/creatinine (EUC) in 
others. A guide to its interpretation is shown in Box 16.3. 
Because the blood consists of both intracellular (red cell) 
and extracellular (plasma) components, it is important 
interpretation of test results. The key principles, includ-
ing the concepts of sensitivity and specificity, are 
described on page 5. Reference ranges for laboratory 
results are provided in Chapter 29. Many laboratory 
investigations can be subject to variability arising from 
incorrect patient preparation (for example, in the fasting 
or fed state), timing of sample collection (for example, 
in relation to diurnal variation of hormone levels, or 
dosage regimens for therapeutic agents), analytical 
factors (for example, serum versus plasma; use of the 
correct anticoagulant, or POCT versus central analysis) 
or artefact (for example, taking a venous sample proxi-
mal to the site of an intravenous infusion). It is therefore 
important for clinical and laboratory staff to communi-
cate effectively and for clinicians to follow local recom-
mendations concerning collection and transport of 
samples in the appropriate container and with appropri-
ate labelling.
INTEGRATED WATER AND 
ELECTROLYTE BALANCE
One of the most common uses of the clinical biochemis-
try laboratory is to monitor electrolyte and acid–base 
status. The diverse clinical consequences of these bio-
chemical disorders are illustrated in Box 16.2. Some 
whole-body electrolyte disturbances (notably of sodium) 
result in major clinical problems with minimal distur-
bance in measured biochemical parameters. However, 
these will also be considered for convenience here.
Before considering individual electrolytes and acid–
base balance, it is important to review the relationships 
between them.
Water and electrolyte distribution
The following basic concepts are relevant to understand-
ing the origin, consequences and therapy of many of 
the fluid and electrolyte disturbances discussed.
In a typical adult male, total body water (TBW) is 
approximately 60% of body weight (somewhat more for 
infants and less for women). For an average individual, 
Fig. 16.1  Normal distribution of body water and electrolytes. 
Schematic representation of volume (L = litres) and composition (dominant 
ionic species only shown) of the intracellular fluid (ICF) and extracellular 
fluid (ECF) in a 70 kg male. The main difference in composition between 
the plasma and interstitial fluid (ISF) is the presence of appreciable 
concentrations of protein in the plasma but not the ISF. 
ICF
ISF
Plasma
Protein
ECF
Cl−
HCO3−
HPO4
2    −
Proteinn  − 
2K  +
3Na  +
Na+
K+
(12 L)
(3 L)
(25 L)
Primary 
disturbance
Altered 
physiology
Clinical effect
Sodium
ECF volume
Circulatory changes
Water
ECF osmolality
Cerebral changes
Potassium
Action potential in 
excitable tissues
Neuromuscular 
weakness, cardiac 
effects
Hydrogen ion
Acid–base 
balance (pH)
Altered tissue function, 
respiratory compensation
Magnesium
Cell membrane 
stability
Neuromuscular, vascular 
and cardiac effects
Phosphate
Cellular energetics
Widespread tissue effects
(ECF = extracellular fluid)
16.2  Manifestations of disordered water, 
electrolyte and acid–base status
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
430
glomerulus, generating a fluid that is free from cells and 
protein and which resembles plasma in its electrolyte 
composition. This is then delivered into the renal tubules, 
where reabsorption of water and various electrolytes 
occurs (more detail on the structure and function of the 
glomerulus is given in Ch. 17). The glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR) is approximately 125 mL/min (equivalent 
to 180 L/day) in a typical adult. Over 99% of this 
filtered fluid is reabsorbed into the blood in the peri­
tubular capillaries during its passage through successive 
segments of the nephron, largely as a result of tubular 
reabsorption of sodium. The processes mediating this 
sodium reabsorption, and the factors that regulate it, are 
key to understanding clinical disturbances and pharma-
cological interventions.
Nephron segments
At least four different functional segments of the 
nephron can be defined in terms of their mechanism for 
sodium reabsorption (Fig. 16.3).
Proximal tubule
This is responsible for the reabsorption of some 65% of 
the filtered sodium load. The cellular mechanisms are 
complex but some of the key features are shown in 
Figure 16.3A. Filtered sodium in the luminal fluid enters 
the cell via several sodium transporters in the apical 
membrane that couple sodium transport to the entry of 
glucose, amino acid, phosphate and other organic mol-
ecules. Entry of sodium into the tubular cells at this site 
is also linked to secretion of H+ ions, through the 
to avoid haemolysis during or after collection of the 
sample, which causes contamination of the plasma com-
partment by intracellular elements, particularly potas-
sium. Blood should not be drawn from an arm into 
which an intravenous infusion is being given, to avoid 
contamination by the infused fluid. Repeated measure-
ments of plasma electrolytes are frequently necessary 
when abnormalities have been detected and corrective 
therapy instituted.
Since the kidney maintains the constancy of body 
fluids by adjusting urine volume and composition, it is 
frequently helpful to obtain a sample of urine (‘spot’ 
specimen or 24-hour collection) at the time of blood 
analysis. An example of the use of urine biochemistry is 
given for the differential diagnosis of hyponatraemia in 
Box 16.14 (p. 438).
DISORDERS OF SODIUM BALANCE
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
renal sodium handling
Since the great majority of the body’s sodium content is 
located in the ECF, where it is by far the most abundant 
cation, total body sodium is a principal determinant of 
ECF volume. Regulation of sodium excretion by the 
kidney is crucially important in maintaining normal 
ECF volume, and plasma volume, in the face of wide 
variations in sodium intake, which typically may range 
between 50 and 250 mmol/day.
The functional unit for renal excretion is the neph­
ron (Fig. 16.2). Blood undergoes ultrafiltration in the 
Fig. 16.2  The nephron. Letters A–D refer to tubular segments shown in 
more detail in Figure 16.3. (aa = afferent arteriole; ea = efferent arteriole; 
md = macula densa) 
aa
ea
md
Cortex
Medulla
A
B
Thin
descending
limb
Loop of Henle
Thin
ascending
limb
Medullary
collecting
duct
Pars
recta
Proximal
(convoluted)
tubule
Glomerulus
C
Early distal
(convoluted)
tubule
Late distal
tubule
Cortical
collecting
duct
D
Thick
ascending
limb
Na+ (sodium)
•	 Largely reflects reciprocal changes in body water content
•	 See ‘Hypernatraemia’ and ‘Hyponatraemia’, pp. 437 and 439
K+ (potassium)
•	 May reflect K shifts in and out of cells
•	 Low levels usually mean excessive losses (gastrointestinal or 
renal)
•	 High levels usually mean renal dysfunction
•	 See ‘Hypokalaemia’ and ‘Hyperkalaemia’, pp. 440 and 442
Cl− (chloride)
•	 Generally changes in parallel with plasma Na
•	 Low in metabolic alkalosis
•	 High in some forms of metabolic acidosis
HCO3
− (bicarbonate)
•	 Abnormal in acid–base disorders
•	 See Box 16.18, p. 445
Urea
•	 Increased with a fall in glomerular filtration rate (GFR), 
reduced renal perfusion or urine flow rate, and in high 
protein intake or catabolic states
•	 See page 466
Creatinine
•	 Increased with a fall in GFR, in individuals with high muscle 
mass, and with some drugs
•	 See Fig. 17.2, p. 467
16.3  How to interpret ‘U&Es’ (urea and electrolytes) 
or ‘EUC’ (electrolytes/urea/creatinine) results
Disorders of sodium balance
16
431
the Na,K,2Cl co-transporter (‘triple co-transporter’, or 
NKCC2), which allows electroneutral entry of these ions 
into the renal tubular cell. Some of the potassium accu-
mulated inside the cell recirculates across the apical 
membrane back into the lumen through a specific potas-
sium channel (ROMK), providing a continuing supply 
of potassium to match the high concentrations of sodium 
and chloride available in the lumen. A small positive 
transepithelial potential difference exists in the lumen of 
this segment relative to the interstitium, and this serves 
to drive cations such as sodium, potassium, calcium and 
magnesium between the cells, forming a reabsorptive 
shunt pathway.
Early distal tubule
Some 6% of filtered sodium is reabsorbed in the early 
distal tubule (also called distal convoluted tubule) (Fig. 
16.3C), again driven by the activity of the basolateral 
Na,K-ATPase. In this segment, entry of sodium into the 
cell from the luminal fluid is via a sodium–chloride 
co-transport carrier (NCCT). This segment is also imper-
meable to water, resulting in further dilution of the 
luminal fluid. There is no significant transepithelial flux 
of potassium in this segment, but calcium is reabsorbed 
through the mechanism shown in Figure 16.3C: a 
sodium–hydrogen exchanger (NHE-3). Intracellular H+ 
ions are generated within tubular cells from the break-
down of carbonic acid, which is produced from carbon 
dioxide and water under the influence of carbonic anhy-
drase. Large numbers of Na,K-ATPase pumps are 
present on the basolateral membrane of tubular cells that 
transport sodium from the cells into the blood. In addi-
tion, a large component of the transepithelial flux of 
sodium, water and other dissolved solutes occurs 
through the gaps between the cells (the ‘shunt’ pathway). 
Overall, fluid and electrolyte reabsorption is almost iso-
tonic in this segment, as water reabsorption is matched 
very closely to sodium fluxes. A component of this water 
flow also passes through the cells, via aquaporin-1 
(AQP-1) water channels, which are not sensitive to hor-
monal regulation.
The loop of Henle
The thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle (Fig. 
16.3B) reabsorbs a further 25% of the filtered sodium but 
is impermeable to water, resulting in dilution of the 
luminal fluid. Again, the primary driving force for 
sodium reabsorption is the Na,K-ATPase on the basola-
teral cell membrane, but in this segment sodium enters 
the cell from the lumen via a specific carrier molecule, 
Fig. 16.3  Principal transport mechanisms in segments of the nephron. See text for further details. The apical membrane of the tubular cells is 
the side facing the lumen, and the basolateral membrane is the side facing the blood. Black circles indicate primary active transport pumps; open circles 
are carrier molecules without direct linkage to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis. *Site of diuretic action in each segment. †Peritubular forces refers 
to the hydrostatic and oncotic pressures in the peritubular capillaries. (ADH = antidiuretic hormone; c.a. = carbonic anhydrase) 
Na+
Gluc
Na+
‘Shunt’
3Na+
2K+
H+
(c.a.)*
A Proximal
Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+
Na+
3Na+
2K+
*
B Thick ascending limb
Na+
3Na+
2K+
C Early distal
Na+
3Na+
2K+
D Late distal/cortical collecting
 2Cl−
K+
K+
Cl−
Ca2+
Ca2+
3Na+
*
H+
HCO3
 – 
Cl−
K+
Cl−
*
Principal cell
Intercalated cell
Lumen
Blood
Urine
Na reabsorption
(%, hormonal control)
Water
permeability
Diuretics
Highly
permeable
*Acetazolamide
25%
Impermeable
*Furosemide
6%
Impermeable
*Thiazide
2–3%
Aldosterone
Permeability
increased by
ADH
*Amiloride
Spironolactone
 
65%
Angiotensin II
Sympathetic nerves
Peritubular forces†
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
432
cortex, and causes vasoconstriction of small arterioles. 
Aldosterone amplifies sodium retention by its action on 
the cortical collecting duct. The net effect is to restore 
ECF volume and blood pressure towards normal, 
thereby correcting the initiating hypovolaemic stimulus.
The sympathetic nervous system also increases 
sodium retention, both through haemodynamic mecha-
nisms (afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction and GFR 
reduction) and by direct stimulation of proximal tubular 
sodium reabsorption. Other humoral mediators, such as 
the natriuretic peptides, inhibit sodium reabsorption, 
contributing to natriuresis during periods of sodium 
and volume excess. Hypovolaemia also has haemo­
dynamic effects that reduce GFR and alter the peritubu-
lar physical forces around the proximal tubule, thereby 
decreasing sodium excretion. Conversely, increased 
renal perfusion in hypervolaemia and hypertension 
results in a compensatory increase in sodium excretion.
Presenting problems in disorders of 
sodium balance
When the balance of sodium intake and excretion is 
disturbed, any tendency for plasma sodium concentra-
tion to change is usually corrected by the osmotic mech-
anisms controlling water balance (p. 436). As a result, 
disorders in sodium balance present chiefly as altera-
tions in the ECF volume, resulting in hypovolaemia or 
oedema, rather than as an alteration in plasma sodium 
concentration. Clinical manifestations of altered volume 
are illustrated in Box 16.4.
Sodium depletion
Aetiology and clinical assessment
Sodium depletion can occur occasionally under extreme 
environmental conditions due to inadequate intake of 
basolateral sodium–calcium exchanger leads to low 
intracellular concentrations of calcium, promoting 
calcium entry from the luminal fluid through a calcium 
channel.
Late distal tubule and collecting ducts
The late distal tubule and cortical collecting duct are 
anatomically and functionally continuous (Fig. 16.3D). 
Here, sodium entry from the luminal fluid occurs via 
the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) through which 
sodium passes alone, generating a substantial lumen-
negative transepithelial potential difference. This 
sodium flux into the tubular cells is balanced by secre-
tion of potassium and hydrogen ions into the lumen and 
by reabsorption of chloride ions. Potassium is accumu-
lated in the cell by the basolateral Na,K-ATPase, and 
passes into the luminal fluid down its electrochemical 
gradient, through an apical potassium channel (ROMK). 
Chloride ions pass largely between cells. Hydrogen ion 
secretion is mediated by an H+-ATPase located on the 
luminal membrane of the intercalated cells, which con-
stitute approximately one-third of the epithelial cells 
in this nephron segment. This part of the nephron has 
a variable permeability to water, depending on the 
availability of antidiuretic hormone (ADH, or vaso-
pressin) in the circulation. All ion transport processes 
in this segment are stimulated by the steroid hormone 
aldosterone, which can increase sodium reabsorption 
in this segment to a maximum of 2–3% of the filtered 
sodium load.
Less than 1% of sodium reabsorption occurs in the med-
ullary collecting duct, where it is inhibited by atrial natriu-
retic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP).
Regulation of sodium transport
A large number of interrelated mechanisms serve to 
maintain whole body sodium balance and hence ECF 
volume by matching urinary sodium excretion to sodium 
intake (Fig. 16.4).
Important sensing mechanisms include volume 
receptors in the cardiac atria and the intrathoracic veins, 
as well as pressure receptors located in the central arte-
rial tree (aortic arch and carotid sinus) and the afferent 
arterioles within the kidney. A further afferent signal is 
generated within the kidney itself; the enzyme renin is 
released from specialised smooth muscle cells in the 
walls of the afferent and efferent arterioles, at the point 
where they make contact with the early distal tubule (at 
the macula densa) to form the juxtaglomerular appara-
tus. Renin release is stimulated by:
•	 reduced perfusion pressure in the afferent arteriole
•	 increased sympathetic nerve activity
•	 decreased sodium chloride concentration in the 
distal tubular fluid.
Renin released into the circulation activates the effec-
tor mechanisms for sodium retention, which are com­
ponents of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone (RAA) 
system (see Fig. 20.17, p. 771). Renin acts on the peptide 
substrate, angiotensinogen (manufactured in the liver), 
producing angiotensin I in the circulation. This in turn 
is cleaved by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
into angiotensin II, largely in the pulmonary capillary 
bed. Angiotensin II has multiple actions: it stimulates 
proximal tubular sodium reabsorption and release of 
aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal 
Fig. 16.4  Mechanisms involved in the regulation of sodium 
transport. (ANP = atrial natriuretic peptide; BNP = brain natriuretic 
peptide; ECF = extracellular fluid; GFR = glomerular filtration rate; 
RAA = renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system; SNS = sympathetic nervous 
system.  indicates an effect to stimulate Na reabsorption and hence 
reduce Na excretion, while  indicates an effect to inhibit Na reabsorption 
and hence increase Na excretion) 
• Volume receptors
    Cardiac atria
    Intrathoracic veins
• Pressure receptors
    Aortic arch/carotids
    Afferent arteriole
• Tubular fluid [NaCl]
    Macula densa
• Neurohumoral
     RAA
     SNS/catecholamines
     ANP
     BNP
     Prostaglandins
• Haemodynamic
     GFR
     Peritubular forces
ECF Na content
and volume
Afferent
Efferent
Sensors
Effectors
Disorders of sodium balance
16
433
Management
Management of sodium and water depletion has two 
main components:
•	 treat the cause where possible, to stop ongoing salt 
and water losses
•	 replace the salt and water deficits, and provide 
ongoing maintenance requirements, usually by 
intravenous fluid replacement when depletion is 
severe.
Intravenous fluid therapy
Box 16.6 shows the daily maintenance requirements for 
water and electrolytes in a typical adult, and Box 16.7 
summarises the composition of some widely available 
intravenous fluids. The choice of fluid and the rate of 
administration depend on the clinical circumstances, as 
assessed at the bedside and from laboratory data, and as 
described in Box 16.8.
In the absence of normal oral intake (as in a fasting or 
post-operative patient in hospital), maintenance quanti-
ties of fluid, sodium and potassium should be provided. 
If any deficits or continuing pathological losses are iden-
tified, additional fluid and electrolytes will be required. 
In prolonged periods of fasting (more than a few days), 
attention also needs to be given to providing sufficient 
caloric and nutritional intake to prevent excessive 
catabolism of body energy stores (p. 120).
The choice of intravenous fluid therapy in the treat-
ment of significant hypovolaemia relates to the concepts 
in Figure 16.1 (p. 429). If fluid containing neither sodium 
nor protein is given, it will distribute in the body fluid 
compartments in proportion to the normal distribution 
of total body water. Thus, giving 1 L of 5% dextrose will 
contribute relatively little (approximately 3/40 of the 
infused volume) towards expansion of the plasma 
volume. This makes 5% dextrose ineffective at restoring 
the circulation and perfusion of vital organs. Intra­
venous infusion of an isotonic (normal) saline solution, 
on the other hand, results in more effective expansion of 
the extracellular fluid, although a minority of the infused 
volume (some 3/15) will contribute to plasma volume.
salt, but it is much more commonly due to pathological 
losses of sodium-containing fluids (Box 16.5). Loss of 
whole blood, as in acute haemorrhage, is also an obvious 
cause of hypovolaemia, and elicits the same mechanisms 
for the conservation of sodium and water.
The diagnosis of hypovolaemia is based on cha­
racteristic symptoms and signs (see Box 16.4) in the 
context of a relevant precipitating illness. Supportive 
evidence may be obtained from the clinical biochemistry 
laboratory. Although plasma sodium concentration 
may not be reduced if salt and water are lost in equal 
proportions, a number of other parameters are altered 
during appropriate renal, hormonal and haemodynamic 
responses to hypovolaemia. During the early stages of 
hypovolaemia, GFR is maintained while urinary flow 
rate is reduced as a consequence of activation of sodium- 
and water-retaining mechanisms in the nephron. Thus, 
plasma creatinine, which reflects GFR, may be relatively 
normal, but the plasma urea concentration is typically 
elevated, since urea excretion is affected by both GFR 
and urine flow rate. Plasma uric acid may also rise, 
reflecting activation of compensatory proximal tubular 
reabsorption. With avid retention of sodium and water, 
the urine osmolality increases while the urine sodium 
concentration falls. Under these circumstances, sodium 
excretion may fall to less than 0.1% of the filtered 
sodium load.
Hypovolaemia
Hypervolaemia
Symptoms
Thirst
Ankle swelling
Dizziness on standing
Abdominal swelling
Weakness
Breathlessness
Signs
Low JVP
Peripheral oedema
Postural hypotension
Raised JVP
Tachycardia
Pulmonary crepitations
Dry mouth
Pleural effusion
Reduced skin turgor
Ascites
Reduced urine output
Weight gain
Weight loss
Hypertension 
(sometimes)
Confusion, stupor
(JVP = jugular venous pressure)
16.4  Clinical features of hypovolaemia and 
hypervolaemia
Mechanism
Examples
Inadequate intake
Environmental deprivation, inadequate 
therapeutic replacement
Gastrointestinal 
sodium loss
Vomiting, diarrhoea, nasogastric suction, 
external fistula
Skin sodium loss
Excessive sweating, burns
Renal sodium loss
Diuretic therapy, mineralocorticoid 
deficiency, tubulointerstitial disease
Internal 
sequestration*
Bowel obstruction, peritonitis, 
pancreatitis, crush injury
*A cause of circulatory volume depletion, although total body sodium and 
water may be normal or increased.
16.5  Causes of sodium and water depletion
Requirement per kg
Typical 70 kg adult
Water
35–45 mL/kg
2.5–3.0 L/day
Sodium
1.5–2 mmol/kg
100–140 mmol/day
Potassium
1.0–1.5 mmol/kg
70–100 mmol/day
16.6  Basic daily water and electrolyte 
requirements
Fluid
D-glucose
Calories
Na+ 
(mmol/L)
Cl− 
(mmol/L)
Other  
(mmol/L)
5% dextrose
50 g
200
0
0
0
Normal 
(0.9%) 
saline
0
0
154
154
0
Hartmann’s 
solution
0
0
131
111
K+ 5
Ca2+ 2
Lactate− 29
16.7  Composition of some isotonic 
intravenous fluids
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
434
Carrying this reasoning further, it might be expected 
that a solution containing plasma proteins would be 
largely retained within the plasma, thus maximally 
expanding the circulating fluid volume and improving 
tissue perfusion. However, recent clinical studies have 
not shown any overall advantage of infusions contain-
ing albumin in the treatment of acute hypovolaemia 
(Box 16.9). Resuscitation fluids containing synthetic 
colloids such as carbohydrate polymers should not be 
used in the acute resuscitation of volume-depleted 
patients since they offer no benefit over crystalloids and 
are associated with increased mortality (see Box 17.21, 
p. 482).
Sodium excess
Aetiology and clinical assessment
In patients with normal cardiac and renal function, 
excessive intakes of salt and water are compensated for 
by increased excretion and do not lead to clinically 
obvious features of sodium and water overload. 
However, patients with cardiac, renal or hepatic disease 
frequently present with signs and symptoms of sodium 
excess (Fig. 16.5). This does not always involve an 
increase in circulating blood volume, since the excess 
fluid often leaks out of the capillaries to expand the 
interstitial compartment of the ECF, especially in dis-
eases like nephrotic syndrome and chronic liver disease 
that cause hypoalbuminaemia. Important causes of 
sodium excess are shown in Box 16.10.
Peripheral oedema is the most common physical sign 
of ECF volume expansion (p. 478). The three most 
common systemic disorders associated with sodium and 
fluid overload are cardiac failure, cirrhosis and neph-
rotic syndrome. In each of these, sodium retention is 
largely a secondary response to circulatory insufficiency 
caused by the primary disorder, as illustrated in Figure 
16.5. The pathophysiology is different in renal failure, 
when the primary cause of volume expansion is the 
profound reduction in GFR impairing sodium and water 
excretion, and secondary tubular mechanisms are of 
lesser importance. Further detail on each of these condi-
tions is given in other chapters of this book.
Management
The management of ECF volume overload involves a 
number of components:
•	 specific treatment directed at the underlying cause, 
such as ACE inhibitors in heart failure and 
corticosteroids in minimal change nephropathy
•	 restriction of dietary sodium (to 50–80 mmol/day) 
to match the diminished excretory capacity
•	 treatment with diuretics.
Diuretic therapy
Diuretics are important in the treatment of conditions of 
ECF expansion due to salt and water retention and in 
hypertension (p. 606). They act by inhibiting sodium 
reabsorption at various locations along the nephron (see 
Fig. 16.3, p. 431). Their potency and adverse effects relate 
to their mechanism and site of action.
Mechanisms of action
In the proximal tubule, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 
such as acetazolamide inhibit the intracellular produc-
tion of H+ ions, thereby reducing the fraction of sodium 
reabsorption that is exchanged for H+ by the apical 
Step 1: assess clinical volume status
•	 Examine patient for signs of hypovolaemia or hypervolaemia 
(see Box 16.4)
•	 Check daily weight change
Step 2: review fluid balance chart
•	 Check total volumes IN and OUT on previous day (IN–OUT is 
positive by ~400 mL in normal balance, reflecting insensible 
fluid losses of ~800 mL and metabolic water generation of 
~400 mL)
•	 Check cumulative change in daily fluid balance over previous 
3–5 days
•	 Correlate chart figures with weight change and clinical 
volume status to estimate net fluid balance
Step 3: assess ongoing pathological process
•	 Check losses from gastrointestinal tract and surgical drains
•	 Estimate increased insensible losses (e.g. in fever) and 
internal sequestration (‘third space’)
Step 4: check plasma U&Es (see Box 16.3)
•	 Check plasma Na as marker of relative water balance
•	 Check plasma K as a guide to extracellular K balance
•	 Check HCO3 as a clue to acid–base disorder
•	 Check urea and creatinine to monitor renal function
Step 5: prescribe appropriate IV fluid replacement therapy
•	 Replace basic water and electrolytes each day (see Box 16.6)
•	 Allow for anticipated oral intake and pathological fluid loss
•	 Adjust amounts of water (if IV, usually given as isotonic 5% 
dextrose), sodium and potassium according to plasma 
electrolyte results
16.8  How to assess fluid and electrolyte balance 
in hospitalised patients
‘For patients with hypovolaemia there is no evidence that 
albumin reduces mortality when compared with cheaper 
alternatives such as saline.’
•	 Roberts I et al. Human albumin solution for resuscitation and volume expansion 
in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2011, issue 
11. Art. no.: CD001208.
16.9  Albumin infusions in hypovolaemia
Mechanism
Examples
Impaired renal function (Ch. 17)
Primary renal disease
Primary hyperaldosteronism* 
(p. 780)
Conn’s syndrome
Secondary hyperaldosteronism
(see Fig. 16.5)
Congestive cardiac failure
Cirrhotic liver disease
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-losing enteropathy
Malnutrition
Idiopathic/cyclical oedema
Renal artery stenosis*
*Conditions in this table other than primary hyperaldosteronism and renal 
artery stenosis are typically associated with generalised oedema.
16.10  Causes of sodium and water excess
Disorders of sodium balance
16
435
Another is the mineralocorticoid receptor, to which 
binding of aldosterone is blocked by spironolactone and 
eplerenone.
An important feature of the most commonly used 
diuretic drugs (furosemide, thiazides and amiloride) is 
that they act on their target transport molecules from the 
luminal side of the tubular epithelium. Since they are 
highly protein-bound in the plasma, very little reaches 
the urinary fluid by glomerular filtration, but there are 
active transport mechanisms for secreting organic acids 
and bases, including these drugs, across the proximal 
tubular wall into the lumen, resulting in adequate drug 
concentrations being delivered to later tubular seg-
ments. This secretory process may be impaired by 
certain other drugs, and also by accumulated organic 
anions as occurs in chronic renal failure and chronic 
liver failure, leading to resistance to diuretics.
Osmotic diuretics act independently of specific trans-
port mechanism. They are freely filtered at the glomeru-
lus but are not reabsorbed by any part of the tubular 
system. They retain fluid osmotically within the tubular 
lumen and limit the extent of sodium reabsorption in 
multiple segments. Mannitol is the most commonly used 
osmotic diuretic. It is given by intravenous infusion to 
achieve short-term diuresis in conditions such as cere-
bral oedema.
Clinical use of diuretics
In the selection of a diuretic drug for hypertension or 
oedema disorders, the following principles should be 
observed:
•	 Use the minimum effective dose.
•	 Use for as short a period of time as necessary.
•	 Monitor regularly for adverse effects.
Fig. 16.5  Secondary mechanisms causing sodium excess and oedema in cardiac failure, cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome. Primary 
renal retention of Na and water may also contribute to oedema formation when GFR is significantly reduced (see Box 16.10 and p. 478). 
Cirrhotic liver disease
Nephrotic renal disease
Heart failure
Peripheral
vasodilatation/
splanchnic
pooling
Impaired
albumin
synthesis
Heavy
proteinuria
↓ Cardiac
output
↓ Plasma
albumin
↓ Arterial
filling
• ↑ Renin – angiotensin – aldosterone
• ↑ Renal sympathetic drive
• Altered renal haemodynamics 
↑ Venous
pressure
Na+ + H2O
retention
↑ Capillary hydrostatic
pressure
↓ Capillary oncotic
pressure
Oedema
2°
1°
1°
membrane sodium–hydrogen exchanger. These drugs 
have limited usefulness, however, since only a small 
fraction of proximal sodium reabsorption uses this 
mechanism, and much of the sodium that is not 
reabsorbed can be reabsorbed by downstream segments 
of the nephron.
In the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, loop 
diuretics such as furosemide inhibit sodium reabsorption 
by blocking the action of the apical membrane Na,K,2Cl 
co-transporter. Because this segment reabsorbs a large 
fraction of the filtered sodium, these drugs are potent 
diuretics, and are commonly used in diseases associated 
with significant oedema.
In the early distal tubule, thiazides inhibit sodium 
reabsorption by blocking the sodium–chloride co- 
transporter in the apical membrane. Since this segment 
reabsorbs a much smaller fraction of the filtered sodium, 
these are less potent than loop diuretics, but are widely 
used in the treatment of hypertension and less severe 
oedema.
All diuretic drugs acting in the proximal, loop and 
early distal segments cause excretion not only of sodium 
(and with it water), but also of potassium. This occurs 
largely as a result of delivery of increased amounts of 
sodium to the late distal/cortical collecting ducts, where 
sodium reabsorption is associated with excretion of 
potassium, and is amplified if circulating aldosterone 
levels are high. By contrast, drugs acting to inhibit 
sodium reabsorption in the late distal/cortical collecting 
duct segment are associated with reduced potassium 
secretion, and are described as ‘potassium-sparing’. One 
target of drug action in this segment is the apical sodium 
channel in the principal cells (see Fig. 16.3), which is 
blocked by drugs such as amiloride and triamterene. 
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
436
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
renal water handling
While regulation of total ECF volume is largely achieved 
through renal control of sodium excretion, mechanisms 
also exist to allow for the excretion of a ‘pure’ water load 
when water intake is high, and for retention of water 
when access is restricted.
These functions are largely achieved by the loop of 
Henle and the collecting ducts. The counter-current con-
figuration of flow in adjacent limbs of the loop (see Fig. 
16.2, p. 430), involves osmotic movement of water from 
the descending limbs and reabsorption of solute from 
neighbouring ascending limbs, to set up a gradient of 
osmolality from isotonic (like plasma) in the renal cortex 
to hypertonic (around 1200 mmol/kg) in the inner part 
of the medulla. At the same time, the fluid emerging 
from the thick ascending limb is hypotonic compared to 
plasma, because it has been diluted by the reabsorption 
of sodium, but not water, from the thick ascending limb 
and early distal tubule. As this dilute fluid passes from 
the cortex through the collecting duct system to the renal 
pelvis, it traverses the medullary interstitial gradient of 
osmolality set up by the operation of the loop of Henle, 
and water is reabsorbed.
Further changes in the urine osmolality on passage 
through the collecting ducts depend on the circulating 
level of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which is released 
by the posterior pituitary gland under conditions 
of increased plasma osmolality or hypovolaemia 
(Ch. 20).
•	 When water intake is high and plasma osmolality is 
normal or low-normal, ADH levels are suppressed 
and the collecting ducts remain impermeable to 
water. The luminal fluid osmolality remains low, 
resulting in the excretion of a dilute urine 
(minimum osmolality approximately 50 mmol/kg 
in a healthy young person).
•	 When water intake is restricted and plasma 
osmolality is high, or in the presence of plasma 
volume depletion, ADH levels rise. This causes 
water permeability of the collecting ducts to 
increase through binding of ADH to the V2 
receptor, which enhances collecting duct water 
permeability through the insertion of aquaporin 
(AQP-2) channels into the luminal cell membrane. 
This results in osmotic reabsorption of water along 
the entire length of the collecting duct, with 
maximum urine osmolality approaching that in the 
medullary tip (up to 1200 mmol/kg).
Parallel to these changes in ADH release are changes 
in water-seeking behaviour triggered by the sensation of 
thirst, which also becomes activated as plasma osmolal-
ity rises.
In summary, for adequate dilution of the urine there 
must be:
•	 adequate solute delivery to the loop of Henle and 
early distal tubule
•	 normal function of the loop of Henle and early 
distal tubule
•	 absence of ADH in the circulation.
If any of these processes is faulty, water retention and 
hyponatraemia may result.
The choice of diuretic will be determined by the 
required potency, the presence of coexistent conditions, 
and the anticipated side-effect profile.
Adverse effects encountered with the most com-
monly used classes of diuretic (loop drugs and thiazide 
drugs) are summarised in Box 16.11. Volume depletion 
and electrolyte disorders commonly occur, as predicted 
from their mechanism of action. The metabolic side-
effects listed are rarely of clinical significance and may 
reflect effects on K+ channels that influence insulin secre-
tion (p. 800). Since most drugs from these classes are 
sulphonamides, there is a relatively high incidence of 
hypersensitivity reactions, and occasional idiosyncratic 
side-effects in a variety of organ systems.
The side-effect profile of the potassium-sparing diu-
retics differs in a number of important respects from that 
of other diuretics. The disturbances in potassium, mag-
nesium and acid–base balance are in the opposite direc-
tion, so that normal or increased levels of potassium 
and magnesium are found in the blood, and there is a 
tendency to metabolic acidosis, especially when renal 
function is impaired.
Diuretic resistance is encountered under a variety of 
circumstances, including impaired renal function, acti-
vation of sodium-retaining mechanisms, impaired oral 
bioavailability (for example, in patients with gastro­
intestinal disease) and decreased renal blood flow. In 
these circumstances, short-term intravenous therapy 
with a loop-acting agent such as furosemide may be 
useful. Combinations of diuretics administered orally 
may also increase potency. Either a loop or a thiazide 
drug can be combined with a potassium-sparing drug, 
and all three classes can be used together for short 
periods, with carefully supervised clinical and labora-
tory monitoring.
DISORDERS OF WATER BALANCE
Daily water intake can vary from about 500 mL to 
several litres a day. While a certain amount of water is 
lost through the stool, sweat and the respiratory tract 
(‘insensible losses’, approximately 800 mL/day), and 
some water is generated by oxidative metabolism (‘met-
abolic water’, approximately 400 mL/day), the kidneys 
are chiefly responsible for adjusting water excretion to 
maintain constancy of body water content and body 
fluid osmolality (reference range 280–295 mmol/kg).
Renal side-effects
•	 Hypovolaemia
•	 Hyponatraemia
•	 Hypokalaemia
•	 Metabolic alkalosis
•	 Hyperuricaemia
•	 Hypomagnesaemia
•	 Hypercalciuria (loop)
•	 Hypocalciuria (thiazide)
Metabolic side-effects
•	 Glucose intolerance/
hyperglycaemia
•	 Hyperlipidaemia
Miscellaneous side-effects
•	 Hypersensitivity reactions
•	 Erectile dysfunction
•	 Acute pancreatitis/
cholecystitis (thiazides)
16.11  Adverse effects of loop-acting and 
thiazide diuretics
Disorders of water balance
16
437
Conversely, to achieve concentration of the urine 
there must be:
•	 adequate solute delivery to the loop of Henle
•	 normal function of the loop of Henle
•	 ADH release into the circulation
•	 ADH action on the collecting ducts.
Failure of any of these steps may result in inappropriate 
water loss and hypernatraemia.
Presenting problems in disorders of 
water balance
Disturbances in body water balance, in the absence 
of changes in sodium balance, alter plasma sodium con-
centration and hence plasma osmolality. When extracel-
lular osmolality changes abruptly, water flows rapidly 
across cell membranes with resultant cell swelling 
(during hypo-osmolality) or shrinkage (during hyper-
osmolality). Cerebral function is very sensitive to such 
volume changes, particularly brain swelling during 
hypo-osmolality, which can lead to an increase in intrac-
erebral pressure and reduced cerebral perfusion.
Hyponatraemia
Aetiology and clinical assessment
Hyponatraemia (plasma Na < 135 mmol/L) is a common 
electrolyte abnormality, which is often asymptomatic 
but which can also be associated with profound distur-
bances of cerebral function, manifesting as anorexia, 
nausea, vomiting, confusion, lethargy, seizures and 
coma. The likelihood of symptoms occurring is related 
more to the speed at which electrolyte abnor­malities 
develop rather than their severity. When plasma 
osmo­lality falls rapidly, water flows into cerebral cells, 
which become swollen and ischaemic. However, when 
hyponatraemia develops gradually, cerebral neurons 
have time to respond by reducing intracellular osmo­
lality, through excreting potassium and reducing syn-
thesis of intracellular organic osmolytes (Fig. 16.6). The 
osmotic gradient favouring water movement into the 
cells is thus reduced and symptoms are avoided.
The causes of hyponatraemia are best categorised 
according to any associated changes in the ECF volume 
(Box 16.12). In all cases, there is retention of water rela-
tive to sodium, and it is clinical examination rather than 
the biochemical results that gives a clue to the underly-
ing cause.
Artefactual causes of hyponatraemia should also be 
considered. These can occur in the presence of severe 
hyperlipidaemia or hyperproteinaemia, when the 
aqueous fraction of the plasma specimen is reduced 
because of the volume occupied by the macromolecules 
(although this artefact is dependent on the assay tech-
nology). Transient hyponatraemia may also occur due 
to osmotic shifts of water out of cells during hyperosmo-
lar states caused by acute hyperglycaemia or by man-
nitol infusion.
Hyponatraemia with hypovolaemia
Patients who have hyponatraemia in association with a 
sodium deficit (‘depletional hyponatraemia’) have clini-
cal features of hypovolaemia (see Box 16.4, p. 433) and 
supportive laboratory findings, including low urinary 
Fig. 16.6  Hyponatraemia and the brain. Numbers represent 
osmolality (osmo) in mmol/kg. 
Acute
hyponatraemia
Slowly
developing
hyponatraemia
Normal
cerebral
cell
Plasma
osmo
290
Osmo
290
Osmo
290
Osmo
290
H2O
H2O
Loss of cellular
osmolytes
Osmo
220
Cerebral swelling
→ cerebral oedema
Osmo
220
Plasma
osmo
220
No change in
cerebral cell size
Plasma
osmo falls 
abruptly
290→220
Plasma
osmo falls
gradually
290→220
Volume status
Examples
Hypovolaemic (sodium 
deficit with a relatively 
smaller water deficit)
Renal sodium losses
Diuretic therapy (especially  
thiazides)
Adrenocortical failure
Gastrointestinal sodium  
losses
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Skin sodium losses
Burns
Euvolaemic (water 
retention alone)
Primary polydipsia
Excessive electrolyte-free water 
infusion
SIADH
Hypothyroidism
Hypervolaemic (sodium 
retention with relatively 
greater water retention)
Congestive cardiac failure
Cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Chronic renal failure (during free 
water intake)
(SIADH = syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion; see 
Box 16.13).
16.12  Causes of hyponatraemia
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
438
sodium concentration (< 30 mmol/L) and elevated 
plasma renin activity. The cause of sodium loss is usually 
apparent; common examples are shown in Box 16.12.
Hyponatraemia with euvolaemia
Patients in this group (dilutional hyponatraemia) have 
no major disturbance of body sodium content and are 
clinically euvolaemic. Excess body water may be the 
result of abnormally high intake, either orally (primary 
polydipsia) or as a result of medically infused fluids (as 
intravenous dextrose solutions, or by absorption of 
sodium-free bladder irrigation fluid after prostatectomy).
Water retention also occurs in the syndrome of inap-
propriate secretion of ADH (SIADH). In this condition, 
an endogenous source of ADH (either cerebral or 
tumour-derived) promotes water retention by the 
kidney in the absence of an appropriate physiological 
stimulus (Box 16.13). The clinical diagnosis requires the 
patient to be euvolaemic, with no evidence of cardiac, 
renal or hepatic disease potentially associated with 
hyponatraemia. Other non-osmotic stimuli that cause 
release of ADH (pain, stress, nausea) should also be 
excluded. Supportive laboratory findings are shown in 
Box 16.13. In this situation, plasma concentrations of 
sodium, chloride, urea and uric acid are low with a cor-
respondingly reduced osmolality. Urine osmolality, 
which should physiologically be maximally dilute 
(approximately 50 mmol/kg) in the face of low plasma 
osmolality, is higher than at least 100 mmol/kg and 
indeed is typically higher than the plasma osmolality. 
The urine sodium concentration is typically high 
(> 30 mmol/L), consistent with euvolaemia and lack 
of compensatory factors promoting sodium retention.
Hyponatraemia with hypervolaemia
In this situation, excess water retention is associated 
with sodium retention and volume expansion, as in 
heart failure, liver disease or kidney disease.
Investigations
Plasma and urine electrolytes and osmolality (Box 16.14) 
are usually the only tests required to classify the 
hyponatraemia. Doubt about clinical signs of ECF 
volume may be resolved with measurement of plasma 
renin activity.
Measurement of ADH is not generally helpful in 
distinguishing between these categories of hyponatrae-
mia. This is because ADH is activated both in hypovol-
aemic states and in most chronic hypervolaemic states, 
as the impaired circulation in those disorders activates 
ADH release through non-osmotic mechanisms. Indeed, 
these disorders may have higher circulating ADH levels 
than patients with SIADH. The only disorders listed in 
Box 16.12 in which ADH is suppressed are primary 
polydipsia and iatrogenic water intoxication, where 
the hypo-osmolar state inhibits ADH release from the 
pituitary.
Management
The treatment of hyponatraemia is critically dependent 
on its rate of development, severity and underlying 
cause. If hyponatraemia has developed rapidly (over 
hours to days), and there are signs of cerebral oedema 
such as obtundation or convulsions, sodium levels 
should be restored to normal rapidly by infusion of 
hypertonic (3%) sodium chloride. A common approach 
is to give an initial bolus of 100 mL, which may be 
repeated once or twice over the initial hours of observa-
tion, depending on the neurological response and rise in 
plasma sodium.
On the other hand, rapid correction of hyponatraemia 
that has developed slowly (over weeks to months) can 
be hazardous, since brain cells adapt to slowly develop-
ing hypo-osmolality by reducing the intracellular osmo-
lality, thus maintaining normal cell volume (see Fig. 
16.6). Under these conditions, an abrupt increase in 
extracellular osmolality can lead to water shifting out of 
neurons, abruptly reducing their volume and causing 
them to detach from their myelin sheaths. The resulting 
‘myelinolysis’ can produce permanent structural and 
functional damage to mid-brain structures, and is gener-
ally fatal. The rate of correction of the plasma Na con-
centration in chronic asymptomatic hyponatraemia 
should not exceed 10 mmol/L/day, and an even slower 
rate is generally safer.
The underlying cause should be treated. For hypo­
volaemic patients, this involves controlling the source 
of sodium loss, and administering intravenous saline 
if clinically warranted. Patients with dilutional hypo­
natraemia generally respond to fluid restriction in 
the range of 600–1000 mL/day, accompanied where 
Causes
•	 Tumours
•	 CNS disorders: stroke, trauma, infection, psychosis, porphyria
•	 Pulmonary disorders: pneumonia, tuberculosis, obstructive 
lung disease
•	 Drugs: anticonvulsants, psychotropics, antidepressants, 
cytotoxics, oral hypoglycaemic agents, opiates
•	 Idiopathic
Diagnosis
•	 Low plasma sodium concentration (typically < 130 mmol/L)
•	 Low plasma osmolality (< 270 mmol/kg)
•	 Urine osmolality not minimally low (typically > 150 mmol/kg)
•	 Urine sodium concentration not minimally low (> 30 mmol/L)
•	 Low-normal plasma urea, creatinine, uric acid
•	 Exclusion of other causes of hyponatraemia (see Box 16.12)
•	 Appropriate clinical context (above)
16.13  Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone secretion (SIADH): causes and diagnosis
Urine Na 
(mmol/L)
Urine osmolality 
(mmol/kg)
Possible diagnoses
Low (< 30)
Low (< 100)
Primary polydipsia
Malnutrition
Beer excess
Low
High (> 150)
Salt depletion
Hypovolaemia
High (> 40)
Low
Diuretic action (acute phase)
High
High
SIADH
Cerebral salt-wasting
Adrenal insufficiency
*Urine analysis may give results of indeterminate significance, and in this 
case the diagnosis depends on a comprehensive clinical assessment.
16.14  Urine Na and osmolality in the differential 
diagnosis of hyponatraemia*
Disorders of potassium balance
16
439
Elderly patients are predisposed, in different circum-
stances, to both hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia, 
and a high index of suspicion of these electrolyte distur-
bances is appropriate in elderly patients with recent 
alterations in behaviour (Box 16.16).
DISORDERS OF POTASSIUM BALANCE
Potassium is the major intracellular cation (see Fig. 16.1, 
p. 429), and the steep concentration gradient for potas-
sium across the cell membrane of excitable cells plays an 
important part in generating the resting membrane 
potential and allowing the propagation of the action 
potential that is crucial to normal functioning of nerve, 
muscle and cardiac tissues. Control of body potassium 
balance is described below.
Changes in the distribution of potassium between the 
ICF and ECF compartments can alter plasma potassium 
concentration, without any overall change in total body 
potassium content. Potassium is driven into the cells by 
possible by withdrawal of the precipitating stimulus 
(such as drugs causing SIADH). If the response of 
plasma sodium is inadequate, treatment with demeclo­
cycline (600–900 mg/day) may be of value by enhancing 
water excretion, through its inhibitory effect on respon-
siveness to ADH in the collecting duct. An effective 
alternative for subjects with persistent hyponatraemia 
due to prolonged SIADH is oral urea therapy (30–45 g/
day), which provides a solute load to promote water 
excretion. Where available, oral vasopressin receptor 
antagonists such as tolvaptan may be used to block 
the ADH-mediated component of water retention in 
a range of hyponatraemic conditions. Hypervolaemic 
patients with hyponatraemia need treatment of the 
underlying condition, accompanied by cautious use of 
diuretics in conjunction with strict fluid restriction. 
Potassium-sparing diuretics may be particularly useful 
in this context where there is significant secondary 
hyperaldosteronism.
Hypernatraemia
Aetiology and clinical assessment
Just as hyponatraemia represents a failure of the mecha-
nisms for diluting the urine during free access to water, 
so hypernatraemia (plasma Na > 148 mmol/L) reflects 
inadequate concentration of the urine in the face of 
restricted water intake. This can be due to failure to 
generate an adequate medullary concentration gradient 
(low GFR states, loop diuretic therapy), but more com-
monly it is due to failure of the ADH system, either 
because of pituitary damage (central or ‘cranial’ diabetes 
insipidus, p. 794) or because the collecting duct cells are 
unable to respond to circulating ADH (nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus).
Patients with hypernatraemia generally have reduced 
cerebral function, either as a primary problem or as a 
consequence of the hypernatraemia itself, which results 
in dehydration of neurons and brain shrinkage. In the 
presence of an intact thirst mechanism and preserved 
capacity to obtain and ingest water, hypernatraemia 
may not progress very far. If adequate water is not 
obtained, dizziness, confusion, weakness and ultimately 
coma and death can result.
The causes of hypernatraemia are best grouped 
according to the associated disturbance, if any, in total 
body sodium content (Box 16.15). It is important to 
remember that hypernatraemia may be iatrogenic, and 
to reiterate that, whatever the underlying cause, sus-
tained or severe hypernatraemia generally reflects an 
impaired thirst mechanism or responsiveness to thirst.
Management
Treatment of hypernatraemia depends on both the rate 
of development and the underlying cause. If there is 
reason to think that the condition has developed rapidly, 
neuronal shrinkage may be acute and relatively rapid 
correction may be attempted. This can be achieved by 
infusing an appropriate volume of intravenous fluid 
(isotonic 5% dextrose or hypotonic 0.45% saline) at an 
initial rate of 50–70 mL/hour. However, in older, insti-
tutionalised patients it is more likely that the disorder 
has developed slowly, and extreme caution should be 
exercised in lowering plasma sodium to avoid the risk 
of cerebral oedema. Where possible, the underlying 
cause should also be addressed (see Box 16.15).
Volume status
Examples
Hypovolaemic (sodium 
deficit with a relatively 
greater water deficit)
Renal sodium losses
Diuretic therapy (especially osmotic 
diuretic, or loop diuretic during 
water restriction)
Glycosuria (HONK, p. 814)
Gastrointestinal Na losses
Colonic diarrhoea
Skin sodium losses
Excessive sweating
Euvolaemic (water 
deficit alone)
Diabetes insipidus (central or 
nephrogenic) (p. 794)
Hypervolaemic (sodium 
retention with relatively 
less water retention)
Enteral or parenteral feeding
IV or oral salt administration
Chronic renal failure (during water 
restriction)
16.15  Causes of hypernatraemia
•	 Decline in GFR: older patients are predisposed to both 
hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia, mainly because, as GFR 
declines with age, the capacity of the kidney to dilute or 
concentrate the urine is impaired.
•	 Hyponatraemia: occurs when free water intake continues in 
the presence of a low dietary salt intake and/or diuretic 
drugs (particularly thiazides).
•	 ADH release: water retention is aggravated by any condition 
that stimulates ADH release, especially heart failure. 
Moreover, the ADH response to non-osmotic stimuli may be 
brisker in older subjects. Appropriate water restriction may 
be a key part of management.
•	 Hypernatraemia: occurs when water intake is inadequate, 
due to physical restrictions preventing access to drinks and/
or blunted thirst. Both are frequently present in patients with 
advanced dementia or following a severe stroke.
•	 Dietary salt: hypernatraemia is aggravated if dietary 
supplements or medications with a high sodium content 
(especially effervescent preparations) are administered. 
Appropriate prescription of fluids is a key part of management.
16.16  Hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia 
in old age
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
440
extracellular alkalosis and by a number of hormones, 
including insulin, catecholamines (through the β2 recep-
tor) and aldosterone. Any of these factors can produce 
hypokalaemia, whereas extracellular acidosis, lack of 
insulin, and insufficiency or blockade of catecholamines 
or aldosterone can cause hyperkalaemia due to efflux of 
potassium from the intracellular compartment.
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
renal potassium handling
In the steady state, the kidneys excrete some 90% of the 
daily intake of potassium, typically 80–100 mmol/day. 
Potassium is freely filtered at the glomerulus; around 
65% is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule and a further 
25% in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. 
Little potassium is transported in the early distal tubule 
but a significant secretory flux of potassium into the 
urine occurs in the late distal tubule and cortical collect-
ing duct to ensure that the amount removed from the 
blood is proportional to the ingested load.
The mechanism for potassium secretion in the distal 
parts of the nephron is shown in Figure 16.3D (p. 431). 
Movement of potassium from blood to lumen is depend-
ent on active uptake across the basal cell membrane by 
the Na,K-ATPase, followed by diffusion of potassium 
through a luminal membrane potassium channel 
(ROMK) into the tubular fluid. The electrochemical gra-
dient for potassium movement into the lumen is con­
tributed to both by the high intracellular potassium 
concentration and by the negative luminal potential dif-
ference relative to the blood.
A number of factors influence the rate of potassium 
secretion. Luminal influences include the rate of sodium 
delivery and fluid flow through the late distal tubule 
and cortical collecting ducts. This is a major factor 
responsible for the increased potassium loss that accom-
panies diuretic treatment. Agents interfering with the 
generation of the negative luminal potential also impair 
potassium secretion, and this is the basis of reduced 
potassium secretion associated with potassium-sparing 
diuretics such as amiloride. Factors acting on the blood 
side of this tubular segment include plasma potassium 
and pH, such that hyperkalaemia and alkalosis 
both enhance potassium secretion directly. However, 
the most important factor in the acute and chronic 
adjustment of potassium secretion to match metabolic 
potassium load is aldosterone.
As shown in Figure 16.7, a negative feedback relation-
ship exists between the plasma potassium concentration 
and aldosterone. In addition to its regulation by the 
renin–angiotensin system (see Fig. 20.19, p. 771), aldos-
terone is released from the adrenal cortex in direct 
response to an elevated plasma potassium. Aldosterone 
then acts on the kidney to enhance potassium secretion, 
hydrogen secretion and sodium reabsorption, in the late 
distal tubule and cortical collecting ducts. The resulting 
increased excretion of potassium maintains plasma 
potassium within a narrow range (3.3–4.7 mmol/L). 
Factors that reduce angiotensin II levels may indirectly 
affect potassium balance by blunting the rise in aldoster-
one that would otherwise be provoked by hyperkalae-
mia. This accounts for the increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
during therapy with ACE inhibitors and related drugs.
Fig. 16.7  Feedback control of plasma potassium concentration. 
Kidney
↑K+ excretion
Adrenal
cortex
(Zona
glomerulosa)
↑Plasma [K+]
↑K+ intake
Negative
feedback
↑Aldosterone
Fig. 16.8  The ECG in hypokalaemia and hyperkalaemia. 
R
P
T
Q S
Normal ECG
Flattened
T wave
HYPOKALAEMIA
Peaked
T wave
Moderate
U wave
ST
depression
Severe
HYPERKALAEMIA
Widened
QRS
Loss
of P wave
Presenting problems in disorders of 
potassium balance
Hypokalaemia
Aetiology and clinical assessment
Patients with mild hypokalaemia (plasma K 3.0–
3.3 mmol/L) are generally asymptomatic, but more pro-
found reductions in plasma potassium often lead to 
muscular weakness and associated tiredness. Ventricu-
lar ectopic beats or more serious arrhythmias may occur 
and the arrhythmogenic effects of digoxin may be poten-
tiated. Typical ECG changes occur, affecting the T wave 
in particular (Fig. 16.8). Functional bowel obstruction 
may occur due to paralytic ileus. Long-standing hypo­
kalaemia causes renal tubular damage (hypokalaemic 
nephropathy) and interferes with the tubular response 
to ADH (acquired nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), 
resulting in polyuria and polydipsia.
The main causes of hypokalaemia and an approach 
to the differential diagnosis are shown in Figure 16.9. 
Disorders of potassium balance
16
441
limb of Henle is defective, usually due to a loss-of- 
function mutation of the NKCC2 transporter. The clini-
cal and biochemical features are similar to chronic 
treatment with furosemide. In Gitelman’s syndrome 
there is a loss-of-function mutation affecting the 
NCCT transporter in the early distal tubule. The clinical 
and biochemical features are similar to chronic 
thiazide treatment. Note that while both Bartter’s and 
Gitelman’s syndromes are characterised by hypokalae-
mia and hypomagnesaemia, urinary calcium excretion 
is increased in Bartter’s syndrome but decreased in 
Gitelman’s syndrome, analogous to the effects of the 
loop and thiazide diuretics, respectively, on calcium 
transport (see Box 16.11, p. 436).
If hypokalaemia occurs in the presence of a normal 
blood pressure and metabolic acidosis, renal tubular aci-
dosis (proximal or ‘classical’ distal) should be suspected 
(p. 446).
When hypokalaemia is due to potassium wasting 
through the gastrointestinal tract, the cause is usually 
obvious clinically. In some cases, when there is occult 
induction of vomiting, the hypokalaemia is characteristi-
cally associated with metabolic alkalosis, due to loss of 
gastric acid. If, however, potassium loss has occurred 
through the surreptitious use of aperients, the hypo­
kalaemia is generally associated with metabolic acidosis. 
In both cases, urinary potassium excretion is low unless 
there is significant extracellular volume depletion, which 
can raise urinary potassium levels by stimulating aldos-
terone production.
Investigations
Measurement of plasma electrolytes, bicarbonate, urine 
potassium and sometimes of plasma calcium and mag-
nesium is usually sufficient to establish the diagnosis. If 
the diagnosis remains unclear, plasma renin should be 
Redistribution of potassium into cells should be consid-
ered, since correction of the factors involved (see above) 
may be sufficient to correct the plasma concentration. 
An inadequate intake of potassium can contribute to 
hypokalaemia but is unlikely to be the only cause, except 
in extreme cases. Generally, hypokalaemia is indicative 
of abnormal potassium loss from the body, either 
through the kidney or the gastrointestinal tract. When 
there is no obvious clinical clue to which pathway is 
involved, measurement of urinary potassium may be 
helpful; if the kidney is the route of potassium loss, the 
urine potassium is high (> 30 mmol/day), whereas if 
potassium is being lost through the gastrointestinal 
tract, the kidney retains potassium, resulting in a lower 
urinary potassium (generally < 20 mmol/day). It should 
be noted, however, that if gastrointestinal fluid loss 
is also associated with hypovolaemia, activation of 
the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system may occur, 
causing increased loss of potassium in the urine.
Renal causes of hypokalaemia can be divided into 
those with and those without hypertension. Hypokalae-
mia in the presence of hypertension may be due to 
increased aldosterone secretion in Conn’s syndrome 
(p. 780) or a genetic defect affecting sodium channels 
in the distal nephron (Liddle’s syndrome). Excessive 
intake of liquorice or treatment with carbenoxolone 
may result in a similar clinical picture, due to inhibition 
of the renal 11βHSD2 enzyme, which inactivates cortisol 
in peripheral tissues.
If blood pressure is normal or low, hypokalaemia can 
be classified according to the associated change in 
acid–base balance. Inherited defects in tubular transport 
should be suspected when hypokalaemia occurs in asso-
ciation with alkalosis, provided that diuretic use has 
been excluded. One such disease is Bartter’s syndrome, 
in which sodium reabsorption in the thick ascending 
Fig. 16.9  Diagnostic decision tree for hypokalaemia. (ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone) 
Hypokalaemia
Redistribution
into cells
 ↓ K intake
Excessive K losses
Insulin excess
Catecholamine β2 -agonists
Alkalosis
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis
Dietary
IV therapy
Urine K
> 20–30 mmol/day
RENAL
With hypertension
• Hyperaldosteronism
     1° (incl. Conn’s syndrome)
     2° (with renal ischaemia)
• Other forms of mineralocorticoid
  receptor activation
     Cushing’s syndrome/ectopic ACTH
     Corticosteroid therapy
     Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
     Liquorice/carbenoxolone
• Liddle’s syndrome
Urine K
< 20–30 mmol/day
GASTROINTESTINAL
With alkalosis
Vomiting
Nasogastric aspiration
With acidosis
Diarrhoea
Laxative abuse
Villous adenoma of rectum
Bowel obstruction/fistula
Ureterosigmoidostomy
With normal – low blood pressure
• With alkalosis
     Diuretic therapy (loop and thiazide)
     Bartter’s and Gitelman’s syndromes
• With acidosis
     Renal tubular acidosis (types 1 and 2)
     Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor therapy
• With variable pH
     Post-obstructive diuresis
     Recovery after acute tubular necrosis
     Mg depletion
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
442
to defining the underlying cause of hyperkalaemia is 
shown in Figure 16.10. Redistribution of potassium from 
the ICF to the ECF may occur in the presence of systemic 
acidosis, or when the circulating levels of insulin, cate-
cholamines and aldosterone are reduced or when the 
effects of these hormones are blocked (p. 440). High 
potassium intake may contribute to hyperkalaemia, but 
is seldom the only explanation unless renal excretion 
mechanisms are impaired.
Impaired excretion of potassium into the urine may 
be associated with a reduced GFR, as in acute kidney 
injury or chronic kidney disease. Acute kidney injury 
can be associated with severe hyperkalaemia when there 
is a concomitant potassium load, such as in rhabdo­
myolysis or in sepsis, particularly when acidosis is 
present. In chronic kidney disease, adaptation to mod-
erately elevated plasma potassium levels commonly 
occurs. However, acute rises in potassium triggered by 
excessive dietary intake, hypovolaemia or drugs (see 
below) may occur and destabilise the situation.
Hyperkalaemia can also develop when tubular potas-
sium secretory processes are impaired, even if the GFR 
is well maintained. In some cases, this is due to low 
levels of aldosterone, as occurs in Addison’s disease or 
with ACE inhibitor therapy. Another cause is hyporenin­
aemic hypoaldosteronism where the renin–angiotensin 
system is inactivated. This condition typically occurs in 
association with diabetic nephropathy with neuropathy, 
and is thought to be due to impaired β-adrenergic stimu-
lation of renin release. Other causes include angiotensin 
receptor antagonists, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) and β-blocking drugs. In another group 
of conditions, tubular potassium secretion is impaired 
as the result of aldosterone resistance. This can occur in 
a variety of diseases in which there is inflammation 
of the tubulointerstitium, such as systemic lupus ery-
thematosus; following renal transplantation; during 
treatment with potassium-sparing diuretics; and in a 
number of inherited disorders of tubular transport.
In all conditions of aldosterone deficiency or aldos-
terone resistance, hyperkalaemia may be associated with 
acid retention, giving rise to the pattern of hyperkalae-
mic distal (‘type 4’) renal tubular acidosis (p. 446).
Investigations
Measurement of electrolytes, creatinine and bicarbonate, 
when combined with clinical assessment, usually pro-
vides the explanation for hyperkalaemia. In aldosterone 
deficiency, plasma sodium concentration is characteris-
tically low, although this can occur in many causes of 
hyperkalaemia. Addison’s disease should be excluded 
unless there is an obvious alternative diagnosis, as 
described on page 777.
Management
Treatment of hyperkalaemia depends on its severity and 
the rate of development. In the absence of neuromuscu-
lar symptoms or ECG changes, reduction of potassium 
intake and correction of underlying abnormalities may 
be sufficient. However, in acute and/or severe hyper­
kalaemia (plasma K > 6.5–7.0 mmol/L) more urgent 
measures must be taken (Box 16.17).
If ECG changes are present, the first step should be 
infusion of 10 mL 10% calcium gluconate to stabilise 
conductive tissue membranes (calcium has the opposite 
measured. Levels are low in patients with primary 
hyperaldosteronism (p. 780) and other forms of mineralo­
corticoid excess, but raised in other causes of 
hypokalaemia.
The cause of hypokalaemia may remain unclear 
despite the above investigations when urinary potas-
sium measurements are inconclusive and the history is 
incomplete or unreliable. Many such cases are associ-
ated with metabolic alkalosis, and in this setting the 
measurement of urine chloride concentration can be 
helpful. A low urine chloride (< 30 mmol/L) is charac-
teristic of vomiting (spontaneous or self-induced, in 
which chloride is lost in HCl in the vomit), while a urine 
chloride > 40 mmol/L suggests diuretic therapy (acute 
phase) or a tubular disorder such as Bartter’s or Gitel-
man’s syndrome. Differentiation between occult diuretic 
use and primary tubular disorders can be achieved by 
performing a screen of urine for diuretic drugs.
Management
Treatment of hypokalaemia involves first determining 
the cause and then correcting this where possible. If the 
problem is mainly one of redistribution of potassium 
into cells, reversal of this (for example, correction of 
alkalosis) may be sufficient to restore plasma potassium 
without providing supplements. In most cases, however, 
some form of potassium replacement will be required. 
This can generally be achieved with slow-release potas-
sium chloride tablets, but in more acute circumstances 
intravenous potassium chloride may be necessary. The 
rate of administration depends on the severity of 
hypokalaemia and the presence of cardiac or neuromus-
cular complications, but should generally not exceed 
10 mmol of potassium per hour. In patients with severe, 
life-threatening hypokalaemia, the concentration of 
potassium in the infused fluid may be increased to 
40 mmol/L if a peripheral vein is used, but higher 
concentrations must be infused into a large ‘central’  
vein with continuous cardiac monitoring.
In the less common situation where hypokalaemia 
occurs in the presence of systemic acidosis, alkaline 
salts of potassium, such as potassium bicarbonate, can 
be given by mouth. If magnesium depletion is also pres­
ent, replacement of magnesium may also be required for 
hypokalaemia to be corrected since low cell magnesium 
can enhance the mechanism for tubular potassium secre-
tion, causing ongoing urinary losses. In some circum-
stances, potassium-sparing diuretics, such as amiloride, 
can assist in the correction of hypokalaemia, hypomag-
nesaemia and metabolic alkalosis, especially when loop 
or thiazide diuretics are the underlying cause.
Hyperkalaemia
Aetiology and clinical assessment
Hyperkalaemia can present with progressive muscular 
weakness, but sometimes there are no symptoms until 
cardiac arrest occurs. The typical ECG changes are 
shown in Figure 16.8. Peaking of the T wave is an early 
ECG sign, but widening of the QRS complex presages a 
dangerous cardiac arrhythmia.
Hyperkalaemia may occur either because of redistri-
bution of potassium between the ICF and ECF or because 
intake exceeds excretion. It is also important to remem-
ber that hyperkalaemia can also be artefactual due to 
in vitro haemolysis of blood specimens. An approach 
Disorders of acid–base balance
16
443
DISORDERS OF ACID–BASE BALANCE
The pH of the arterial plasma is normally 7.40, corre-
sponding to a H+ concentration of 40 nmol/L. An 
increase in H+ concentration corresponds to a decrease 
in pH. Under normal circumstances, H+ concentrations 
do not vary outside the range of 36–44 nmol/L (pH 
7.44–7.36), but abnormalities of acid–base balance occur 
in a wide range of diseases.
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
acid–base homeostasis
A variety of physiological mechanisms maintain pH of 
the ECF within narrow limits. The first is the action of 
blood and tissue buffers, of which the most important 
involves reaction of H+ ions with bicarbonate to form 
carbonic acid, which, under the influence of the enzyme 
carbonic anhydrase (CA), dissociates to form CO2 and 
water:
CO
H O
H CO
H
HCO
CA
2
2
2
3
3
+
+
+

⇀

↽


⇋
−
This buffer system is important because bicarbonate 
is present at relatively high concentration in ECF (21–
28 mmol/L), and two of its key components are under 
physiological control: CO2 by the lungs, and bicarbonate 
by the kidneys. These relationships are illustrated in 
Figure 16.11 (a form of the Henderson–Hasselbalch 
equation).
effect to potassium on conduction of an action potential). 
Measures to shift potassium from the ECF to the ICF 
should also be taken, as they generally act rapidly and 
may avert arrhythmias. Ultimately, a means of remov-
ing potassium from the body is generally necessary. 
When renal function is reasonably preserved, loop diu-
retics (accompanied by intravenous saline if hypovolae-
mia is present) may be effective; in established renal 
failure, ion-exchange resins acting through the gastro­
intestinal tract and urgent dialysis may be required.
Fig. 16.10  Diagnostic decision tree for hyperkalaemia. Creatinine of 500 µmol/L = 5.67 mg/dL. 
Hyperkalaemia
Redistribution
out of cells
↑K intake or load
Renal retention of K
Insulin deficiency
β-blockers
Acidosis
Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis
Exogenous (diet, IV therapy)
Endogenous (haemolysis, rhabdomyolysis)
RENAL FAILURE
Acute renal failure (severe)
Especially with acidosis/haemolysis/
rhabdomyolysis
Chronic renal failure (advanced)
Especially with oliguria/K load
Plasma creatinine
< 500 µmol/L
TUBULAR SECRETORY FAILURE
With low aldosterone
Adrenocortical failure
(Addison’s disease)
Adrenal enzyme defects
Hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism
Drugs (NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors,
β-blockers, ciclosporin, prolonged
heparin therapy)
Severe hyperglycaemia
In vitro haemolysis
Very high white blood cell or platelet count
Spurious
Plasma creatinine
> 500 µmol/L
With normal – high aldosterone
Tubular transport defects
(pseudohypoaldosteronism)
Tubulointerstitial disease (SLE, renal
transplant, amyloidosis,
obstruction/infection)
Drugs (amiloride, spironolactone)
Objective
Therapy
Stabilise cell 
membrane potential1
IV calcium gluconate (10 mL of 10% 
solution)
Shift K into cells
Inhaled β2-adrenoceptor agonist (e.g. 
salbutamol)
IV glucose (50 mL of 50% solution) 
and insulin (5 U Actrapid®)
IV sodium bicarbonate2
Remove K from body
IV furosemide and normal saline3
Ion-exchange resin (e.g. Resonium®) 
orally or rectally
Dialysis
1If ECG changes suggestive of hyperkalaemia (K typically > 7 mmol/L)
2If acidosis present. 3If adequate residual renal function.
16.17  Treatment of severe hyperkalaemia
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
444
bound to a variety of urinary buffers, of which phos-
phate and ammonia are the most important. Filtered 
phosphate (HPO4
2−) combines with H+ in the distal 
tubular lumen to form dihydrogen phosphate (H2PO4
−), 
which is excreted in the urine with sodium. Ammonia 
(NH3) is generated within tubular cells by deamination 
of the amino acid glutamine by the enzyme glutaminase. 
The NH3 then reacts with secreted H+ in the tubular lumen 
to form ammonium (NH4
+), which becomes trapped in 
the luminal fluid and is excreted with chloride ions.
These two mechanisms remove approximately 
1 mmol/kg of hydrogen ions from the body per day, 
which equates to the non-volatile acid load arising from 
the metabolism of dietary protein. The slightly alkaline 
plasma pH of 7.4 (H+ 40 nmol/L) that is maintained 
during health can be accounted for by the kidney’s 
ability to generate an acidic urine (pH typically 5–6), in 
which the net daily excess of metabolic acid produced 
by the body can be excreted.
Presenting problems in disorders of 
acid–base balance
Patients with disturbances of acid–base balance may 
present clinically either with the effects of tissue mal-
function due to disturbed pH (such as altered cardiac 
and central nervous system function), or with secondary 
changes in respiration as a response to the underlying 
metabolic change (such as Kussmaul respiration during 
metabolic acidosis). The clinical picture is often domi-
nated by the cause of the acid–base change, such as 
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus or primary lung disease. 
Frequently the acid–base disturbance only becomes 
evident when the venous plasma bicarbonate concentra-
tion is noted to be abnormal, or when a full arterial blood 
gas analysis shows abnormalities in pH, PCO2 or bicar-
bonate. The ‘base excess’ or ‘base deficit’ can also be 
calculated from these data. This is the difference between 
the patient’s bicarbonate level and the normal bicarbo-
nate, measured in vitro with the PCO2 adjusted to 
5.33 kPa (40 mmHg). Calculation of the base excess or 
deficit is particularly useful in patients with combined 
respiratory and metabolic disorders (p. 187).
The most common patterns of abnormality in blood 
gas parameters are shown in Box 16.18. (Note that the 
terms acidosis and alkalosis strictly refer to the under­
lying direction of the acid–base change, while acidaemia 
and alkalaemia more correctly refer to the net change 
present in the blood). Interpretation of arterial blood 
gases is also described on page 653.
In metabolic disturbances, respiratory compensation 
is almost immediate, so that the predicted compensatory 
change in PCO2 is achieved soon after the onset of the 
metabolic disturbance. In respiratory disorders, on the 
other hand, a small initial change in bicarbonate occurs 
as a result of chemical buffering of CO2, largely within 
red blood cells, but over days and weeks the kidney 
achieves further compensatory changes in bicarbonate 
concentration as a result of long-term adjustments in 
acid secretory capacity. When the clinically obtained 
acid–base parameters do not accord with the predicted 
compensation shown, a mixed acid–base disturbance 
should be suspected (p. 447).
Respiratory compensation for acid–base disturbances 
can occur quickly. In response to acid accumulation, pH 
changes in the brainstem stimulate ventilatory drive, 
serving to reduce PCO2 and increase pH (p. 653). Con-
versely, systemic alkalosis leads to inhibition of ventila-
tion, causing a rise in PCO2 and reduction in pH, 
although it should be noted that this mechanism has 
limited capacity to change pH because hypoxia provides 
an alternative stimulus to drive ventilation.
The kidney provides a third line of defence against 
disturbances of arterial pH. When acid accumulates due 
to chronic respiratory or metabolic (non-renal) causes, 
the kidney has the long-term capacity to enhance urinary 
excretion of acid, effectively increasing the plasma 
bicarbonate.
Renal control of acid–base balance
Regulation of acid–base balance occurs at several sites 
in the kidney. The proximal tubule reabsorbs some 85% 
of the filtered bicarbonate ions, through the mechanism 
for H+ secretion illustrated in Figure 16.3A (p. 431). This 
is dependent on the enzyme carbonic anhydrase both in 
the cytoplasm of the proximal tubular cells and on the 
luminal surface of the brush border membranes. The 
system has a high capacity but does not lead to signifi-
cant acidification of the luminal fluid.
Distal nephron segments have an important role in 
determining net acid excretion by the kidney. In the 
intercalated cells of the cortical collecting duct and the 
outer medullary collecting duct cells, acid is secreted 
into the lumen by an H+-ATPase. This excreted acid is 
generated in the tubular cell from the hydration of CO2 
to form carbonic acid, which dissociates into an H+ ion 
secreted luminally, and a bicarbonate ion that passes 
across the basolateral membrane into the blood. The 
secreted H+ ions contribute to the reabsorption of any 
residual bicarbonate present in the luminal fluid, but 
also contribute net acid for removal from the body, 
Fig. 16.11  Relationship between pH, PCO2 (in mmHg) and plasma 
bicarbonate concentration (in mmol/L). *Note that changes in 
HCO3
− concentration are also part of the renal correction for sustained 
metabolic acid–base disturbances as long as the kidney itself is not the 
cause of the primary disturbance. 
pH = 6.1 + log
[HCO3
− ]
0.03 × PCO2
1° changes
in metabolic
disturbances
2° changes
after renal
compensation*
2° changes
after respiratory
compensation
1° changes
in respiratory
disturbances
Disorders of acid–base balance
16
445
Metabolic acidosis
Aetiology and assessment
Metabolic acidosis occurs when an acid other than 
carbonic acid (due to CO2 retention) accumulates in 
the body, resulting in a fall in the plasma bicarbonate. 
The pH fall that would otherwise occur is blunted by 
hyperventilation, resulting in a reduced PCO2. If the 
kidneys are intact and the primary cause of acidosis is 
not renal in origin, the kidney can gradually increase 
acid secretion over days to weeks and restore a new 
steady state.
Two patterns of metabolic acidosis are recognised 
(Box 16.19), depending on the nature of the accumulat-
ing acid:
•	 In pattern A, when a mineral acid such as 
hydrochloric acid accumulates, or when there is a 
primary loss of bicarbonate buffer from the ECF, 
there is no addition to the plasma of a new acidic 
anion. In this case, the ‘anion gap’ (calculated as the 
difference between the main measured cations (Na+ 
+ K+) and the anions (Cl− + HCO3
−)) is normal, since 
the plasma chloride increases to replace the 
depleted bicarbonate levels. This ‘gap’ is normally 
around 12–16 mmol/L (12–16 meq/L) and is made 
up of anions such as phosphate, sulphate and 
multiple negative charges on plasma protein 
molecules. Normal anion gap metabolic acidosis 
(pattern A) is usually due either to bicarbonate  
loss in diarrhoea, where the clinical diagnosis is 
generally obvious, or to renal tubular acidosis  
(see below).
•	 In pattern B, an accumulating acid is accompanied 
by its corresponding anion, which adds to the 
unmeasured anion gap, while the chloride 
concentration remains normal. The cause is usually 
apparent from associated clinical features such as 
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, renal failure or 
shock, or may be suggested by associated 
symptoms, such as visual complaints in methanol 
poisoning (p. 222). It is noteworthy that a number 
of causes of increased anion gap acidosis are 
associated with alcoholism, including starvation 
ketosis, lactic acidosis and intoxication by methanol 
or ethylene glycol.
Lactic acidosis
The diagnosis of lactic acidosis can be confirmed by the 
measurement of plasma lactate, which is increased over 
the normal maximal level of 2 mmol/L (20 mg/dL) by 
as much as tenfold. Two types of lactic acidosis have 
been defined:
•	 type 1, due to tissue hypoxia and peripheral 
generation of lactate, as in patients with circulatory 
failure and shock
•	 type 2, due to impaired metabolism of lactate, as in 
liver disease or by a number of drugs and toxins, 
including metformin, which inhibit lactate 
metabolism (p. 823).
Disturbance
Blood H+
Primary change
Compensatory response
Predicted compensation
Metabolic acidosis
> 401
HCO3
− < 24 mmol/L
PCO2 < 5.33 kPa2
PCO2 fall in kPa = 0.16 × HCO3
− fall in mmol/L
Metabolic alkalosis
< 401
HCO3
− > 24 mmol/L
PCO2 > 5.33 kPa2,3
PCO2 rise in kPa = 0.08 × HCO3
− rise in mmol/L
Respiratory acidosis
> 401
PCO2 > 5.33 kPa2
HCO3
− > 24 mmol/L
Acute: HCO3
− rise in mmol/L = 0.75 × PCO2 rise 
in kPa
Chronic: HCO3
− rise in mmol/L = 2.62 × PCO2 
rise in kPa
Respiratory alkalosis
< 401
PCO2 < 5.33 kPa2
HCO3
− < 24 mmol/L
Acute: HCO3
− fall in mmol/L = 1.50 × PCO2 fall 
in kPa
Chronic: HCO3
− fall in mmol/L = 3.75 × PCO2 
fall in kPa
1H+ of 40 nmol/L = pH of 7.40. 2PCO2 of 5.33 kPa = 40 mmHg. 3PCO2 does not rise above 7.33 kPa (55 mmHg) because hypoxia then intervenes to drive 
respiration.
16.18  Principal patterns of acid–base disturbance
Disorder
Mechanism
A. Normal anion gap
Ingestion or infusion of 
inorganic acid
Therapeutic infusion of or poisoning 
with NH4Cl, HCl
Gastrointestinal  
HCO3 loss
Loss of HCO3 in diarrhoea, small 
bowel fistula, urinary diversion 
procedure
Renal tubular  
acidosis (RTA)
Urinary loss of HCO3 in proximal RTA; 
impaired tubular acid secretion in 
distal RTA
B. Increased anion gap
Endogenous acid load
  Diabetic ketoacidosis
Accumulation of ketones1 with 
hyperglycaemia (p. 811)
  Starvation ketosis
Accumulation of ketones without 
hyperglycaemia (p. 800)
  Lactic acidosis
Shock, liver disease, drugs
  Renal failure
Accumulation of organic acids
Exogenous acid load
  Aspirin poisoning
Accumulation of salicylate2
  Methanol poisoning
Accumulation of formate
  Ethylene glycol 
poisoning
Accumulation of glycolate, oxalate
1Ketones include acid anions acetoacetate and β-hydroxybutyrate (p. 802).
2Salicylate poisoning is also associated with respiratory alkalosis due to 
direct ventilatory stimulation.
16.19  Causes of metabolic acidosis
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
446
renal stone formation and nephrocalcinosis. Potassium 
is also lost in classical distal RTA, while it is retained in 
hyperkalaemic distal RTA.
Management
The first step in management of metabolic acidosis is to 
identify and correct the underlying cause when possible 
(see Box 16.19). This may involve controlling diarrhoea, 
treating diabetes mellitus, correcting shock, stopping 
drugs that might cause the condition, or using dialysis to 
remove toxins. Since metabolic acidosis is frequently 
associated with sodium and water depletion, resuscita-
tion with intravenous fluids is often needed. Use of 
intravenous bicarbonate in this setting is controversial. 
Because rapid correction of acidosis can induce hypo­
kalaemia or a fall in plasma ionised calcium, the use of 
bicarbonate infusions is best reserved for situations 
where the underlying disorder cannot be readily cor-
rected and acidosis is severe (H+ > 100 nmol/L, pH 
< 7.00) or associated with evidence of tissue dysfunction.
The acidosis in RTA can sometimes be controlled by 
treating the underlying cause (see Box 16.20), but sup-
plements of sodium and potassium bicarbonate are 
usually also necessary in types 1 and 2 RTA to achieve 
a target plasma bicarbonate level of above 18 mmol/L 
and normokalaemia. In type 4 RTA, loop diuretics, thi-
azides or fludrocortisone (as appropriate to the under­
lying diagnosis) may be effective in correcting the 
acidosis and the hyperkalaemia.
Metabolic alkalosis
Aetiology and clinical assessment
Metabolic alkalosis is characterised by an increase in the 
plasma bicarbonate concentration and the plasma pH 
(see Box 16.18). There is a compensatory rise in PCO2 
due to hypoventilation but this is limited by the need to 
avoid hypoxia. The causes are best classified by the 
accompanying changes in ECF volume.
Hypovolaemic metabolic alkalosis is the most 
common pattern. This can be caused by sustained vomit-
ing, in which acid-rich fluid is lost directly from the 
body, or by treatment with loop diuretics or thiazides. 
In the case of sustained vomiting, loss of gastric acid is 
the immediate cause of the alkalosis, but several factors 
act to sustain or amplify this in the context of volume 
depletion (Fig. 16.12). Loss of sodium and fluid leads to 
hypovolaemia and secondary hyperaldosteronism, trig-
gering proximal sodium bicarbonate reabsorption and 
additional acid secretion by the distal tubule. Hypo­
kalaemia occurs due to potassium loss in the vomitus 
and by the kidney as the result of secondary hyperaldos-
teronism, and itself is a stimulus to acid secretion. 
Additionally, the compensatory rise in PCO2 further 
enhances tubular acid secretion. The net result is sus-
tained metabolic alkalosis with an inappropriately acid 
urine, which cannot be corrected until the deficit in 
circulating volume has been replaced.
Normovolaemic (or hypervolaemic) metabolic alka-
losis occurs when bicarbonate retention and volume 
expansion occur simultaneously. Classical causes 
include primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s syn­
drome, p. 780), Cushing’s syndrome (p. 773) and cortico­
steroid therapy (p. 776). Occasionally, overuse of antacid 
salts for treatment of dyspepsia produces a similar 
pattern.
Renal tubular acidosis
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) should be suspected when 
there is a hyperchloraemic acidosis with a normal anion 
gap and no evidence of gastrointestinal disturbance. 
The urine pH is inappropriately high (> 5.5) in the 
presence of systemic acidosis. RTA can be caused by a 
defect in one of three processes: impaired bicarbonate 
reabsorption in the proximal tubule (proximal RTA); 
impaired acid secretion in the late distal tubule or 
cortical collecting duct intercalated cells (classical distal 
RTA); or impaired sodium reabsorption in the late distal 
tubule or cortical collecting duct, which is associated 
with reduced secretion of both potassium and H+ ions 
(hyperkalaemic distal RTA).
Various subtypes of RTA are recognised and the most 
common causes are shown in Box 16.20. The inherited 
forms of RTA are due to mutations in the genes that 
regulate acid or bicarbonate transport in the renal 
tubules (see Fig. 16.3, p. 431). However, RTA is often an 
acquired disorder and in these circumstances the meta-
bolic acidosis may serve as an early clue to the under­
lying diagnosis.
Sometimes distal RTA is ‘incomplete’ and the plasma 
bicarbonate concentration is normal under resting con-
ditions. However, in incomplete distal RTA the urine pH 
fails to fall below 5.3 after an acid challenge test, involv-
ing the ingestion of ammonium chloride sufficient to 
lower the plasma bicarbonate.
A number of features allow differentiation of types 
of RTA. Proximal RTA is frequently associated with 
urinary wasting of amino acids, phosphate and glucose 
(Fanconi’s syndrome), as well as bicarbonate and potas-
sium. Patients with this disorder can lower the urine pH 
when the acidosis is severe and plasma bicarbonate 
levels have fallen below 16 mmol/L since distal H+ 
secretion mechanisms are intact. In the classical form of 
distal RTA, however, acid accumulation is relentless and 
progressive, resulting in mobilisation of calcium from 
bone and consequent osteomalacia with hypercalciuria, 
Proximal renal tubular acidosis
•	 Inherited
Fanconi’s syndrome
Cystinosis
Wilson’s disease
•	 Paraproteinaemia
Myeloma
•	 Amyloidosis
•	 Hyperparathyroidism
•	 Heavy metal toxicity
Lead, cadmium and 
mercury poisoning
•	 Drugs
Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors
Ifosfamide
Classical distal renal tubular acidosis
•	 Inherited
•	 Autoimmune diseases
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Sjögren’s syndrome
•	 Hyperglobulinaemia
•	 Toxins and drugs
Toluene
Lithium
Amphotericin
Hyperkalaemic distal renal tubular acidosis
•	 Hypoaldosteronism (primary or 
secondary)
•	 Obstructive nephropathy
•	 Renal transplant rejection
•	 Drugs
Amiloride
Spironolactone
16.20  Causes of renal tubular acidosis
Disorders of divalent ion metabolism 
16
447
CO2 accumulation may itself lead to drowsiness that 
further depresses respiratory drive.
Management involves correction of causative factors 
where possible, but ultimately ventilatory support may 
be necessary.
Respiratory alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis develops when there is a period 
of sustained hyperventilation, resulting in a reduction 
of PCO2 and increase in plasma pH. If the condition 
is sustained, renal compensation occurs, such that 
tubular acid secretion is reduced and the plasma bicar-
bonate falls.
Respiratory alkalosis is usually of short duration, 
occurring in anxiety states or as the result of over-
vigorous assisted ventilation. It can be prolonged in the 
context of pregnancy, pulmonary embolism, chronic 
liver disease, and ingestion of certain drugs such as sali-
cylates that directly stimulate the respiratory centre in 
the brainstem.
Clinical features are those of the underlying cause but 
agitation associated with perioral and digital tingling 
may also occur, due to a reduction in ionised calcium 
concentrations because of increased binding of calcium 
to albumin as the result of the alkalosis. In severe cases, 
Trousseau’s sign and Chvostek’s sign may be positive, 
and tetany or seizures may develop (p. 768).
Management involves correction of identifiable 
causes, reduction of anxiety, and a period of rebreathing 
into a closed bag to allow CO2 levels to rise.
Mixed acid–base disorders
It is not uncommon for more than one disturbance of 
acid–base metabolism to be present at the same time in 
the same patient: for example, respiratory acidosis due 
to narcotic overdose with metabolic alkalosis due to 
vomiting. In these situations, the arterial pH will repre-
sent the net effect of all primary and compensatory 
changes. Indeed, the pH may be normal, but the pres-
ence of underlying acid–base disturbances can be 
gauged from concomitant abnormalities in the PCO2 and 
bicarbonate concentration.
In assessing these disorders, all clinical influences on 
the patient’s acid–base status should be identified, and 
reference should be made to the table of predicted com-
pensation given in Box 16.18. If the compensatory change 
is discrepant from the rules of thumb provided, more 
than one disturbance of acid–base metabolism may be 
suspected.
DISORDERS OF DIVALENT  
ION METABOLISM
The present section excludes discussion of calcium dis-
orders, which are considered in Chapters 20 (pp. 767–
770) and 25 (p. 1125).
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
magnesium metabolism
Like potassium, magnesium is mainly an intracellular 
cation. It is important to the function of many enzymes, 
Clinically, apart from manifestations of the under­
lying cause, there may be few symptoms or signs related 
to alkalosis itself. When the rise in systemic pH is 
abrupt, plasma ionised calcium falls and signs of 
increased neuromuscular irritability, such as tetany, 
may develop (p. 768).
Management
Metabolic alkalosis with hypovolaemia can be corrected 
by intravenous infusions of 0.9% saline with potassium 
supplements. This reverses the secondary hyperaldos-
teronism and allows the kidney to excrete the excess 
alkali in the urine.
In metabolic alkalosis with normal or increased 
volume, treatment should focus on management of the 
underlying endocrine cause (Ch. 20).
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory acidosis occurs when there is accumulation 
of CO2 due to type II respiratory failure (p. 663). This 
results in a rise in the PCO2, with a compensatory 
increase in plasma bicarbonate concentration, particu-
larly when the disorder is of long duration and the 
kidney has fully developed its capacity for increased 
acid excretion.
This acid–base disturbance can arise from lesions any-
where along the neuromuscular pathways from the brain 
to the respiratory muscles that result in impaired ventila-
tion. It can also arise during intrinsic lung disease if there 
is significant mismatching of ventilation and perfusion.
Clinical features are primarily those of the underlying 
cause of the respiratory disorder such as paralysis, chest 
wall injury or chronic obstructive lung disease, but the 
Fig. 16.12  Generation and maintenance of metabolic alkalosis 
during prolonged vomiting. Loss of H+Cl− generates metabolic 
alkalosis, which is maintained by renal changes. 
Vomiting
Na+Cl−
Metabolic
alkalosis
Gastric loss of
H+Cl−
K+Cl−
Hypovolaemia
↑ Proximal
Na+HCO3−
reabsorption
↑ Renin – 
angiotensin – 
aldosterone
Hypokalaemia
↑ Distal H+
secretion
↑ Renal NH3
synthesis
↑ H+ excretion
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
448
p. 570), central nervous excitation and seizures, vasocon-
striction and hypertension may all occur. Magnesium 
depletion is also associated (through uncertain mecha-
nisms) with hyponatraemia and hypokalaemia, which 
may contribute to some of the clinical manifestations.
Management
The underlying cause should be identified and treated 
where possible. When symptoms are present, the treat-
ment of choice is intravenous magnesium chloride at a 
rate not exceeding 0.5 mmol/kg in the first 24 hours. 
When intravenous access is not available, magnesium 
sulphate can be given intramuscularly. Oral magnesium 
salts have limited effectiveness due to poor absorption 
and may cause diarrhoea. If hypomagnesaemia is due 
to diuretic treatment, adjunctive use of a potassium-
sparing agent can also help by reducing magnesium loss 
into the urine.
Hypermagnesaemia
This is a much less common abnormality than hypomag-
nesaemia. Predisposing conditions include acute kidney 
injury and chronic kidney disease, and adrenocortical 
insufficiency. The condition is generally precipitated in 
patients at risk by an increased intake of magnesium, or 
through the use of magnesium-containing medications, 
such as antacids, laxatives and enemas.
Clinical features include bradycardia, hypotension, 
reduced consciousness and respiratory depression.
Management involves ceasing all magnesium-
containing drugs and reducing dietary magnesium 
intake, improving renal function if possible, and pro-
moting urinary magnesium excretion using a loop 
diuretic with intravenous hydration, if residual renal 
function allows. Calcium gluconate may be given intra-
venously to ameliorate cardiac effects. Dialysis may be 
necessary in patients with poor renal function.
Functional anatomy and physiology of 
phosphate metabolism
Inorganic phosphate (mainly present as HPO4
2−) is inti-
mately involved in cell energy metabolism, intracellular 
signalling and bone and mineral balance (Ch. 25). The 
normal plasma concentration is 0.8–1.4 mmol/L (2.48–
4.34 mg/dL). It is freely filtered at the glomerulus and 
approximately 65% is reabsorbed by the proximal 
tubule, via an apical sodium–phosphate co-transport 
carrier. A further 10–20% is reabsorbed in the distal 
tubules, leaving a fractional excretion of some 10% to 
pass into the urine, usually as H2PO4
−. Proximal 
reabsorption is decreased by PTH, fibroblast growth 
factor 23 (FGF-23), volume expansion, osmotic diuretics 
and glucose infusion.
Presenting problems in disorders of 
phosphate metabolism
Hypophosphataemia
The causes of hypophosphataemia are shown in Box 
16.22. Phosphate may redistribute into cells during 
including the Na,K-ATPase, and can regulate both 
potassium and calcium channels. Its overall effect is to 
stabilise excitable cell membranes.
Renal handling of magnesium involves filtration of 
free plasma magnesium at the glomerulus (about 70% of 
the total) with extensive reabsorption (50–70%) in the 
loop of Henle, and other parts of the proximal and distal 
renal tubule. Magnesium reabsorption is also enhanced 
by parathyroid hormone (PTH).
Presenting problems in disorders of 
magnesium metabolism
Hypomagnesaemia
Aetiology and clinical assessment
Hypomagnesaemia exists when plasma magnesium 
concentrations are below the reference range of 0.75–
1.0 mmol/L (1.5–2.0 meq/L). This is usually a reflection 
of magnesium depletion (Box 16.21), which can be 
caused by excessive magnesium loss from the gastro­
intestinal tract (notably in chronic diarrhoea) or the 
kidney (during prolonged use of loop diuretics). Exces-
sive alcohol ingestion can cause magnesium depletion 
through both gut and renal losses. Some inherited tubu­
lar transport disorders, such as Gitelman’s syndrome, 
can also result in urinary magnesium wasting (p. 440).
Hypomagnesaemia is frequently associated with 
hypocalcaemia, probably because magnesium is required 
for the normal secretion of PTH in response to a fall in 
serum calcium, and because hypomagnesaemia causes 
end-organ resistance to PTH. The clinical features of 
hypomagnesaemia and hypocalcaemia are similar in that 
tetany, cardiac arrhythmias (notably torsades de pointes, 
Mechanism
Examples
Inadequate 
intake
Starvation
Malnutrition (esp. alcoholism)
Parenteral alimentation
Excessive losses
Gastrointestinal
Prolonged vomiting/nasogastric aspiration
Chronic diarrhoea/laxative abuse
Malabsorption
Small bowel bypass surgery
Fistulae
Urinary
Diuretic therapy (loop, thiazide)
Alcohol
Tubulotoxic drugs (gentamicin, cisplatin)
Volume expansion (e.g. primary 
hyperaldosteronism)
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Post-obstructive diuresis
Recovery from acute tubular necrosis
Inherited tubular transport defect (Bartter’s 
syndrome, Gitelman’s syndrome
Primary renal magnesium wasting)
Miscellaneous
Acute pancreatitis
Foscarnet therapy
Proton pump inhibitor therapy (prolonged)
Hungry bone syndrome
Diabetes mellitus
16.21  Causes of hypomagnesaemia
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism
16
449
If renal function is normal, intravenous normal 
saline should be given to promote phosphate excretion. 
Hyperphosphataemia in patients with renal failure 
should be treated with dietary phosphate restriction and 
the use of oral phosphate binders (p. 486).
DISORDERS OF AMINO ACID 
METABOLISM
Congenital disorders of amino acid metabolism usually 
present in the neonatal period and may involve life-long 
treatment regimens. However, some disorders, particu-
larly those involved in amino acid transport, may not 
present until later in life.
Phenylketonuria
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is inherited as an autosomal 
recessive disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations 
in the PAH gene, which encodes phenylalanine hydroxy­
lase, an enzyme required for degradation of phenyl­
alanine. As a result, phenylalanine accumulates at high 
levels in the neonate’s blood, causing mental retardation.
The diagnosis of PKU is almost always made by 
routine neonatal screening (p. 64). Treatment involves 
life-long adherence to a low-phenylalanine diet. Early 
and adequate dietary treatment prevents major mental 
retardation, although there may still be a slight reduc-
tion in IQ.
Homocystinuria
Homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by loss-of-function mutations in the CBS gene, 
which encodes cystathionine beta–synthase. The enzyme 
deficiency causes accumulation of homocysteine and 
methionine in the blood. Many cases of homocystinuria 
are diagnosed through newborn screening programmes.
Clinical manifestations are wide-ranging and involve 
the eyes (ectopia lentis – displacement of the lens), 
central nervous system (mental retardation, delayed 
developmental milestones, seizures, psychiatric distur-
bances), skeleton (resembling Marfan’s syndrome, and 
also with generalised osteoporosis), vascular system 
(thrombotic lesions of arteries and veins) and skin 
(hypopigmentation).
Treatment is dietary, involving a methionine-
restricted, cystine-supplemented diet, as well as large 
doses of pyridoxine.
DISORDERS OF CARBOHYDRATE 
METABOLISM
The most common disorder of carbohydrate metabolism 
is diabetes mellitus, which is discussed in Chapter 21. 
There are also some rare inherited defects.
Galactosaemia
Galactosaemia is caused by loss-of-function mutations 
in the GALT gene, which encodes galactose-1-phosphate 
uridyl transferase. It is usually inherited as an autosomal 
recessive disorder. The neonate is unable to metabolise 
galactose, one of the hexose sugars contained in 
lactose.
periods of increased energy utilisation (such as refeed-
ing after a period of starvation) and during systemic 
alkalosis. However, severe hypophosphataemia usually 
represents an overall body deficit due to either inade-
quate intake or absorption through the gut, or excessive 
renal losses, most notably in primary hyperpara­
thyroidism (p. 769) or as the result of acute plasma 
volume expansion, osmotic diuresis and diuretics acting 
on the proximal renal tubule. Less common causes 
include inherited defects of proximal sodium–phosphate 
co-transport and tumour-induced osteomalacia due to 
ectopic production of the hormone FGF-23 (p. 1125).
The clinical manifestations of phosphate depletion 
are wide-ranging, reflecting the involvement of phos-
phate in many aspects of metabolism. Defects appear in 
the blood (impaired function and survival of all cell 
lines), skeletal muscle (weakness, respiratory failure), 
cardiac muscle (congestive cardiac failure), smooth 
muscle (ileus), central nervous system (decreased con-
sciousness, seizures and coma) and bone (osteomalacia 
in severe prolonged hypophosphataemia, p. 1125).
Management involves administering oral phosphate 
supplements and high-protein/high-dairy dietary sup-
plements that are rich in naturally occurring phosphate. 
Intravenous treatment with sodium or potassium phos-
phate salts can be used in critical situations, but there is 
a risk of precipitating hypocalcaemia and metastatic 
calcification.
Hyperphosphataemia
Phosphate accumulation is usually the result of acute 
kidney injury or chronic kidney disease (pp. 768 and 483, 
and p. 768). Phosphate excretion is also reduced in 
hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypoparathyroidism 
(p. 770). Redistribution of phosphate from cells into the 
plasma can also be a contributing factor in the ‘tumour 
lysis’ syndrome and in catabolic states. Phosphate accu-
mulation is aggravated in any of these conditions if the 
patient takes phosphate-containing preparations or 
inappropriate vitamin D therapy.
The clinical features relate to hypocalcaemia and 
metastatic calcification, particularly in chronic renal 
failure with tertiary hyperparathyroidism (when a high 
calcium–phosphate product occurs).
Mechanism
Examples
Redistribution into 
cells
Refeeding after starvation
Respiratory alkalosis
Treatment for diabetic ketoacidosis
Inadequate intake or 
absorption
Malnutrition
Malabsorption
Chronic diarrhoea
Phosphate binders (antacids)
Vitamin D deficiency or resistance
Increased renal 
excretion
Hyperparathyroidism
ECF volume expansion with diuresis
Osmotic diuretics
Fanconi’s syndrome
Familial hypophosphataemic rickets
Tumour-induced hypophosphataemic 
rickets
16.22  Causes of hypophosphataemia
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
450
participation in genetic carrier screening programmes 
(p. 64).
DISORDERS OF BLOOD LIPIDS  
AND LIPOPROTEINS
The three most important classes of lipid are cholesterol, 
which is composed of hydrocarbon rings; triglycerides 
(TG), which are esters composed of glycerol linked to 
three long-chain fatty acids; and phospholipids, which 
are composed of a hydrophobic ‘tail’ consisting of two 
long-chain fatty acids linked through glycerol to a 
hydrophilic head containing a phosphate group. Phos-
pholipids are present in cell membranes and are impor-
tant signalling molecules.
Despite their poor water solubility, lipids need to 
be absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and trans-
ported throughout the body. This is achieved by incor-
porating lipids within lipoproteins. Plasma cholesterol 
and TG are clinically important because they are major 
treatable risk factors for cardiovascular disease, whilst 
severe hypertriglyceridaemia also predisposes to acute 
pancreatitis.
Functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigation of lipid metabolism
Lipids are transported and metabolised by apolipopro-
teins, which combine with lipids to form spherical or 
disc-shaped lipoproteins, consisting of a hydrophobic 
core and a less hydrophobic coat (Fig. 16.13). The struc-
ture of some apolipoproteins also enables them to act as 
enzyme co-factors or cell receptor ligands. Variations in 
lipid and apolipoprotein composition result in distinct 
classes of lipoprotein that perform specific metabolic 
functions.
Processing of dietary lipid
The intestinal absorption of dietary lipid is described on 
page 841 (see also Fig. 16.14). Enterocytes lining the gut 
extract monoglyceride and free fatty acids from micelles 
and re-esterify them into TG, which are combined with 
a truncated form of apolipoprotein B (Apo B48) as it is 
synthesised. Intestinal cholesterol derived from dietary 
Vomiting or diarrhoea usually begins within a few 
days of ingestion of milk, and the neonate may become 
jaundiced. Failure to thrive is the most common clinical 
presentation. The classic form of the disease results in 
hepatomegaly, cataracts and mental retardation, and 
fulminant infection with Escherichia coli is a frequent 
complication. Treatment involves life-long avoidance of 
galactose- and lactose-containing foods.
The widespread inclusion of galactosaemia in 
newborn screening programmes has resulted in the 
identification of a number of milder variants.
Glycogen storage diseases
Glycogen storage diseases (GSD, or glycogenoses) result 
from an inherited defect in one of the many enzymes 
responsible for the formation or breakdown of glycogen, 
a complex carbohydrate that can be broken down 
quickly to release glucose during exercise or between 
meals.
There are several major types of GSD, which are clas-
sified by a number, by the name of the defective enzyme 
or eponymously after the physician who first described 
the condition (Box 16.23). Most forms of GSD are inheri­
ted as autosomal recessive disorders.
A diagnosis of GSD is made on the basis of the symp-
toms, physical examination and results of biochemical 
tests. Occasionally, a muscle or liver biopsy is required 
to confirm the enzyme defect. Different types of GSD 
present at different ages, and some may require life-long 
modifications of diet and lifestyle.
DISORDERS OF COMPLEX LIPID 
METABOLISM
Complex lipids are key components of the cell mem-
brane (p. 47) that are normally catabolised in organelles 
called lysosomes. The lysosomal storage diseases are a 
heterogeneous group of disorders caused by loss-of-
function mutations in various lysosomal enzymes (Box 
16.24), resulting in an inability to break down complex 
glycolipids or other intracellular macromolecules. These 
disorders have diverse clinical manifestations, typically 
including mental retardation. Some can be treated with 
enzyme replacement therapy, while others (such as Tay–
Sachs disease) can be prevented through community 
Type
Eponym
Enzyme deficiency
Clinical features and complications
I
Von Gierke
Glucose-6-phosphatase
Childhood presentation, hypoglycaemia, hepatomegaly
II
Pompe
α-glucosidase (acid maltase)
Classical presentation in infancy, muscle weakness (may be severe)
III
Cori
Glycogen debrancher enzyme
Childhood presentation, hepatomegaly, mild hypoglycaemia
IV
Andersen
Brancher enzyme
Presentation in infancy, severe muscle weakness (may affect heart), cirrhosis
V
McArdle
Muscle glycogen phosphorylase
Exercise-induced fatigue and myalgia
VI
Hers
Liver phosphorylase
Mild hepatomegaly
VII
Tarui
Muscle phosphofructokinase
Exercise-induced fatigue and myalgia
IX*
Liver phosphorylase kinase
Mild hepatomegaly
0
Hepatic glycogen synthase
Fasting hypoglycaemia, post-prandial hyperglycaemia
*Note that type VIII has been merged into type IX and no longer exists as a separate entity.
16.23  Glycogen storage diseases
Disorders of blood lipids and lipoproteins 
16
451
The main dietary determinants of plasma cholesterol 
concentrations are the intake of saturated and trans-
unsaturated fatty acids, which reduce LDL-receptor 
activity (see below). Dietary cholesterol has surprisingly 
little effect on fasting cholesterol levels. Plant sterols 
and drugs that inhibit cholesterol absorption are effec-
tive because they also reduce the re-utilisation of biliary 
cholesterol. The dietary determinants of plasma TG con-
centrations are complex since excessive intake of carbo-
hydrate, fat or alcohol may all contribute to increased 
plasma TG by different mechanisms.
Endogenous lipid synthesis
In the fasting state, the liver is the major source of plasma 
lipids (see Fig. 16.14). The liver may acquire lipids by 
uptake, synthesis or conversion from other macronutri-
ents. These lipids are transported to other tissues by 
secretion of very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), 
which are rich in TG but differ from chylomicrons in that 
they contain full-length Apo B100. Following secretion 
into the circulation, VLDL undergo metabolic process-
ing similar to that of chylomicrons. Hydrolysis of VLDL 
TG releases fatty acids to tissues and converts VLDL into 
‘remnant’ particles, referred to as intermediate-density 
lipoproteins (IDL). Most IDL are rapidly cleared by LDL 
receptors in the liver, but some are processed by hepatic 
lipase, which converts the particle to an LDL by remov-
ing TG and most materials other than Apo B100, and free 
and esterified cholesterol.
The LDL particles act as a source of cholesterol 
for cells and tissues (see Fig. 16.14). LDL cholesterol 
is internalised by receptor-mediated endocytosis via 
the LDL receptor. Delivery of cholesterol via this 
pathway down-regulates further expression of the LDL 
receptor gene and reduces the synthesis and activity of 
and biliary sources is also absorbed via a specific intes-
tinal membrane transporter termed NPC1L1. This pro-
duces chylomicrons containing TG and cholesterol ester 
that are secreted basolaterally into lymphatic lacteals 
and carried to the circulation through the thoracic duct. 
Upon entering the blood stream, nascent chylomicrons 
are modified by further addition of apolipoproteins. 
Chylomicron TG are hydrolysed by lipoprotein lipase 
located on the endothelium of tissue capillary beds. This 
releases fatty acids that are used locally for energy pro-
duction or stored as TG in muscle or fat. The residual 
‘remnant’ chylomicron particle is avidly cleared by low-
density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptors in the liver, which 
recognise Apo E on the remnant lipoproteins. Complete 
absorption of dietary lipids takes about 6–10 hours, so 
chylomicrons are usually undetectable in the plasma 
after a 12-hour fast.
Lysosomal storage disease
Clinical features
Enzyme deficiency
Human enzyme 
replacement therapy
Fabry disease
Variable age of onset
Neurological (pain in extremities)
Dermatological (hypohidrosis, 
angiokeratomas)
Cerebrovascular (renal, cardiac, central 
nervous system)
α-galactosidase A
In clinical practice
Gaucher disease (various types)
Splenic and liver enlargement, with variable 
severity of disease
Some types also have neurological 
involvement
Glucocerebrosidase
In clinical practice for 
some types
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) 
(various types, including Hurler’s, 
Hunter’s, Sanfilippo’s and 
Morquio’s syndromes)
Vary with syndrome. Can cause mental 
retardation, skeletal and joint abnormalities, 
abnormal facies, obstructive respiratory 
diseases and recurrent respiratory 
infections
Each MPS type has a 
different enzyme 
deficiency
In clinical practice for 
some types; clinical trials 
under way for other types
Niemann–Pick disease
Most common presentation is as a 
progressive neurological disorder, 
accompanied by organomegaly Some 
variants do not have neurological 
symptoms
Acid sphingomyelinase
Clinical trials planned for 
some types
GM2-gangliosidosis (various 
types, including Tay–Sachs and 
Sandhoff diseases)
Severe progressive neurological disorder. 
Sandhoff disease also characterised by 
organomegaly
Hexosaminidase A, B
16.24  Lysosomal storage diseases
Fig. 16.13  Structure of lipoproteins. 
Apolipoprotein
Free 
cholesterol
Phospholipid
Triglyceride
Cholesteryl
ester
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
452
is esterified by lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase 
(LCAT), thus maintaining an uptake gradient and 
remodelling the particle into a mature spherical HDL. 
These HDL release their cholesterol to the liver and 
other cholesterol-requiring tissues via the scavenger 
receptor B1 (SRB1).
The cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP) in 
plasma allows transfer of cholesterol from HDL or LDL 
to VLDL or chylomicrons in exchange for TG. When TG 
is elevated, the action of CETP may reduce HDL choles-
terol and remodel LDL into ‘small, dense’ LDL particles 
that appear to be more atherogenic in the blood vessel 
wall. Animal species that lack CETP are resistant to 
atherosclerosis.
Lipids and cardiovascular disease
Plasma lipoprotein levels are major modifiable risk 
factors for cardiovascular disease. Increased levels of 
the rate-limiting enzyme for cholesterol synthesis, 
HMGCoA reductase. This negative feedback loop, 
together with the modulation of cholesterol esterifica-
tion, controls the intracellular free cholesterol level 
within a narrow range.
Reverse cholesterol transport
Peripheral tissues are further guarded against excessive 
cholesterol accumulation by high-density lipoproteins 
(HDL; see Fig. 16.14). Lipid-poor Apo A1 (derived from 
the liver, intestine and the outer layer of chylomicrons 
and VLDL) accepts cellular cholesterol and phospho­
lipid from a specific membrane transporter known as the 
ATP-binding cassette A1 (ABCA1). This produces small 
HDL that are able to accept more free cholesterol from 
cholesterol-rich regions of the cell membrane known as 
‘rafts’ via another membrane transporter (ABCG1). The 
cholesterol that has been accepted by these small HDL 
Fig. 16.14  Absorption, transport and storage of lipids. Pathways of lipid transport are shown; in addition, cholesterol ester transfer protein 
exchanges triglyceride and cholesterol ester between VLDL/chylomicrons and HDL/LDL, and free fatty acids released from peripheral lipolysis can be taken 
up in the liver. (ABCA1/ABCG1 = ATP-binding cassette A1/G1; Apo = apolipoprotein; BA = bile acids; C = cholesterol; CE = cholesterol ester; FFA = free 
fatty acids; HDL = mature high-density lipoprotein; HL = hepatic lipase; HMGCoAR = hydroxy-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase; IDL = intermediate-
density lipoprotein; iHDL = immature high-density lipoprotein; LCAT = lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase; LDL = low-density lipoprotein; LDLR = 
low-density lipoprotein receptor (Apo B100 receptor); LPL = lipoprotein lipase; SRB1 = scavenger receptor B1; TG = triglyceride; VLDL = very low-density 
lipoprotein) 
Synthesis
Oxidation
FFA
TG
Bile acids (BA)
Apo B100
Cholesterol
HMGCoAR
Synthesis
Liver
LDLR
LDLR
HL
SRB1
FFA
LPL
LPL
LDLR
ABCA1
ABCG1
Lipid rafts
Cholesterol
Oxidation
Peripheral
tissues
TG
LCAT
HDL
iHDL
Lipid-poor Apo A1
C
CE
TG
CE
CE
TG
TG
TG
CE
iHDL
IDL
TG
CE
Chylomicron
remnant
iHDL
iHDL
TG
TG
TG
CE
Chylomicron
VLDL
LDL
Dietary TG,
C and CE
Biliary BA and
C excretion
BA
reabsorption
Post-prandial
Endogenous TG supply
Endogenous cholesterol supply
Reverse cholesterol transport
Biliary excretion/enterohepatic
circulation
Lymph
TG
TG
TG
CE
Chylomicron
Small
intestine
iHDL
Disorders of blood lipids and lipoproteins 
16
453
atherogenic lipoproteins (especially LDL, but also IDL, 
lipoprotein(a) and possibly chylomicron remnants) con-
tribute to the development of atherosclerosis (p. 579). 
Increased plasma concentration and reduced diameter 
favour subendothelial accumulation of these lipopro-
teins. Following chemical modifications such as oxida-
tion, Apo B-containing lipoproteins are no longer cleared 
by normal mechanisms. They trigger a self-perpetuating 
inflammatory response during which they are taken up 
by macrophages to form foam cells, a hallmark of athero-
sclerotic lesions. These processes also have an adverse 
effect on endothelial function.
Conversely, HDL removes cholesterol from the 
tissues to the liver, where it is metabolised and excreted 
in bile. HDL may also counteract some components of 
the inflammatory response, such as the expression of 
vascular adhesion molecules by the endothelium. Con-
sequently, low HDL cholesterol levels, which are 
often associated with TG elevation, also predispose to 
atherosclerosis.
Lipid measurement
Abnormalities of lipid metabolism most commonly 
come to light following routine blood testing. Measure-
ment of plasma cholesterol alone is not sufficient for 
comprehensive assessment. Levels of total cholesterol 
(TC), triglyceride (TG) and HDL cholesterol (HDL-C) 
need to be obtained after a 12-hour fast to permit accu-
rate calculation of LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) according to 
the Friedewald formula (LDL-C = TC − HDL-C − 
(TG/2.2) mmol/L; or LDL-C = TC − HDL-C − (TG/5) 
mg/dL). The formula becomes unreliable when TG 
levels exceed 4 mmol/L (350 mg/dL). Other risk 
markers, such as NHDL-C (non-HDL-C, calculated as 
the difference between TC and HDL-C levels) or Apo B, 
may assess risk of cardiovascular disease more accu-
rately than LDL-C when TG levels are increased. Fur-
thermore, non-fasting samples are often used to guide 
therapeutic decisions since they are unaffected in terms 
of TC and measured LDL-C, albeit that they differ from 
fasting samples in terms of TG, HDL-C and, to some 
extent, calculated LDL-C. Consideration must be given 
to confounding factors, such as recent illness, after 
which cholesterol, LDL and HDL levels temporarily 
decrease in proportion to severity. Results that will 
affect major decisions, such as initiation of drug therapy, 
should be confirmed with a repeat measurement.
Elevated levels of TG are common in obesity, diabetes 
and insulin resistance (Chs 5 and 21), and are frequently 
associated with low HDL and increased ‘small, dense’ 
LDL. Under these circumstances, LDL-C may under­
estimate risk. This is one situation in which measure-
ment of Apo B may provide additional useful 
information.
Presenting problems in disorders  
of lipids
Lipid measurements are usually performed for the fol-
lowing reasons:
•	 screening for primary or secondary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease
•	 investigation of patients with clinical features of 
lipid disorders (Fig. 16.15) and their relatives
•	 monitoring of response to diet, weight control and 
medication.
Aetiology and clinical assessment
The first step is to consider the effect of other diseases 
and drugs (Box 16.25). Overt or subclinical hypo­
thyroidism (p. 743) may cause hypercholesterolaemia, 
and so measurement of thyroid function is warranted in 
most cases, even in the absence of typical symptoms 
and signs.
Once secondary causes are excluded, primary lipid 
abnormalities may be diagnosed. Primary lipid abnor-
malities can be classified according to the predominant 
lipid problem: hypercholesterolaemia, hypertriglyceri-
daemia or mixed hyperlipidaemia (Box 16.26). Although 
single-gene disorders are encountered in all three cate-
gories, most cases are due to multiple-gene (polygenic) 
loci interacting with environmental factors. Clinical con-
sequences of dyslipidaemia vary somewhat between 
these causes (see Fig. 16.15).
Secondary hypercholesterolaemia
Moderately common
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Cholestatic liver disease
•	 Drugs (diuretics, ciclosporin, 
corticosteroids, androgens, 
antiretroviral agents)
Less common
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Anorexia nervosa
•	 Porphyria
•	 Hyperparathyroidism
Secondary hypertriglyceridaemia
Common
•	 Diabetes mellitus (type 2)
•	 Chronic renal disease
•	 Abdominal obesity
•	 Excess alcohol
•	 Hepatocellular disease
•	 Drugs (β-blockers, 
retinoids, corticosteroids, 
anti-retroviral agents)
16.25  Causes of secondary hyperlipidaemia
Predominant hypercholesterolaemia
Polygenic hypercholesterolaemia is the most common 
cause of a mild to moderate increase in LDL-C (see Box 
16.26). Physical signs, such as corneal arcus and xanthe-
lasma, may be found in this as well as other forms of 
lipid disturbance (see Fig. 16.15). The risk of cardiovas-
cular disease is proportional to the degree of LDL-C (or 
Apo B) elevation, but is modified by other major risk 
factors, particularly low HDL-C.
Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) causes moder-
ate to severe hypercholesterolaemia and has a preva-
lence of at least 0.2% in most populations. It is usually 
caused by a loss-of-function mutation in the LDL recep-
tor gene, which results in an autosomal dominant 
pattern of inheritance. A similar syndrome can arise 
with loss-of-function mutations in the ligand-binding 
domain of Apo B100 or gain-of-function mutations in 
the PCSK9 gene. The latter increases the activity of 
the PCSK9 protein, which is a sterol-sensitive protease 
that targets the LDL receptor for degradation. Causative 
mutations can be detected in one of these three genes 
by genetic testing in about 70% of patients with FH. 
Most patients with these types of FH have LDL levels 
that are approximately twice as high as in normal 
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
454
Fig. 16.15  Clinical manifestations of hyperlipidaemia. *Note that xanthelasma and corneal arcus may be non-specific, especially in later life. 
Xanthelasma*
Corneal arcus*
Achilles tendon
xanthomas
Predominant hypercholesterolaemia
Predominant hypertriglyceridaemia
Lipaemia retinalis
Lipaemic blood and
plasma
Eruptive xanthomas
Extensor digitorum
xanthomas
Pre-patellar xanthomas
Aortic stenosis
Hepatosplenomegaly
Acute pancreatitis
Disease
Elevated lipid results
Elevated lipoprotein
CHD risk
Pancreatitis 
risk
Predominant hypercholesterolaemia
Polygenic (majority)
TC ± TG
LDL ± VLDL
+
–
Familial hypercholesterolaemia (LDL receptor defect, 
defective Apo B100, increased function of PCSK-9)
TC ± TG
LDL ± VLDL
+++
–
Hyperalphalipoproteinaemia
TC ± TG
HDL
–
–
Predominant hypertriglyceridaemia
Polygenic (majority)
TG
VLDL ± LDL
Variable
+
Lipoprotein lipase deficiency
TG >> TC
Chylo
?
+++
Familial hypertriglyceridaemia
TG > TC
VLDL ± Chylo
?
++
Mixed hyperlipidaemia
Polygenic (majority)
TC + TG
VLDL + LDL
Variable
+
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia*
TC and/or TG
LDL and/or VLDL
++
+
Dysbetalipoproteinaemia*
TC and/or TG
IDL
+++
+
+ = slightly increased risk; ++ = increased risk; +++ = greatly increased risk.
*Familial combined hyperlipidaemia and dysbetalipoproteinaemia may also present as predominant hypercholesterolaemia or predominant hypertriglyceridaemia.
16.26  Classification of hyperlipidaemia
(CHD = coronary heart disease; Chylo = chylomicrons; TC = total cholesterol; TG = triglycerides)
Disorders of blood lipids and lipoproteins 
16
455
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia, and dysbeta­
lipoproteinaemia, may present with the pattern of 
predominant hypertriglyceridaemia (see ‘Mixed hyper-
lipidaemia’, below).
Mixed hyperlipidaemia
It is difficult to define quantitatively the distinction 
between predominant hyperlipidaemias and mixed 
hyperlipidaemia. The term ‘mixed’ usually implies the 
presence of hypertriglyceridaemia, as well as an increase 
in LDL or IDL. Treatment of massive hypertriglycerid­
aemia may improve TG faster than cholesterol, thus 
temporarily mimicking mixed hyperlipidaemia.
Primary mixed hyperlipidaemia is usually polygenic 
and, like predominant hypertriglyceridaemia, often 
occurs in association with type 2 diabetes, impaired 
glucose tolerance, central obesity or other manifesta­
tions of insulin resistance (p. 805). Both components 
of mixed hyperlipidaemia may contribute to the risk of 
cardiovascular disease.
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia is a term used 
to identify an inherited tendency towards the over-
production of atherogenic Apo B-containing lipopro-
teins. It results in elevation of cholesterol, TG or both in 
different family members at different times. It is associ-
ated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease but 
it does not produce any pathognomonic physical signs. 
In practice, this relatively common condition is substan-
tially modified by factors such as age and weight. It may 
not be a monogenic condition, but rather one end of a 
heterogeneous spectrum that overlaps insulin resistance 
(p. 805).
Dysbetalipoproteinaemia (also referred to as type 3 
hyperlipidaemia, broad-beta dyslipoproteinaemia or 
remnant hyperlipidaemia) involves accumulation of 
roughly equimolar levels of cholesterol and TG. It is 
caused by homozygous inheritance of the Apo E2 allele, 
which is the isoform least avidly recognised by the LDL 
receptor. In conjunction with other exacerbating factors, 
such as obesity and diabetes, it leads to accumulation of 
atherogenic IDL and chylomicron remnants. Premature 
cardiovascular disease is common and it may also result 
in the formation of palmar xanthomas, tuberous xantho-
mas or tendon xanthomas.
Rare dyslipidaemias
Several rare disturbances of lipid metabolism have been 
described (Box 16.28). They provide important insights 
into lipid metabolism and its impact on risk of cardio-
vascular disease.
Fish eye disease, Apo A1 Milano and LCAT defi-
ciency demonstrate that very low HDL levels do not 
necessarily cause cardiovascular disease, but Apo A1 
deficiency, and possibly Tangier disease, demonstrate 
that low HDL-C can be atherogenic under some circum-
stances. Autosomal recessive FH and PCSK9 gain-of-
function mutations reveal the importance of proteins 
that chaperone the LDL receptor. Sitosterolaemia and 
cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis 
demonstrate 
that 
sterols other than cholesterol can cause xanthomas and 
cardiovascular disease, while PCSK9 loss-of-function 
mutations, abetalipoproteinaemia and hypobetalipopro-
teinaemia suggest that low levels of Apo B-containing 
lipoproteins reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. 
The only adverse health outcomes associated with 
subjects of the same age and gender. Affected subjects 
suffer from severe hypercholesterolaemia and prema-
ture cardiovascular disease. FH may be accompanied 
by xanthomas of the Achilles or extensor digitorum 
tendons (see Fig. 16.15), which are strongly suggestive 
of FH. The onset of corneal arcus before age 40 is 
also suggestive of this condition. Identification of an 
index case of FH (the first case of FH in a family) should 
trigger genetic and biochemical screening of other family 
members, which is a cost-effective method for case 
detection. Affected individuals should be managed from 
childhood (Box 16.27).
Homozygous FH may occur in populations in which 
there is a ‘founder’ effect or consanguineous marriage, 
resulting in more extensive xanthomas and precocious 
cardiovascular disease in childhood. Hyperalphalipo-
proteinaemia refers to increased levels of HDL-C. In 
the absence of an increase in LDL-C, this condition 
does not cause cardiovascular disease, so it should not 
be regarded as pathological.
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia, and dysbeta­
lipoproteinaemia, may present with the pattern of 
predominant hypercholesterolaemia (see ‘Mixed hyper-
lipidaemia’ below).
Predominant hypertriglyceridaemia
Polygenic hypertriglyceridaemia is the most common 
cause of a raised TG level (see Box 16.26). Other common 
causes include excess alcohol intake, medications (such 
as β-blockers and retinoids), type 2 diabetes, impaired 
glucose tolerance, central obesity or other manifestations 
of insulin resistance (p. 805) and impaired absorption of 
bile acids. It is often accompanied by post-prandial 
hyperlipidaemia and reduced HDL-C, both of which 
may contribute to cardiovascular risk. Excessive intake 
of alcohol or dietary fat, or other exacerbating factors 
may precipitate a massive increase in TG levels, which, 
if they exceed 10 mmol/L (880 mg/dL), may pose a risk 
of acute pancreatitis.
Inherited forms of hypertriglyceridaemia also occur. 
Loss-of-function mutations in the LPL gene, which 
encodes lipoprotein lipase, or the APOC2 gene, which 
encodes the Apo C2 protein that acts as a co-factor for 
lipoprotein lipase, may cause recessively inherited 
forms of hypertriglyceridaemia. These mutations cause 
massive hypertriglyceridaemia that is not readily amen­
able to drug treatment. It often presents in childhood 
and is associated with episodes of acute abdominal pain 
and pancreatitis. In common with other causes of severe 
hypertriglyceridaemia, it may result in hepatospleno­
megaly, lipaemia retinalis and eruptive xanthomas (see 
Fig. 16.15).
Familial hypertriglyceridaemia may also be inherited 
in a dominant manner due to mutations in the APOA5 
gene, which encodes Apo A5 – a co-factor that is essen-
tial for lipoprotein lipase activity. This disorder may be 
associated with high levels of TG that predispose to 
cardiovascular disease and pancreatitis.
•	 Statin treatment: may be required from the age of about 10. 
It does not compromise normal growth and maturation.
•	 Tobacco: patients should be strongly advised to avoid this.
16.27  Familial hypercholesterolaemia 
in adolescence
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
456
extremely low plasma lipid levels in the latter two condi-
tions are attributable to fat-soluble vitamin deficiency, 
or impaired transport of lipid from intestine or liver.
Management of dyslipidaemia
Lipid-lowering therapies have a key role in the second-
ary and primary prevention of cardiovascular diseases 
(p. 581). Assessment of absolute risk, treatment of all 
modifiable risk factors and optimisation of lifestyle, 
especially diet and exercise, are central to management 
in all cases.
Patients with the greatest absolute risk of cardiovas-
cular disease will derive the greatest absolute benefit 
from treatment. Public health organisations recommend 
thresholds for the introduction of lipid-lowering therapy 
based on the identification of patients in very high-risk 
categories, or those calculated to be at high absolute risk 
according to algorithms or tables such as the Joint British 
Societies Coronary Risk Prediction Chart (see Fig. 18.62, 
p. 582). These tables, which are based on large epidemio-
logical studies, should be recalibrated for the local 
population, if possible. In general, patients who have 
cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, chronic renal 
impairment, familial hypercholesterolaemia or an abso-
lute risk of cardiovascular disease of greater than 20% 
in the ensuing 10 years are arbitrarily regarded as having 
sufficient risk to justify drug treatment.
Public health organisations also recommend target 
levels for patients receiving drug treatment. High-risk 
patients should aim for HDL-C > 1 mmol/L (38 mg/dL) 
and fasting TG < 2 mmol/L (approximately 180 mg/
dL), whilst target levels for LDL-C have been reduced 
from 2.5 to 2.0 mmol/L (76 mg/dL) or less. In general, 
total cholesterol should be < 5 mmol/L (190 mg/dL) 
during treatment, and < 4 mmol/L (approximately 
150 mg/dL) in high-risk patients and in secondary pre-
vention of cardiovascular disease.
Non-pharmacological management
Patients with lipid abnormalities should receive medical 
advice and, if necessary, dietary counselling to:
•	 reduce intake of saturated and trans-unsaturated fat 
to less than 7–10% of total energy
•	 reduce intake of cholesterol to < 250 mg/day
•	 replace sources of saturated fat and cholesterol with 
alternative foods, such as lean meat, low-fat dairy 
products, polyunsaturated spreads and low 
glycaemic index carbohydrates
•	 reduce energy-dense foods such as fats and soft 
drinks, whilst increasing activity and exercise to 
maintain or lose weight
•	 increase consumption of cardioprotective and 
nutrient-dense foods, such as vegetables, unrefined 
carbohydrates, fish, pulses, nuts, legumes, fruit, etc.
•	 adjust alcohol consumption, reducing intake if 
excessive or if associated with hypertension, 
hypertriglyceridaemia or central obesity
•	 achieve additional benefits with supplementary 
intake of foods containing lipid-lowering nutrients 
such as n-3 fatty acids, dietary fibre and plant 
sterols.
The response to diet is usually apparent within 3–4 
weeks but dietary adjustment may need to be intro-
duced gradually. Although hyperlipidaemia in general, 
and hypertriglyceridaemia in particular, can be very 
responsive to these measures, LDL-C reductions are 
often only modest in routine clinical practice. Explana-
tion, encouragement and persistence are often required 
to induce patient compliance. Even minor weight loss 
can substantially reduce cardiovascular risk, especially 
in centrally obese patients (p. 116).
All other modifiable cardiovascular risk factors 
should be assessed and treated. If possible, intercurrent 
drug treatments that adversely affect the lipid profile 
should be replaced.
Pharmacological management
The main diagnostic categories provide a useful frame-
work for management and the selection of first-line 
pharmacological treatment (Fig. 16.16).
Predominant hypercholesterolaemia
Predominant hypercholesterolaemia can be treated with 
one or more of the cholesterol-lowering drugs:
Statins.  These reduce cholesterol synthesis by inhibit-
ing the HMGCoA reductase enzyme. The reduction in 
cholesterol synthesis up-regulates activity of the LDL 
receptor, which increases clearance of LDL and its pre-
cursor, IDL, resulting in a secondary reduction in LDL 
synthesis. Statins reduce LDL-C by up to 60%, reduce 
TG by up to 40% and increase HDL-C by up to 10%. 
They also reduce the concentration of intermediate 
metabolites such as isoprenes, which may lead to other 
effects such as suppression of the inflammatory response. 
There is clear evidence of protection against total and 
coronary mortality, stroke and cardiovascular events 
across the spectrum of CVD risk (Box 16.29).
Statins are generally well tolerated and serious side-
effects are rare (well below 2%). Liver function test 
abnormalities and muscle problems, such as myalgia, 
asymptomatic increase in creatine kinase (CK), myositis 
and, infrequently, rhabdomyolysis, are the most 
common. Side-effects are more likely in patients who are 
elderly, debilitated or receiving other drugs that inter-
fere with statin degradation, which usually involves 
cytochrome P450 3A4 or glucuronidation.
Condition
Lipoprotein pattern
CVD risk
Tangier disease
Very low HDL, low TC
+
Apo A1 deficiency
Very low HDL
++
Apo A1 Milano
Very low HDL
–
Fish eye disease
Very low HDL, high TG
–
LCAT deficiency
Very low HDL, high TG
?
Autosomal recessive FH
Very high LDL
++
Sitosterolaemia
High plant sterols 
including sitosterol
+
Cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis
Bile acid defect 
(cholestanol 
accumulation)
+
+ = slightly increased risk; ++ = increased risk.
(CVD = cardiovascular disease; FH = familial hypercholesterolaemia; 
HDL = high-density lipoprotein; LCAT = lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase; 
TC = total cholesterol; TG = triglycerides)
16.28  Miscellaneous and rare forms 
of hyperlipidaemia
Disorders of blood lipids and lipoproteins 
16
457
Colesevelam has fewer gastrointestinal effects than 
older preparations that are less well tolerated. Develop-
ment of specific inhibitors of the intestinal bile acid 
transporter may further improve tolerability of this class 
of agent.
Nicotinic acid.  Pharmacological doses reduce periph-
eral fatty acid release with the result that VLDL and LDL 
decline whilst HDL-C increases. Randomised clinical 
trials have been inconsistent regarding effects on athero-
sclerosis and cardiovascular events. Side-effects include 
flushing, gastric irritation, liver function disturbances, 
and exacerbation of gout and hyperglycaemia. Slow-
release formulations and low-dose aspirin may reduce 
flushing. Combination therapy with the prostaglandin 
D2 receptor inhibitor laropiprant to reduce flushing 
further is being evaluated.
Combination therapy.  In many patients, treatment of 
predominant hypercholesterolaemia can be achieved by 
diet plus the use of a statin in sufficient doses to achieve 
target LDL-C levels. Patients who do not reach LDL 
targets on the highest tolerated statin dose, or who are 
intolerant of statins, may receive ezetimibe, plant sterols, 
nicotinic acid or resins. Ezetimibe and resins are safe and 
effective in combination with a statin, but nicotinic acid 
with a statin requires a greater level of caution because 
the risk of side-effects is slightly increased.
Predominant hypertriglyceridaemia
Predominant hypertriglyceridaemia can be treated with 
one of the TG-lowering drugs (see Fig. 16.16).
Fibrates.  These stimulate peroxisome proliferator acti-
vated receptor (PPAR) alpha, which controls the expres-
sion of gene products that mediate the metabolism of TG 
and HDL. As a result, synthesis of fatty acids, TG and 
VLDL is reduced, whilst that of lipoprotein lipase, which 
catabolises TG, is enhanced. In addition, production of 
Apo A1 and ATP binding cassette A1 is up-regulated, 
leading to increased reverse cholesterol transport via 
HDL. Consequently, fibrates reduce TG by up to 50% 
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors.  The only licensed 
drug in this class is ezetimibe, which inhibits activity of 
the intestinal mucosal transporter NPC1L1 that absorbs 
dietary and biliary cholesterol. Depletion of hepatic cho-
lesterol up-regulates hepatic LDL receptor activity. This 
mechanism of action is synergistic with the effect of 
statins. Monotherapy with the standard 10 mg/day 
dose reduces LDL-C by 15–20%. Slightly greater 
(17–25%) incremental LDL-C reduction occurs when 
ezetimibe is added to statins. Ezetimibe is well tolerated, 
and evidence of a beneficial effect on cardiovascular 
disease endpoints may be inferred from a trial of 
combination therapy with simvastatin. Plant sterol-
supplemented foods, which also reduce cholesterol 
absorption, lower LDL-C by 7–15%.
Bile acid sequestering resins.  Drugs in this class include 
colestyramine, colestipol and colesevelam. These pre­
vent the reabsorption of bile acids, thereby increasing 
de novo bile acid synthesis from hepatic cholesterol. 
As with ezetimibe, the resultant depletion of hepatic 
cholesterol up-regulates LDL receptor activity and 
reduces LDL-C in a manner that is synergistic with the 
action of statins. Resins reduce LDL-C and modestly 
increase HDL-C, but may increase TG. They are safe but 
may interfere with bioavailability of other drugs. 
Fig. 16.16  Flow chart for the drug treatment of hyperlipidaemia. *Interrupt treatment if CK is more than 5–10 times the upper limit of normal, or 
if elevated with muscle symptoms, or if ALT is more than 2–3 times the upper limit. To convert TG in mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply by 88. To convert LDL-C 
in mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply by 38. (ALT = alanine aminotransferase; CK = creatine kinase) 
Predominant
hypercholesterolaemia
Mixed
hyperlipidaemia
Predominant
hypertriglyceridaemia
First-line treatment
with statin
Ezetimibe if intolerant
Monitor lipids,
Monitor for side-effects*
Titrate dose
    Statin
± ezetimibe
± resin
± nicotinate
 if resistant
Combination
treatment likely if
TG and LDL > 4 mmol/L
Statin + fish oil
Fibrate + ezetimibe
Statin + nicotinate
Statin + fibrate
Monitor for side-effects*
First-line treatment
with fibrate
Fish oil if intolerant
Monitor lipids,
Monitor for side-effects*
Titrate fish oil
  Fibrate
± fish oil
± nicotinate
 if resistant
‘Meta-analysis of major randomised controlled clinical trials 
involving over 130 000 subjects receiving statins for 
approximately 5 years showed a reduced risk of a major 
cardiovascular event of 21% (95% confidence interval 19–23%) 
per 1 mmol/L reduction in LDL-C, irrespective of age, gender, 
baseline LDL-C or intercurrent cardiovascular disease. Relative 
risk reduction was equally favourable in the subjects with the 
lowest risk.’
•	 Cholesterol Treatment Trialists Collaborators. Lancet 2012; 380:581–590. 
16.29  Benefits of using statins to treat patients 
with hypercholesterolaemia
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
458
absolute cardiovascular risk assessed periodically. It is 
not necessary to perform routine checks of CK and liver 
function unless symptoms occur, or if statins are used in 
combination with fibrates, nicotinic acid or other drugs 
that may interfere with their clearance. If myalgia or 
weakness occurs in association with CK elevation over 
5–10 times the upper limit of normal, or if sustained 
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) elevation more than 
2–3 times the upper limit of normal occurs that is not 
accounted for by fatty liver (p. 959), treatment should be 
discontinued and alternative therapy sought.
The principles of the management of dyslipidaemia 
can be applied broadly, but the objectives of treatment 
in the elderly (Box 16.30) and the safety of pharmaco-
logical therapy in pregnancy (Box 16.31) warrant special 
consideration.
DISORDERS OF HAEM SYNTHESIS 
– THE PORPHYRIAS
The porphyrias are a group of disorders caused by 
inherited abnormalities in the haem biosynthetic 
pathway (Fig. 16.17). Most of the described forms are 
due to partial enzyme deficiencies with a dominant 
mode of inheritance. They are commonly classified as 
either hepatic or erythropoietic, depending on whether 
the major site of excess porphyrin production is in the 
liver or in the red cell.
and increase HDL-C by up to 20%, but LDL-C changes 
are variable.
Fewer large-scale trials have been conducted with 
fibrates than with statins and the results are less con­
clusive, but reduced rates of cardiovascular disease 
have been reported with fibrate therapy in the subgroup 
of patients with low HDL-C levels and elevated TG 
(e.g. TG > 2.3 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)). Fibrates are 
usually well tolerated but share a similar side-effect 
profile to statins. In addition, they may increase the risk 
of cholelithiasis and prolong the action of anticoagu-
lants. Accumulating evidence suggests that they may 
also have a protective effect against diabetic microvas-
cular complications.
Highly polyunsaturated long-chain n-3 fatty acids. 
These include eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosa-
hexaenoic acid (DHA), which comprise approximately 
30% of the fatty acids in fish oil. EPA and DHA are 
potent inhibitors of VLDL TG formation. Intakes of 
greater than 2 g n-3 fatty acid (equivalent to 6 g of most 
forms of fish oil) per day lower TG in a dose-dependent 
fashion. Up to 50% reduction in TG may be achieved 
with 15 g fish oil per day. Changes in LDL-C and HDL-C 
are variable. Fish oil fatty acids have also been shown to 
inhibit platelet aggregation and improve cardiac arrhyth-
mia in animal models. Dietary and pharmacological 
trials suggest that n-3 fatty acids may reduce mortality 
from coronary heart disease. Fish oils appear to be safe 
and well tolerated.
Patients with predominant hypertriglyceridaemia 
who do not respond to lifestyle intervention can be 
treated with fibrates, fish oil or nicotinic acid, depending 
on individual response and tolerance. If target levels are 
not achieved, the fibrates and fish oil or nicotinic acid 
can be combined. Massive hypertriglyceridaemia may 
require more aggressive limitation of dietary fat intake 
(< 10–20% energy as fat). Any degree of insulin defi-
ciency should be corrected because insulin is required 
for optimal activity of lipoprotein lipase. The initial 
target for patients with massive hypertriglyceridaemia 
is TG < 10 mmol/L (880 mg/dL), to reduce the risk of 
acute pancreatitis.
Mixed hyperlipidaemia
Mixed hyperlipidaemia can be difficult to treat. Statins 
alone are less effective first-line therapy once fasting TG 
exceeds around 4 mmol/L (350 mg/dL). Fibrates are 
first-line therapy for dysbetalipoproteinaemia, but they 
may not control the cholesterol component in other 
forms of mixed hyperlipidaemia. Combination therapy 
is often required. Effective combinations include: statin 
plus fish oil when TG is not too high; fibrate plus 
ezetimibe; statin plus nicotinic acid; or statin plus fibrate. 
The risk of myopathy is increased with gemfibrozil, but 
fenofibrate is relatively safe in this regard.
Monitoring of therapy
The effect of drug therapy should be assessed after 
6 weeks (12 weeks for fibrates). At this point, it is prudent 
to review side-effects, lipid response (see target levels 
above), CK and liver function tests. During longer-term 
follow-up, compliance with drug treatment, diet and 
exercise should be assessed, with monitoring of weight, 
blood pressure and lipid levels. The presence of cardio-
vascular symptoms or signs should be noted and 
•	 Prevalence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: 
greatest in old age.
•	 Associated cardiovascular risk: lipid levels become less 
predictive, as do other risk factors apart from age itself.
•	 Benefit of statin therapy: maintained up to the age of 
80 years but evidence is lacking beyond this.
•	 Life expectancy and statin therapy: lives saved by 
intervention are associated with shorter life expectancy than 
in younger patients, and so the impact of statins on 
quality-adjusted life years is smaller in old age.
16.30  Management of hyperlipidaemia 
in old age
•	 Lipid metabolism: lipid and lipoprotein levels increase 
during pregnancy. This includes an increase in LDL-C, which 
resolves post-partum. Remnant dyslipidaemia and 
hypertriglyceridaemia may be exacerbated during pregnancy.
•	 Treatment: dyslipidaemia is rarely thought to warrant urgent 
treatment so pharmacological therapy is usually 
contraindicated when conception or pregnancy is anticipated. 
Teratogenicity has been reported with systemically absorbed 
agents, and non-absorbed agents may interfere with nutrient 
bioavailability.
•	 Monitoring: cardiovascular disease is very unlikely amongst 
women of child-bearing age, but is possible in women with 
severe risk factor profiles or familial hypercholesterolaemia, 
when pre-conception cardiovascular review can be 
considered to ensure that the patient will be able to 
withstand the demands of pregnancy and labour.
16.31  Dyslipidaemia in pregnancy
Disorders of haem synthesis – the porphyrias
16
459
The other pattern of presentation is with an acute 
neurological syndrome. This presents with acute abdom-
inal pain together with features of autonomic dysfunc-
tion such as tachycardia, hypertension and constipation. 
Neuropsychiatric manifestations, hyponatraemia due to 
inappropriate ADH release (p. 438), and an acute neu-
ropathy may also occur (p. 1223). The neuropathy is 
usually motor and may, in severe cases, progress to res-
piratory failure.
There is no proven explanation for the episodic 
nature of the attacks in porphyria, which can relapse and 
remit or follow a prolonged and unremitting course. 
Sometimes, specific triggers can be identified, such as 
alcohol, fasting, or drugs such as anticonvulsants, sul-
phonamides, oestrogen and progesterone. The oral con-
traceptive pill is a common precipitating factor. In a 
significant number, no precipitant can be identified.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of porphyria and classification into the 
various forms have traditionally relied on the pattern of 
The porphyrias show a low penetrance in the order 
of 25%. Environmental factors are important in disease 
expression in some forms. In the most common of these 
conditions, porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), these include 
alcohol, iron accumulation, exogenous oestrogens and 
exposure to various chemicals. Many cases are associ-
ated with hepatitis C infection and this should always 
be screened for on presentation.
Clinical features
The clinical features of porphyria fall into two broad 
categories, photosensitivity and acute neurovisceral syn-
drome. The enzyme defects responsible for the diseases 
are shown in Figure 16.17.
Photosensitive skin manifestations, attributable to 
excess production and accumulation of porphyrins in 
the skin, cause pain, erythema, bullae, skin erosions, 
hirsutism and hyperpigmentation, and occur predomi-
nantly on areas of the skin that are exposed to sunlight 
(p. 1260). The skin also becomes sensitive to damage 
from minimal trauma.
Fig. 16.17  Haem biosynthetic pathway and enzyme defects responsible for the porphyrias. (N = neurovisceral; P = photosensitive) 
δ-aminolaevulinic acid (ALA)
Porphobilinogen (PBG)
Hydroxymethylbilane
Uroporphyrinogen III
Coproporphyrinogen III
Protoporphyrinogen IX
Protoporphyrin IX (proto IX)
Haem
ALA dehydratase
Coproporphyrin I (Copro I)
Uroporphyrin I (Uro I)
Isocoproporphyrin
(Isocopro)
Coproporphyrin III
(Copro III)
Plumboporphyria
PBG deaminase
Acute intermittent
porphyria
Uroporphyrinogen
synthetase
Congenital
erythropoietic porphyria
Uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase
Porphyria
cutanea tarda
Coproporphyrinogen
oxidase
Hereditary
coproporphyria
Protoporphyrinogen
oxidase
Variegate porphyria
Ferrochelatase
Erythropoietic
protoporphyria
+Fe2+
N
N
P
P
N + P
P
N + P
Pathway
Metabolites
Enzyme
Deficiency
disease
Symptom-
atology
Glycine + succinyl CoA
Clinical biochemistry and metabolism
16
460
the porphyrins and porphyrin precursors found in 
blood, urine and faeces (Box 16.32). This is a straight­
forward diagnosis at clinical presentation when the 
metabolites are significantly elevated, but this is not 
always the case in asymptomatic individuals.
More recently, measurement of the enzymes that 
are deficient in the various porphyrias has provided 
further diagnostic information (for example, PBG de­
aminase activity in red blood cells to diagnose acute 
intermittent porphyria). However, there is often consid-
erable overlap between enzyme activities in affected 
and normal subjects. Furthermore, some of the enzymes 
occur in the mitochondria, for which it is more difficult 
to obtain suitable specimens for analysis. All the genes 
of the haem biosynthetic pathway have now been char-
acterised. This has made it possible to identify affected 
individuals in families by genetic testing, a significant 
advance considering that penetrance of porphyria is low.
Metabolite excretory patterns are always grossly 
abnormal during an acute attack or in the presence of 
cutaneous manifestations of porphyria and are diagnos-
tic of the particular porphyria. A normal metabolite 
profile under these circumstances effectively excludes 
porphyria. Metabolites usually remain abnormal for 
long periods after an acute attack, and in some individu-
als never return to normal. The diagnosis is not so 
straightforward in patients who are in remission, or in 
asymptomatic individuals with a positive family history. 
Neurological porphyria rarely manifests before puberty, 
nor can it be readily diagnosed from metabolite patterns 
after the menopause. In these circumstances, genetic 
testing for disease-specific mutations can now clarify the 
situation.
Management
For patients predisposed to neurovisceral attacks, 
general management includes avoidance of any agents 
known to precipitate acute porphyria. Specific manage-
ment includes intravenous glucose, as provision of 
5000 kilojoules per day can, in some cases, terminate 
acute attacks through a reduction in ALA synthetase 
activity, leading to reduced ALA synthesis. More 
recently, administration of haem (in various forms such 
as haematin or haem arginate) has been shown to reduce 
metabolite excretory rates, relieve pain and accelerate 
recovery. Cyclical acute attacks in women sometimes 
respond to suppression of the menstrual cycle using 
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues. In rare 
cases with frequent prolonged attacks or attacks intracta-
ble to treatment, liver transplantation has been effective.
There are few specific or effective measures to treat 
the photosensitive manifestations. The primary goal is 
to avoid sun exposure and skin trauma. Barrier sun 
creams containing zinc or titanium oxide are the most 
effective products. New colourless creams containing 
nanoparticle formulations have improved patient 
acceptance. Beta-carotene is used in some patients with 
erythropoietic porphyria with some efficacy. Afamelan-
otide, a synthetic analogue of alpha-melanocyte stimu-
lating hormone (α-MSH), has also been shown to provide 
protection in erythropoietic protoporphyria. In porphy-
ria cutanea tarda, a course of venesections to remove 
iron can result in long-lasting clinical and biochemical 
remission, especially if exposure to identified precipi-
tants, such as alcohol or oestrogens, is reduced. Alterna-
tively, a prolonged course of low-dose chloroquine 
therapy is also effective.
Further information
Websites
http://emedicine.medscape.com The Nephrology link on this 
site contains a useful compendium of articles.
www.lipidsonline.org Summarises management strategies for 
dyslipidaemia.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov The link to OMIM (Online Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man) provides updated information on the 
genetic basis of metabolic disorders.
www.porphyria-europe.com and www.drugs-porphyria.org 
Excellent resources on drug safety in porphyria.
Elevated porphyrins and precursors
Condition
Blood
Urine
Faeces
ALA dehydratase deficiency (plumboporphyria)
Proto IX*
ALA, Copro III*
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP)
ALA, PBG
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP)
Uro I
Uro I
Copro I
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT)
Uro I
Isocopro
Hereditary coproporphyria (HCP)
ALA, PBG, Copro III
Copro III
Variegate porphyria (VP)
ALA, PBG, Copro III
Proto IX
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP)
Proto IX
Proto IX
*The paradoxical rise in coproporphyrin III (Copro III) and protoporphyrin (Proto) in this very rare condition is poorly understood.
16.32  Diagnostic biochemical findings in the porphyrias
Refer to Figure 16.17 for metabolic pathways.
461
17 
Clinical examination of the kidney and 
urinary tract 462
Functional anatomy and physiology 464
Investigation of renal and urinary tract 
disease 466
Glomerular filtration rate 466
Urinalysis 468
Blood tests 468
Imaging 468
Renal biopsy 471
Presenting problems in renal and urinary 
tract disease 471
Dysuria 471
Loin pain 471
Oliguria/anuria 471
Polyuria 472
Nocturia 472
Frequency 472
Urinary incontinence 472
Erectile dysfunction 474
Haematuria 474
Proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome 476
Oedema 478
Hypertension 478
Acute kidney injury 478
Chronic kidney disease 483
Kidney and  
urinary tract disease
Isolated defects of tubular function 510
Diseases of the collecting system and 
ureters 510
Congenital abnormalities 510
Retroperitoneal fibrosis 511
Infections of the urinary tract 511
Benign prostatic enlargement 514
Prostatitis 515
Tumours of the kidney and urinary  
tract 515
Renal adenocarcinoma 515
Urothelial tumours 516
Prostate cancer 517
Testicular tumours 518
Inherited tumour syndromes affecting the renal 
tract 519
Renal involvement in systemic  
conditions 519
Pregnancy and renal disease 520
Kidney disease in adolescence 521
Drugs and the kidney 522
J. Goddard
A.N. Turner
Renal replacement therapy 488
Preparing for renal replacement therapy 489
Conservative treatment 490
Haemodialysis 490
Haemofiltration 491
Haemodiafiltration 492
Peritoneal dialysis 492
Renal transplantation 492
Renal vascular diseases 494
Renal artery stenosis 494
Acute renal infarction 495
Diseases of small intrarenal vessels 495
Glomerular diseases 497
Glomerulonephritis 498
Inherited glomerular diseases 502
Tubulo-interstitial diseases 502
Acute interstitial nephritis 502
Chronic interstitial nephritis 503
Reflux nephropathy 504
Papillary necrosis 505
Sickle-cell nephropathy 505
Cystic diseases of the kidney 505
Renal stone disease 507
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
462
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE KIDNEY AND URINARY TRACT
Lungs
Crepitations in
fluid overload
Observation
Blood pressure
Often elevated
Jugular venous pressure
Elevated in fluid overload
6
• Tiredness
• Respiratory rate and depth
  increased in metabolic acidosis
• Pallor*
Hands
1
Sacral oedema
Peripheral neuropathy*
11
3
4
Abdomen
Enlarged kidneys
Local tenderness
Renal or other arterial bruits
in renal vascular disease
Rectal examination — prostate
8
Heart
Extra heart sounds in fluid
overload
Pericardial friction rub*
7
Fundoscopy
5
Ankle oedema
9
10
Urinalysis for blood
and protein
12
*Features of advanced chronic kidney
disease (see also Fig. 17.13)
Urine microscopy
13
Genitalia
14
2
Phimosis
Hypertensive changes
‘Brown line’ pigmentation
of nails
Splinter haemorrhages
Skin
Yellow complexion*
Bruising*
Excoriation of pruritus*
Reduced skin turgor in
fluid depletion
Clinical examination of the kidney and urinary tract
463
Many diseases of the kidney and uri­
nary tract are clinically silent, at least 
in the early stages. Accordingly, it is 
common for these conditions to first 
be detected by routine blood tests 
or on dipstick testing of the urine. 
Several important abnormalities can 
also be picked up on physical examina­
tion, however, as summarised below.
Inset (Dipstick): From Pitkin J, et al. 2003 – see p. 523. 
A
B
C
D
Blood pressure
measurements
1
4
5
6
7
8
2
3
Blood tests for abnormal
creatinine and electrolytes
Dipstick testing for protein,
blood, nitrate and leucocytes
Urine microscopy. A Erythrocytes due to bleeding from lower
in the urinary tract (x400). B Dysmorphic erythrocytes due to
glomerular inflammation (x400). C Hyaline casts (arrows), in
normal urine (×160). D Erythrocytes and a red cell cast (arrow)
in glomerulonephritis (x100). Panels A–C are phase contrast
images; D is a bright field image.
Abdominal examination
for palpable kidneys
Right kidney
Left kidney
Percussing for tenderness
in renal angle
Digital rectal examination for
prostate enlargement
Checking sacrum and ankles for pitting oedema
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
464
through the collecting ducts of multiple nephrons and 
drains into the renal pelvis and ureters.
The glomerulus
The glomerulus comprises a tightly packed loop of capil­
laries supplied by an afferent arteriole and drained by 
an efferent arteriole. It is surrounded by a cup-shaped 
extension of the proximal tubule termed Bowman’s 
capsule, which is comprised of epithelial cells. Blood 
that enters the glomerulus undergoes ultrafiltration 
across the glomerular basement membrane (GBM), 
which is formed by fusion of the basement membranes 
of tubular epithelial and vascular endothelial cells (Fig. 
17.1C and D). The glomerular capillary endothelial 
cells contain pores (fenestrae), through which circulat­
ing molecules can pass to reach the underlying GBM. 
Glomerular epithelial cells (podocytes) have multiple 
long foot processes which interdigitate with those of the 
adjacent epithelial cells (Fig. 17.1E). As well as maintain­
ing a selective barrier to filtration, podocytes are involved 
in regulating turnover of the GBM. Mesangial cells lie in 
the central region of the glomerulus. They have contrac­
tile properties similar to those of vascular smooth muscle 
cells but also have macrophage-like properties.
Under normal circumstances, the glomerulus is 
impermeable to proteins the size of albumin (67 kDa) or 
larger, while proteins of 20 kDa or smaller are filtered 
freely. The ability of molecules between 20 and 67 kDa 
to pass through the GBM is variable and depends on the 
size (smaller molecules are filtered more easily) and 
charge (positively charged molecules are filtered more 
easily). Very little lipid is filtered by the glomerulus.
Filtration pressure at the glomerulus is normally 
maintained at a constant level, in the face of wide vari­
ations in systemic blood pressure and cardiac output, by 
alterations in muscle tone within the afferent and effer­
ent arterioles. This is known as autoregulation. When 
there is a reduction in renal perfusion pressure, renin is 
released by specialised smooth muscle cells in the juxta­
glomerular apparatus. Renin cleaves angiotensinogen 
to release angiotensin I, which is further cleaved by 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) to produce angi­
otensin II (Fig. 17.1D). This restores glomerular perfusion 
pressure in the short term by causing vasoconstriction 
of the efferent arterioles within the kidney and by induc­
ing systemic vasoconstriction to increase blood pressure 
and thus renal perfusion pressure. In the longer term, 
angiotensin II increases plasma volume by stimulating 
aldosterone release, which enhances sodium reabsorp­
tion by the renal tubules (see Fig. 20.17, p. 771).
Renal tubules, loop of Henle and  
collecting ducts
The proximal renal tubule, loop of Henle, distal renal 
tubule and collecting ducts are responsible for reabsorp­
tion of water, electrolytes and other solutes, as well 
as regulating acid–base balance, as described in detail 
on page 430 and in Figure 16.3. They also play a key 
role in regulating calcium homeostasis by converting 
25-hydroxyvitamin D to the active metabolite 1,25- 
dihydroxyvitamin D (p. 1126). Failure of this process 
contributes to the pathogenesis of hypocalcaemia and 
bone disease which occurs in chronic kidney disease 
(CKD, p. 483). Fibroblast-like cells that lie in the intersti­
tium of the renal cortex are responsible for production 
This chapter describes the disorders of the kidneys and 
urinary tract that are commonly encountered in routine 
practice, as well as giving an overview of the highly 
specialised field of renal replacement therapy. Disorders 
of renal tubular function, which may cause alterations 
in electrolyte and acid–base balance, are described in 
Chapter 16.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
The kidneys
The kidneys play a central role in excretion of many 
metabolic breakdown products, including ammonia, 
urea and creatinine from protein, and uric acid from 
nucleic acids, drugs and toxins. They also regulate fluid 
and electrolyte balance. This is achieved by making large 
volumes of an ultrafiltrate of plasma (120 mL/min, 
170 L/day) at the glomerulus, and selectively reabsorb­
ing components of this ultrafiltrate at points along the 
nephron. The rates of filtration and reabsorption are con­
trolled by many hormonal and haemodynamic signals.
The kidneys also regulate acid–base homeostasis, 
calcium and phosphate homeostasis, vitamin D metabo­
lism and production of red blood cells. They are impor­
tant in regulating blood pressure. Renin is secreted from 
the juxtaglomerular apparatus in response to reduced 
afferent arteriolar pressure, stimulation of sympathetic 
nerves, and changes in sodium content of fluid in the 
distal convoluted tubule at the macula densa, and is the 
first step in the generation of angiotensin II and aldos­
terone release, which in turn regulate systemic vasocon­
striction and extracellular volume.
Each kidney is approximately 11–14 cm in length in 
healthy adults; they are located retroperitoneally on 
either side of the aorta and inferior vena cava between 
the 12th thoracic and 3rd lumbar vertebra (Fig. 17.1A). 
The right kidney is usually a few centimetres lower 
because the liver lies above it. Both kidneys rise and 
descend several centimetres with respiration.
The kidneys have a rich blood supply and receive 
approximately 20–25% of cardiac output through the 
renal arteries, which arise from the abdominal aorta. 
The renal arteries undergo various subdivisions within 
the kidney, eventually forming interlobular arteries that 
run through the renal cortex. These eventually give rise 
to afferent glomerular arterioles that supply individual 
nephrons, which are the functional units of the kidney. 
The efferent arteriole, leading from the glomerulus, 
supplies the distal nephron and medulla in a ‘portal’ 
circulation (Fig. 17.1B).
The nephron
Healthy kidneys contain approximately 1 million indi­
vidual nephrons. Each nephron consists of a glomerulus, 
which is responsible for ultrafiltration of blood, a proxi­
mal renal tubule, a loop of Henle, a distal renal tubule 
and a collecting duct, which together are responsible for 
selective reabsorption of water and electrolytes that 
have been filtered at the glomerulus (see Fig. 16.2, 
p. 430). Under normal circumstances, more than 99% of 
the 170 litres of glomerular filtrate that is produced each 
day is reabsorbed in the tubules. The remainder passes 
Functional anatomy and physiology 
17
465
Fig. 17.1  Functional anatomy of the kidney.  A Anatomical relationships of the kidney.  B A single nephron. For the functions of different 
segments, see Figures 16.2 and 16.3 (pp. 430 and 431).  C Histology of a normal glomerulus.  D Schematic cross-section of a glomerulus, showing five 
capillary loops, to illustrate structure and show cell types.  E Electron micrograph of the filtration barrier. (GBM = glomerular basement membrane) 
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Endothelial
cell
Angiotensin II
vasoconstricts
Pelvis
Cortex
Calyx
Medulla
Vena cava
Ureter
Bladder
Afferent
arteriole
Glomerulus
Efferent
arteriole
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Collecting
duct
Thick-
walled
segment
 Loop
  of
Henle
Thin-walled
segment
Ureter
Renal
artery
Renal
vein
Epithelial
cell
Urinary space
Bowman's
capsule
Parietal
epithelium
Capillary
loops
Efferent arteriole
Afferent
arteriole
Mesangial
cell
Mesangial
matrix
Juxtaglomerular
apparatus
Aorta
Endothelial cell
Epithelial cell
(podocyte)
GBM
Macula densa
Renal artery
A
B
C
D
E
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
466
The penis
Blood flow into the corpus cavernosum of the penis is 
controlled by sympathetic nerves from the thoracolum­
bar plexus, which maintain smooth muscle contraction. 
In response to afferent input from the glans penis and 
from higher centres, pelvic splanchnic parasympathetic 
nerves actively relax the cavernosal smooth muscle via 
neurotransmitters such as nitric oxide, acetylcholine, 
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and prosta­
cyclin, with consequent dilatation of the lacunar space. 
At the same time, draining venules are compressed, trap­
ping blood in the lacunar space with consequent eleva­
tion of pressure and erection (tumescence) of the penis.
INVESTIGATION OF RENAL AND 
URINARY TRACT DISEASE
Glomerular filtration rate
The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is the rate at which 
fluid passes into nephrons after filtration and is a 
measure of renal function. It is proportionate to body 
of erythropoietin, which in turn is required for produc­
tion of red blood cells. Erythropoietin synthesis is 
regulated by oxygen tension; anaemia and hypoxia 
increase production, whereas polycythaemia and hyper­
oxia inhibit it. Failure of erythropoietin production 
plays an important role in the pathogenesis of anaemia 
in CKD.
Ureters and bladder
The ureters drain urine from the renal pelvis (Fig. 17.1A) 
and deliver it to the bladder, a muscular organ that lies 
anteriorly in the lower part of the pelvis, just behind the 
pubic bone. The function of the bladder is to store and 
then release urine during micturition. The bladder is 
richly innervated. Sympathetic nerves arising from T10–
L2 relay in the pelvic ganglia to cause relaxation of the 
detrusor muscle and contraction of the bladder neck 
(both via α-adrenoceptors), thereby preventing release 
of urine from the bladder. The distal sphincter mecha­
nism is innervated by somatic motor fibres from sacral 
segments S2–4, which reach the sphincter either by the 
pelvic plexus or via the pudendal nerves. Afferent 
sensory impulses pass to the cerebral cortex, from where 
reflex-increased sphincter tone and suppression of 
detrusor contraction inhibit micturition until it is appro­
priate. Conversely, parasympathetic nerves arising 
from S2–4 stimulate detrusor contraction, promoting 
micturition.
The micturition cycle has a storage (filling) phase and 
a voiding (micturition) phase. During the filling phase, 
the high compliance of the detrusor muscle allows the 
bladder to fill steadily without a rise in intravesical pres­
sure. As bladder volume increases, stretch receptors in 
its wall cause reflex bladder relaxation and increased 
sphincter tone. At approximately 75% bladder capacity, 
there is a desire to void. Voluntary control is now exerted 
over the desire to void, which disappears temporarily. 
Compliance of the detrusor allows further increase in 
capacity until the next desire to void. Just how often this 
desire needs to be inhibited depends on many factors, 
not the least of which is finding a suitable place in which 
to void.
The act of micturition is initiated first by voluntary 
and then by reflex relaxation of the pelvic floor and 
distal sphincter mechanism, followed by reflex detrusor 
contraction. These actions are coordinated by the pontine 
micturition centre. Intravesical pressure remains greater 
than urethral pressure until the bladder is empty.
The prostate gland
The prostate gland is situated at the base of the bladder, 
surrounding the proximal urethra. Exocrine glands 
within the prostate produce fluid, which comprises 
about 20% of the volume of ejaculated seminal fluid and 
is rich in zinc and proteolytic enzymes. The remainder 
of the ejaculate is formed in the seminal vesicles and 
bulbo-urethral glands, with spermatozoa arising from 
the testes.
Smooth muscle fibres within the prostate, which are 
under sympathetic control, play a role in controlling 
urine flow through the bulbar urethra, and also contract 
at orgasm to move seminal fluid through ejaculatory 
ducts into the bulbar urethra (emission). Contraction of 
the bulbocavernosus muscle (via a spinal muscle reflex) 
then ejaculates the semen out of the urethra.
Measuring GFR
• Direct measurement using labelled EDTA or inulin
• Creatinine clearance (CrCl)
Minor tubular secretion of creatinine causes CrCl to 
exaggerate GFR when renal function is poor, and can be 
affected by drugs (e.g. trimethoprim, cimetidine)
Needs 24-hr urine collection (inconvenient and often 
unreliable)
CrCl mL/min
urine creatinine concentration
mol / L
volu
(
)
(
)
=
×
µ
me mL
plasma creatinine concentration
mol/L
time
(
)
(
)
(min)
µ
×
Estimating GFR with equations
• Cockcroft and Gault equation
Reasonably accurate at normal to moderately impaired 
renal function
Estimates CrCl, not GFR
Requires patient weight
CrCl
age in yrs
lean body weight kg
males or
=
−
×
×
(
)
(
)
( .
.
140
1 22
1 04 females
serum creatinine
mol/L
)
(
)
µ
• The Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) study 
equation (see www.renal.org/eGFR)
Performs better than Cockcroft and Gault at low GFR
Requires knowledge of age and sex only
Can be reported automatically by laboratories
For limitations, see Box 17.2
eGFR
*
creatinine in mol/L/
age in yrs
=
×
×
−
−
186
88 4
1 154
0
(
. )
(
)
.
µ
.
( .
)
( .
)
203
0 742
1 21
×
×
if female
if black
• No equations perform well in unusual circumstances, such as 
extremes of body (and muscle) mass or in acutely unwell 
patients (see Box 17.2)
17.1  How to estimate glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR)
*A correction factor, either a value recommended by the laboratory/assay 
manufacturer or a default value of 186; see www.renal.org/ckd. To convert 
creatinine in mg/dL to µmol/L, multiply by 88.4.
Investigation of renal and urinary tract disease
17
467
Fig. 17.2  Serum creatinine and the glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR). The inverse reciprocal relationship between GFR and serum 
creatinine is shown for a group of patients with renal disease. The red 
band indicates the range of values obtained. Note that some individuals 
have a GFR as low as 30–40 mL/min without serum creatinine rising out 
of the reference range. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160
GFR (mL/min/1.73 m2)
Serum creatinine
(µmol/L)
• It is only an estimate, least reliable at extremes of body 
composition (malnourished, amputees) and in hospital 
inpatients (as it was derived from outpatients)
• Confidence intervals are wide (90% of patients will have 
eGFR within 30% of their measured GFR, and 98%  
within 50%)
• Values are consistent in individuals, so changes mean more 
than absolute values
• Creatinine level must be stable over days; eGFR is not valid 
in assessing acute kidney injury
• It tends to underestimate normal or near-normal function, so 
slightly low values should not be over-interpreted. Many 
laboratories report only up to > 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 for this 
reason
• In the elderly, who constitute the majority of those with low 
eGFR, there is controversy about categorising people as 
having chronic kidney disease (CKD; Box 17.3) on the basis 
of eGFR alone, particularly at stage 3A, since there is little 
evidence of adverse outcomes when eGFR is > 50 unless 
there is also proteinuria
• eGFR is not valid in under-18s or during pregnancy
• The equation was originally validated in US patients and 
eGFR for any given creatinine was 21% higher in blacks. 
Performance in other racial groups is under investigation
17.2  Limitations of eGFR
size and the reference range is usually expressed after 
correction for body surface area as 120 ± 25 mL/
min/1.73 m2. The GFR may be measured directly by 
injecting and measuring the clearance of compounds 
such as inulin or radiolabelled ethylenediamine-
tetracetic acid, which are completely filtered at the 
glomerulus and are not secreted or reabsorbed by the 
renal tubules (Box 17.1). However, this is not performed 
routinely and is usually reserved for special circum­
stances, such as the assessment of renal function in 
potential live kidney donors. Instead, GFR is usually 
indirectly assessed in clinical practice by measuring 
serum levels of endogenously produced compounds 
Stage1
Definition2
Description
Prevalence3
Clinical presentation4
1
Kidney damage with normal or 
high GFR (> 90)
Mild CKD
6.5%
Asymptomatic
2
Kidney damage and GFR 60–89
Asymptomatic
3A5
GFR 45–59
Moderate CKD
4.5%
Usually asymptomatic
3B5
GFR 30–44
Anaemia in some patients at 3B
Most are non-progressive or progress very slowly
4
GFR 15–29
Severe CKD
0.4%
First symptoms often at GFR < 20
Electrolyte problems likely as GFR falls
5
GFR < 15 or on dialysis
Kidney failure
Significant symptoms and complications usually present
Dialysis initiation varies but usually at GFR < 10
1Stages of CKD 1–5 were originally defined by the US National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Quality Outcomes Initiative 2002.
2Kidney damage means pathological abnormalities or markers of damage, including abnormalities in urine tests or imaging studies. Two GFR values 3 mths apart 
are required to assign a stage. All GFR values are mL/min/1.73 m2.
3From the NHANES III study of > 15 000 US adults (Am J Kid Dis 2003; 41:1–12).
4For further information, see page 483.
53A/3B split recommended for UK in 2007/8, plus a suffix P, indicating presence of proteinuria (albumin:creatinine ratio (ACR) > 30 or protein:creatinine ratio 
(PCR) > 50 mg/mmol), e.g. 3 Ap, in view of the prognostic importance of proteinuria.
17.3  Stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD)
that are excreted by the kidney. The most widely used 
is serum creatinine, which is produced by muscle at a 
constant rate, is almost completely filtered at the glomer­
ulus, and is not reabsorbed. Although creatinine is 
secreted to a small degree by the proximal tubule, this 
is only usually significant in terms of GFR estimation in 
severe renal impairment, where it accounts for a larger 
proportion of the creatinine excreted. Accordingly, pro­
vided muscle mass remains constant, changes in serum 
creatinine concentrations closely reflect changes in GFR, 
although the reference range for creatinine is wide due 
to the fact that muscle mass varies widely between dif­
ferent individuals (Fig. 17.2). Several methods have been 
developed with which to estimate GFR from serum 
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
468
deficiency from urinary tract bleeding, and haemolytic 
anaemia secondary to disorders such as haemolytic 
uraemic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic thrombocyto­
penic purpura (TTP). Other abnormalities may be 
observed that reflect underlying disease processes, such 
as neutrophilia and raised erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR) in vasculitis or sepsis; lymphopenia and 
raised ESR in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE); and 
fragmented red cells in HUS and TTP.
Biochemistry
Abnormalities of routine biochemistry are common in 
renal disease. Serum levels of creatinine may be raised, 
reflecting reduced GFR (see above), although serum cre­
atinine values can remain within the reference range in 
patients with reduced muscle mass, even when the GFR 
has fallen by more than 50%. Serum levels of urea are 
often increased in kidney disease but this analyte has 
limited value as a measure of GFR since levels increase 
with protein intake, following gastrointestinal haemor­
rhage and in catabolic states. Conversely, urea levels 
may be reduced in patients with liver failure or anorexia 
and in malnourished patients, independently of changes 
in renal function. Serum calcium tends to be reduced 
and phosphate increased in CKD, in association with 
high parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels caused by 
reduced production of 1,25(OH)2D by the kidney (sec­
ondary hyperparathyroidism). In some patients, this 
may be accompanied by raised serum alkaline phos­
phatase levels, which are indicative of renal osteodystro­
phy. Other biochemical abnormalities may be observed 
that reflect underlying disease processes, such as raised 
glucose and HbA1c levels in diabetes mellitus (p. 807) 
and raised levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) in sepsis 
and vasculitis.
Immunology
Antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to extractable nuclear 
antigens and anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies may 
be detected in patients with renal disease secondary to 
SLE (p. 1109). Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies 
(ANCA) may be detected in patients with glomerulo­
nephritis secondary to systemic vasculitis (p. 1115), as 
may antibodies to GBM in patients with Goodpasture’s 
syndrome (p. 497) and low levels of complement in SLE, 
systemic vasculitis and HUS.
Imaging
Ultrasound
Renal ultrasound is a valuable non-invasive technique 
that is indicated to assess renal size and to investigate 
patients who are suspected of having obstruction of the 
urinary tract (Fig. 17.3) or renal tumours, cysts or stones. 
It is often the only method required for renal imaging 
and has the advantage of showing other abdominal, 
pelvic and retroperitoneal pathology. Ultrasound can 
also be used to provide images of the prostate gland and 
bladder, and to estimate the completeness of emptying 
in patients with suspected bladder outflow obstruction. 
Ultrasonography may show increased density of the 
renal cortex with loss of distinction between cortex 
and medulla, which is characteristic of CKD. Doppler 
creatinine measurements (see Box. 17.1) but the most 
widely used is the MDRD equation, which is now the 
accepted standard for assessing estimated GFR (eGFR). 
Although the eGFR has several limitations (Box 17.2), its 
routine reporting by laboratories has increased recogni­
tion of moderate kidney damage and encouraged early 
deployment of protective therapies (Box 17.3).
A potentially more accurate assessment of GFR can 
be obtained by collection of a 24-hour urine sample and 
relating serum creatinine levels to urinary creatinine 
excretion (see Box 17.1).
Urinalysis
Screening for the presence of blood, protein, glucose, 
ketones, nitrates and leucocytes and to assess pH and 
osmolality of urine can be achieved by dipstick testing 
(p. 474). Urine microscopy (p. 463) or flow cytometry can 
detect erythrocytes, which are indicative of bleeding 
from the urogenital tract (anywhere from kidney to tip 
of penis); dysmorphic erythrocytes, which suggest the 
presence of nephritis; red cell casts, indicative of glomer­
ular disease; and crystals, which may be observed in 
patients with renal stone disease. It should be noted that 
calcium oxalate and urate crystals can sometimes be 
found in normal urine that has been left to stand, due to 
crystal formation ex vivo. The presence of leucocytes 
and bacteria in urine is indicative of renal tract infection. 
White cell casts are strongly suggestive of pyelonephri­
tis. Urine pH can provide diagnostic information in the 
assessment of renal tubular acidosis (p. 446). Urine col­
lection over a 24-hour period can be performed to 
measure excretion of solutes, such as calcium, oxalate 
and urate, in patients with recurrent renal stone disease 
(p. 507). Proteinuria can also be measured on 24-hour 
collections but is usually now quantified by protein/
creatinine ratio on spot urine samples.
Other dynamic tests of tubular function, including 
concentrating ability (p. 794), ability to excrete a water 
load (p. 438) and ability to excrete acid (p. 426), and 
calculation of fractional calcium, phosphate or sodium 
excretion, are valuable in some circumstances. The frac­
tional excretion of these ions can be calculated by the 
general formula: (urine concentration of analyte × serum 
creatinine) / (serum concentration of analyte × urinary 
creatinine). For example, familial benign hypercalcae­
mia is characterised by a very low fractional excretion 
of calcium (p. 770), and hypophosphataemic rickets 
(p. 1128) by an increased fractional excretion of phos­
phate. Calculation of fractional excretion of sodium 
(FENa) can help differentiate volume depletion, when 
the tubules are avidly conserving sodium (FENa typi­
cally < 1.0), from acute tubular necrosis, when the 
tubules are damaged and are less able to conserve 
sodium (FENa typically > 1.0).
Blood tests
Haematology
A normochromic normocytic anaemia is common in 
CKD and is due in part to deficiency of erythropoietin 
and bone marrow suppression secondary to toxins 
retained in CKD. Other causes of anaemia include iron 
Investigation of renal and urinary tract disease
17
469
medium are required, which can cause renal dysfunc­
tion, and that the radiation dose is significant (Box 17.4).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offers excellent reso­
lution and gives good distinction between different 
tissue types (see Fig. 17.26, p. 506). It is very useful for 
local staging of prostate, bladder and penile cancers. 
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) provides an 
alternative to CT-angiography for imaging renal vessels 
imaging can be used to study blood flow in extrarenal 
and larger intrarenal vessels and can assess the resistiv­
ity index, which is the ratio of peak systolic and diastolic 
velocity. This is influenced by the resistance to flow 
through small intrarenal arteries and may be elevated in 
various diseases, including acute glomerulonephritis 
and rejection of a renal transplant. High peak velocities 
can also occur in severe renal artery stenosis. However, 
renal ultrasound is operator-dependent, the stored 
images convey only a fraction of the dynamic informa­
tion gained during the investigation, and the results are 
often less clear in obese patients.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography urography (CTU) is used to 
evaluate cysts and mass lesions in the kidney or filling 
defects within the collecting systems. It usually entails 
an initial scan without contrast medium, and subsequent 
scans following injection of contrast to obtain a nephro­
gram image and images during the excretory phases. 
This technique gives more information than intravenous 
urography (IVU) but entails a substantially larger radia­
tion dose. Contrast enhancement is particularly useful 
for characterising mass lesions within the kidney and 
differentiating benign from malignant lesions (see Fig. 
17.32A, p. 516). Computed tomography without contrast 
(CT) gives clear definition of retroperitoneal anatomy 
regardless of obesity and is superior to ultrasound in 
this respect. Non-contrast CT of kidneys, ureters and 
bladder (CTKUB) is the method of choice for demon­
strating stones within the kidney or ureter.
Computed tomography  
and angiography
This technique (CT-angiography) involves performing 
computed tomography, following an intravenous injec­
tion of contrast medium, to obtain images of the renal 
vasculature. It produces high-quality images of the main 
renal vessels and is of value in patients who have suf­
fered renal trauma and those with haemorrhage from 
the renal tract, and in the investigation of renal artery 
stenosis. Other vascular structures, such as angiomyo­
lipomas and aneurysms, can also be detected. Drawbacks 
include the fact that relatively large doses of contrast 
Fig. 17.3  Renal ultrasound.  A Normal kidney. The normal cortex is less echo-dense (blacker) than the adjacent liver.  B A simple cyst occupies the 
upper pole of an otherwise normal kidney.  C The renal pelvis and calyces are dilated by a chronic obstruction to urinary outflow. The thinness and 
increased density of the remaining renal cortex indicate chronic changes. 
A
B
C
Dilated
calyces
Hilum: calyces and
collecting system,
fat, blood vessels
Hilum
Renal
cortex
Fluid-filled
cyst
Normal renal
cortex
Thinned
cortex
Contrast nephrotoxicity
• Acute deterioration in renal function, sometimes life-
threatening, commencing < 48 hrs after administration of IV 
radiographic contrast media
Risk factors
• Pre-existing renal impairment
• Use of high-osmolality, ionic contrast media and repetitive 
dosing in short time periods
• Diabetes mellitus
• Myeloma
Prevention
• Provide hydration with free oral fluids plus IV isotonic saline 
500 mL, then 250 mL/hr during procedure
• Avoid nephrotoxic drugs; withhold non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Omit metformin for 48 hrs after 
the procedure, in case renal impairment occurs
• N-acetylcysteine may provide some protection but data are 
conflicting
• If the risks are high, consider alternative methods of imaging
Cholesterol atheroembolism
• Typically follows days to weeks after intra-arterial 
investigations or interventions (p. 496)
Nephrogenic sclerosing fibrosis after MRI contrast agents
• Chronic progressive sclerosis of skin, deeper tissues and 
other organs, associated with gadolinium-based contrast 
agents
• Only reported in patients with renal impairment, typically on 
dialysis or with GFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m2, but caution is 
advised in patients with GFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2
17.4  Renal complications of radiological 
investigations
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
470
Fig. 17.4  Intravenous urography (IVU).  A Normal nephrogram phase at 1 minute.  B Normal collecting system at 5 minutes.  C Bilateral reflux 
nephropathy (and chronic pyelonephritis), showing clubbing of the calyces that is particularly marked in the upper right pole. 
A
B
C
Fig. 17.5  Retrograde pyelography. The best views of the normal 
collecting system are shown by pyelography. A catheter has been passed 
into the left renal pelvis at cystoscopy. The anemone-like calyces are 
sharp-edged and normal. 
but involves administration of gadolinium-based con­
trast media, which may carry risks for patients with 
impaired renal function (see Box 17.4). Whilst MRA 
gives good images of the main renal vessels, stenosis of 
small branch arteries may be missed.
Renal arteriography
Renal arteriography involves taking X-rays following an 
injection of contrast medium directly into the renal 
artery. The main indication is to investigate renal artery 
stenosis (p. 494) or haemorrhage. Renal angiography can 
often be combined with therapeutic balloon dilatation or 
stenting of the renal artery and can be used to occlude 
bleeding vessels and arteriovenous fistulae by the inser­
tion of thin platinum wires (coils). These curl up within 
the vessel and promote thrombosis, thereby securing 
haemostasis.
Intravenous urography
Intravenous urography (IVU) involves taking serial 
plain X-rays immediately before and after an intra­
venous injection of contrast medium. It has largely been 
replaced by ultrasound, CTKUB and CTU for most renal 
imaging purposes but remains a useful method of 
viewing the renal papillae, stones and urothelial malig­
nancies (Fig. 17.4). The initial X-rays may show the renal 
outlines (if perinephric fat and bowel gas shadows 
allow), as well as radio-opaque calculi and calcification 
within the renal tract. Early films taken 1 minute after 
injection can be used to assess renal perfusion, whereas 
films at later time points provide images of the collecting 
system, ureters and bladder. The disadvantages of this 
technique are the need for an injection, dependence on 
adequate renal function, and exposure to irradiation and 
contrast medium (see Box 17.4).
Pyelography
Pyelography involves direct injection of contrast 
medium into the collecting system from above or below. 
It offers the best views of the collecting system and 
upper tract, and is sometimes used to identify the cause 
of urinary tract obstruction (p. 472). Antegrade pyelog­
raphy requires the insertion of a fine needle into the 
pelvicalyceal system under ultrasound or radiographic 
control. This approach is much more difficult and haz­
ardous in a non-obstructed kidney. In the presence of 
obstruction, percutaneous nephrostomy drainage can be 
established, and often stents can be passed through any 
obstruction. Retrograde pyelography can be performed 
by inserting catheters into the ureteric orifices at cystos­
copy (Fig. 17.5).
Radionuclide studies
These are functional studies requiring the injection of 
gamma ray-emitting radiopharmaceuticals that are 
taken up and excreted by the kidney, a process that can 
be monitored by an external gamma camera.
Dynamic radionucleotide studies are performed with 
mercaptoacetyltriglycine 
labelled 
with 
technetium 
(99mTc-MAG3), which is filtered by the glomerulus and 
excreted into the urine. Imaging following 99mTc-MAG3 
injection can provide valuable information about the 
perfusion of each kidney but is not a reliable method for 
identifying renal artery stenosis. In patients with sig­
nificant obstruction of the outflow tract, 99mTc-MAG3 
Presenting problems in renal and urinary tract disease
17
471
frequency of micturition and a feeling of incomplete 
emptying of the bladder. By far the most common cause 
is urinary tract infection, as described on page 511. Other 
diagnoses that need to be considered in patients with 
dysuria include sexually transmitted infections (p. 411) 
and bladder stones (p. 507).
Loin pain
Loin pain is often caused by musculoskeletal disease but 
can be a manifestation of renal tract disease; in the latter 
case, it may arise from renal stones, ureteric stones, renal 
tumours, acute pyelonephritis and urinary tract obstruc­
tion. Acute loin pain radiating anteriorly and often to 
the groin is termed renal colic. When combined with 
haematuria, this is typical of ureteric obstruction due to 
calculi (p. 507). When loin pain is precipitated by a large 
fluid intake (Dietl’s crisis), upper urinary tract obstruc­
tion caused by a congenital abnormality of the pelvi-
ureteric junction (PUJ, p. 510) is often responsible.
Oliguria/anuria
Oliguria is defined as being present when less than 
300 mL urine is passed per day, whereas anuria is 
deemed to exist when less than 50 mL urine is passed 
per day.
The volume of urine produced represents a balance 
between the amount of fluid that is filtered at the 
glomerulus and that reabsorbed by the renal tubules. 
When GFR is low, urine volumes may still be normal if 
tubular reabsorption is also reduced; hence urine volume 
alone is a poor indicator of kidney disease. Oliguria and 
anuria may be caused by a reduction in urine produc­
tion, as in pre-renal acute kidney injury, when GFR is 
reduced but tubular homeostatic mechanisms increase 
persists in the renal pelvis and a loop diuretic fails to 
accelerate its disappearance. This can be useful in deter­
mining the functional significance of a ‘baggy’ or equiv­
ocally obstructed collecting system without undertaking 
pyelography.
Formal measurements of GFR can be made by radio­
nuclide studies following the injection of diethylene­
triamine pentacetic acid (99mTc-DPTA).
Static radionucleotide studies are performed with 
dimercaptosuccinic acid labelled with technetium (99mTc-
DMSA), which is taken up by proximal tubular cells. 
Following intravenous injection, images of the renal 
cortex are obtained that show the shape, size and rela­
tive function of each kidney (Fig. 17.6). This is a sensitive 
method for demonstrating cortical scarring in reflux 
nephropathy and a way of assessing the individual func­
tion of each kidney.
Radionuclide bone scanning following the injection 
of methylene diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP) is indicated to 
assess the presence and extent of bone metastases in men 
with advanced prostate cancer (p. 517).
Renal biopsy
Renal biopsy is used to establish the nature and extent 
of renal disease in order to judge the prognosis and need 
for treatment (Box 17.5). The procedure is performed 
transcutaneously with ultrasound or contrast radiogra­
phy guidance to ensure accurate needle placement into 
a renal pole. Light microscopy, electron microscopy and 
immunohistological assessment of the specimen may all 
be required.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN RENAL 
AND URINARY TRACT DISEASE
Dysuria
Dysuria refers to painful urination, often described as 
burning, scalding or stinging, and commonly accompa­
nied by suprapubic pain. It is often associated with 
Fig. 17.6  DMSA isotope renogram. A posterior view is shown of a 
normal left kidney and a small right kidney (with evidence of cortical 
scarring at upper and lower poles) that contributes only 39% of total renal 
function. 
L
LEFT  =    61%   RIGHT =    39%
POSTERIOR
R
Indications
• Acute kidney injury that is not adequately explained
• CKD with normal-sized kidneys
• Nephrotic syndrome or glomerular proteinuria in adults
• Nephrotic syndrome in children that has atypical features or 
is not responding to treatment
• Isolated haematuria or proteinuria with renal characteristics 
or associated abnormalities
Contraindications
• Disordered coagulation or thrombocytopenia. Aspirin and 
other antiplatelet agents increase bleeding risk
• Uncontrolled hypertension
• Kidneys < 60% predicted size
• Solitary kidney* (except transplants)
Complications
• Pain, usually mild
• Bleeding into urine, usually minor but may produce clot colic 
and obstruction
• Bleeding around the kidney, occasionally massive and 
requiring angiography with intervention, or surgery
• Arteriovenous fistula, rarely significant clinically
17.5  Renal biopsy
*Relative contraindication.
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
472
Nocturia
Nocturia is defined as waking up at night to void urine. 
It may be a consequence of polyuria but may also result 
from increased fluid intake or diuretic use in the late 
evening. Nocturia also occurs in CKD, and in prostatic 
enlargement when it is associated with poor stream, 
hesitancy, incomplete bladder emptying, terminal drib­
bling and urinary frequency due to partial urethral 
obstruction (p. 515). Nocturia may also occur in sleep 
disturbance without functional abnormalities of the 
urinary tract.
Frequency
Frequency describes micturition more often than a 
patient’s expectations. It may be a consequence of poly­
uria, when urine volume is normal or high, but is also 
found in patients with dysuria and prostatic diseases, 
when the urine volume is low.
Urinary incontinence
Urinary incontinence is defined as any involuntary 
leakage of urine. It may occur in patients with a normal 
urinary tract, as the result of dementia or poor mobility, 
or transiently during an acute illness or hospitalisation, 
reabsorption to conserve salt and water. A high solute 
load or associated tubular dysfunction may, however, 
produce normal or high urine volumes in such cases 
until the pre-renal insult becomes severe and GFR is 
markedly reduced, such as occurs in diabetic ketoacido­
sis with marked glycosuria. Urine volumes are variable 
in acute kidney injury due to intrinsic renal disease, but 
a rapid decline in urine volume may be observed in 
patients with bilateral renal infarction, in those with a 
single functioning kidney, and in those with rapidly 
progressive glomerulonephritis.
Obstruction of the renal tract can also produce olig­
uria and anuria, but to do so, obstruction must be com­
plete and occur distal to the bladder neck, be bilateral, 
or be unilateral on the side of a single functioning 
kidney. If an obstruction is not relieved, the pressure 
will be transmitted back to the nephrons, causing GFR 
to fall.
Patients with oliguria and anuria should be assessed 
clinically to look for evidence of hypotension or volume 
depletion; of bladder enlargement; and of phimosis or 
meatal stenosis.
The presence of pain that is exacerbated by a fluid 
load suggests an acute obstruction of the renal tract, 
and its characteristics may be of value in reaching 
a diagnosis. Obstruction at the bladder neck is associ­
ated with lower midline abdominal discomfort due to 
bladder dilatation, whereas ureteric obstruction typi­
cally presents as loin pain radiating to the groin. Obstruc­
tions at the level of the renal pelvis may present as flank 
pain. Chronic obstruction rarely produces pain but may 
give rise to a dull ache. Unilateral ureteric obstruction 
may not lead to any noticeable reduction in urine output, 
whereas bilateral ureteric obstruction will result in olig­
uria or anuria. Urethral strictures should be considered 
as a possible cause, especially in patients with a history 
of instrumentation of the renal tract. Urethral valves 
should also be considered, especially in the paediatric 
population.
The presence of bladder enlargement in a middle-
aged or elderly man suggests benign or malignant 
enlargement of the prostate gland as a potential cause of 
oliguria or anuria (pp. 515 and 517). It is important to 
note that about 50% of cases of acute urinary retention 
are seen after general anaesthesia, particularly in patients 
with pre-existing prostatic enlargement. Partial obstruc­
tion can be associated with a normal or even high urine 
volume due to chronic tubular injury, which causes loss 
of tubular concentrating ability. This chronic tubular 
injury can also produce a type 1 renal tubular acidosis 
(p. 446). Over time, even partial obstruction can cause 
tubular atrophy and irreversible renal failure.
All patients with oliguria or anuria should have 
routine biochemistry and haematology checked. Cathe­
terisation should be performed so that urine volumes 
can be accurately monitored and the urine analysed for 
evidence of proteinuria and red cell casts, which may be 
found in patients with glomerulonephritis and systemic 
diseases such as vasculitis or SLE. Isolated haematuria 
may be indicative of an obstructive uropathy secondary 
to urinary calculi (p. 507) or tumours affecting the renal 
tract. If oliguria persists without any other clear explana­
tion, ultrasound examination should be undertaken 
promptly to look for evidence of obstruction. Rarely, 
however, the urinary tract may not be particularly 
• Excess fluid intake
• Hyperglycaemia
• Cranial diabetes insipidus
• Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Lithium
Diuretics
Interstitial nephritis
Hypokalaemia
Hypercalcaemia
17.6  Causes of polyuria
dilated in patients with acute kidney injury due to 
obstruction because of lack of urine production.
Management of oliguria and anuria should be 
directed at the underlying cause. While relief of obstruc­
tion is usually accompanied by a rapid return of renal 
function, tubular function may be impaired, resulting in 
polyuria and failure to conserve electrolytes.
Polyuria
Polyuria is defined as a urine volume in excess of 3 L/
day. Various underlying conditions, both renal and 
extrarenal, may be responsible, as outlined in Box 17.6.
Investigation of polyuria includes measurement of 
urea, creatinine and electrolytes, glucose, calcium and 
albumin. A 24-hour urine collection may be helpful to 
confirm the severity of polyuria and the presence of 
nocturnal polyuria. Investigation and management of 
suspected diabetes insipidus are described on page 794.
Presenting problems in renal and urinary tract disease
17
473
especially in older people (Box 17.7). Diuretics, alcohol 
and caffeine may worsen incontinence.
Pathophysiology
As urine accumulates in the bladder during the storage 
phase, the sphincter tone gradually increases, but there 
are no significant changes in vesical pressure, detrusor 
pressure or intra-abdominal pressure. During voiding, 
intravesical pressure increases, due to detrusor contrac­
tion, and the sphincter relaxes, allowing urine to flow 
from the bladder until it is empty. Clinical disorders 
associated with incontinence are connected with various 
abnormalities in this cycle and these are discussed in 
more detail below.
Stress incontinence
This occurs because passive bladder pressure exceeds 
the urethral pressure, due to either poor pelvic floor 
support or a weak urethral sphincter. Most often, there 
is an element of both. Stress incontinence is very common 
in women and seen most frequently following child­
birth. It is rare in men and usually follows surgery to the 
prostate. The presentation is with incontinence during 
coughing, sneezing or exertion. In women, perineal 
inspection may reveal leakage of urine when the patient 
coughs.
Urge incontinence
This usually occurs because of detrusor overactivity, 
which produces an increased bladder pressure that 
overcomes the urethral sphincter. Urgency with or 
without incontinence may also be driven by a hypersen­
sitive bladder resulting from urinary tract infection or a 
bladder stone. Detrusor overactivity is usually idio­
pathic, other than in patients with neurological condi­
tions such as spina bifida or multiple sclerosis, in which 
case it is neurogenic (p. 1174). The incidence of urge 
incontinence increases with age, occurring in 10-15% of 
the population aged over 65 years and around 50% of 
patients requiring nursing home care. It is also seen in 
men with lower urinary tract obstruction and most often 
remits after the obstruction is relieved.
Continual incontinence
This is suggestive of a fistula, usually between the 
bladder and vagina (vesicovaginal), or the ureter and 
• Prevalence: urinary incontinence affects 15% of women and 
10% of men aged over 65 years.
• Cause: incontinence may be transient and due to an acute 
confusional state, urinary infection, medication (such as 
diuretics), faecal impaction or restricted mobility, and these 
should be treated before embarking on further specific 
investigation.
• Detrusor over-activity: established incontinence in old age 
is most commonly due to detrusor over-activity, which may 
be caused by damage to central inhibitory centres or local 
detrusor muscle abnormalities.
• Catheterisation: poor manual dexterity or cognitive 
impairment may necessitate the help of a carer to assist with 
intermittent catheterisation.
17.7  Incontinence in old age
vagina (ureterovaginal). It is most common following 
gynaecological surgery but is also seen in patients with 
gynaecological malignancy or post-radiotherapy. In 
parts of the world where obstetric services are scarce, 
prolonged obstructed labour can be a common cause of 
vesicovaginal fistulae. Continual incontinence may also 
be seen in infants with congenital ectopic ureters. Occa­
sionally, stress incontinence is so severe that the patient 
leaks continuously.
Overflow incontinence
This occurs when the bladder becomes chronically over-
distended and may be associated with acute kidney 
injury (high-pressure chronic urinary retention). It is 
most commonly seen in men with benign prostatic 
enlargement or bladder neck obstruction (p. 514), but 
may arise in either sex as a result of failure of the detru­
sor muscle (atonic bladder). The latter may be idiopathic 
but more commonly is the result of damage to the pelvic 
nerves, either from surgery (commonly, hysterectomy or 
rectal excision), trauma or infection, or from compres­
sion of the cauda equina by disc prolapse, trauma or 
tumour. Incontinence due to prostatic enlargement can 
be regarded as a type of overflow incontinence.
Post-micturition dribble
This is very common in men, even in the relatively 
young. It is due to a small amount of urine becoming 
trapped in the U-bend of the bulbar urethra, which leaks 
out when the patient moves. It is more pronounced if 
associated with a urethral diverticulum or urethral stric­
ture. It may occur in females with a urethral diverticu­
lum and may mimic stress incontinence.
Clinical assessment
Patients should be encouraged to keep a voiding diary, 
including the measured volume voided, frequency of 
voiding, precipitating factors and associated features, 
such as urgency, since this can be of diagnostic value. 
The patient should be assessed for evidence of cognitive 
impairment and mobility. A neurological assessment 
should be performed to detect disorders such as multi­
ple sclerosis that may affect the nervous supply of the 
bladder, and the lumbar spine should be inspected for 
features of spina bifida occulta. Perineal sensation and 
anal sphincter tone should be assessed. Rectal examina­
tion is needed to assess the prostate in men and to 
exclude faecal impaction as a cause of incontinence. 
Genital examination should be done to identify phimo­
sis and paraphimosis in men, and vaginal mucosal 
atrophy, cystoceles or rectoceles in women.
Investigations
Urinalysis and culture should be performed in all 
patients. Ultrasound examination can be helpful in 
identifying patients with overflow incontinence who 
have incomplete bladder emptying, as they may reveal 
a significant amount of fluid in the bladder (> 100 mL) 
post-micturition. Urine flow rates and full urodynamic 
assessment by cystometrography may be required to 
diagnose the type of incontinence and are indicated in 
selected cases when the diagnosis is unclear on clinical 
grounds. An IVU should be performed in patients with 
continual incontinence who are suspected of having a 
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
474
Management
First-line therapy is usually with oral phosphodiesterase 
type 5 inhibitors, such as sildenafil, which elevate cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) levels in vascular 
smooth muscle cells of the corpus cavernosum, causing 
vasodilatation and penile erection. Co-administration of 
these drugs with nitric oxide donors, such as glycerol 
trinitrate, is contraindicated because of the risk of severe 
hypotension. Other treatments for impotence include 
self-administered intracavernosal injection or urethral 
administration of prostaglandin E1; vacuum devices 
which achieve an erection that is maintained by a tour­
niquet around the base of the penis; and prosthetic 
implants, either of a fixed rod or an inflatable reservoir. 
Psychotherapy involving the patient and sexual partner 
may be helpful for psychological problems. Erectile 
dysfunction associated with peripheral neuropathy 
and vascular disease is difficult to treat. If hypogonad­
ism is detected, it should be managed as described on 
page 760.
Haematuria
Healthy individuals may have occasional red blood 
cells in the urine (up to 12 500 cells/mL), but the pres­
ence of macroscopic haematuria (visible to the naked 
eye) or non-visible haematuria on dipstick testing 
(15 000–20 000 cells/mL or more) is indicative of sig­
nificant bleeding from somewhere in the urinary tract 
(Fig. 17.7) and demands further assessment. First, it is 
important to confirm the presence of blood cells in the 
urine by microscopy (p. 463), since dipstick tests can also 
be positive in the presence of free haemoglobin or 
myoglobin. Microscopy not only confirms the diagnosis 
but may also be helpful in establishing the cause 
of bleeding (Box 17.9). Other causes of red or dark 
urine may sometimes be confused with haematuria 
but produce negative dipstick tests and microscopy 
(Box 17.10). Positive tests may also occur during men­
struation, infection or strenuous exercise. Investigation 
fistula. Imaging with MRI is indicated when a urethral 
diverticulum is suspected.
Management
Females with stress incontinence respond well to 
physio­therapy. The mainstay of treatment for urge 
incontinence is bladder retraining, which involves 
teaching patients to hold more urine voluntarily in 
their bladder, assisted by anticholinergic medication. 
Surgery may be required in patients who have severe 
daytime incontinence despite conservative treatment. 
The treatment of incontinence secondary to fistula for­
mation is surgical. Patients with overflow incontinence 
due to bladder obstruction should be treated surgically 
or with long-term catheterisation (intermittent or con­
tinuous). Incontinence secondary to neurological dis­
eases can be treated by intermittent self-catheterisation.
Erectile dysfunction
Causes of erectile failure are shown in Box 17.8. Vascu­
lar, neuropathic and psychological causes are most 
common. With the exception of diabetes mellitus, endo­
crine causes are relatively uncommon and are character­
ised by loss of libido, as well as erectile dysfunction. 
Erectile dysfunction and reduced libido occur in over 
50% of men with advanced CKD or on dialysis. Erectile 
dysfunction is a markedly under-diagnosed problem. It 
is important to discuss matters frankly with the patient, 
and to establish whether there are associated features of 
hypogonadism (p. 760) and if erections occur at any 
other time. If the patient has erections on wakening, 
vascular and neuropathic causes are much less likely 
and a psychological cause should be suspected.
Investigations
Blood should be taken for glucose, prolactin, testoster­
one, luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH). A number of further tests are avail­
able but are rarely employed because they do not 
usually influence management. These include nocturnal 
tumescence monitoring (using a plethysmograph placed 
around the shaft of the penis overnight) to establish 
whether blood supply and nerve function are sufficient 
to allow erections to occur during sleep; intracavernosal 
injection of prostaglandin E1 to test the adequacy of 
blood supply; internal pudendal artery angiography; 
and tests of autonomic and peripheral sensory nerve 
conduction.
With reduced libido
• Hypogonadism
• Depression
With intact libido
• Psychological problems, including anxiety
• Vascular insufficiency (atheroma)
• Neuropathic causes (diabetes mellitus, alcohol excess, 
multiple sclerosis)
• Drugs (β-blockers, thiazide diuretics)
17.8  Causes of erectile dysfunction
17.9  Interpretation of dipstick-positive 
haematuria
Presenting problems in renal and urinary tract disease
17
475
should be directed first at the exclusion of an anatomical 
bleeding lesion, such as malignancy (see Box 17.12). If 
haematuria occurs with proteinuria and other clinical 
features of kidney disease (see Box 17.11), inflammatory 
of haematuria is always required, as even non-visible 
haematuria can be caused by malignancy.
Glomerular bleeding is characteristic of inflamma­
tory, destructive or degenerative processes that disrupt 
the GBM and may cause microscopic or macroscopic 
haematuria. In glomerulonephritis, one or more other 
features of the ‘nephritic syndrome’ (Box 17.11) may be 
present but the full syndrome is rare (p. 497). Other 
benign causes include thin basement membrane disease 
(p. 502) and vascular malformations.
Visible haematuria is most likely to be caused by 
tumour, which can affect any part of the urogenital tract 
(p. 515 and Box 17.12). Other common causes of visible 
haematuria are urine infection and stones. Investigation 
of haematuria (Fig. 17.8), whether non-visible or visible, 
Fig. 17.7  Causes of haematuria. 
Polyarteritis
nodosa
Vascular
malformation
Renal infarction
Coagulation
disorders
Cysts
Renal tumour
Glomerulonephritis
Small-vessel
vasculitis
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
Other glomerular
diseases
Interstitial nephritis
Pyelonephritis
Calculus
Cystitis
Bladder tumour
Benign prostatic
enlargement
Prostate cancer
Urethritis
Trauma
Ureteric tumour 
Cause
Urine colour
Food dyes
Acanthocyanins
Red
Drugs
Phenolphthalein
Pink when alkaline
Senna/other anthaquinones
Orange
Rifampicin
Orange
Levodopa
Darkens on standing
Porphyria
Darkens on standing
Alkaptonuria
Darkens on standing
Bilirubinuria
Obstructive jaundice
Dark
Dipstick-positive for bilirubin, 
negative for haemoglobin
17.10  Dipstick-negative dark urine
Nephritic syndrome1
• Haematuria (red or brown urine)
• Oedema and generalised fluid retention
• Hypertension
• Oliguria
Nephrotic syndrome2
• Overt proteinuria: usually > 3.5 g/24 hrs (urine may be 
frothy)
• Hypoalbuminaemia (< 30 g/L)
• Oedema and generalised fluid retention
• Intravascular volume depletion with hypotension, or 
intravascular expansion with hypertension, may occur
17.11  Nephritic and nephrotic syndromes
2Classically seen in non-inflammatory and subacute inflammatory/
proliferative glomerular disorders (see Fig. 17.21, p. 497).
1The complete form is classically seen in post-infectious glomerulonephritis, 
may occur in acute IgA nephropathy, and occasionally occurs in other types 
of glomerulonephritis. The presence of one or more features is common to 
many types of glomerular disease.
‘Macroscopic haematuria has a positive predictive value of 83% 
for bladder cancer and 22% for all urothelial tumours, rising to 
41% in patients over the age of 40.’
• Buntinx F, et al. Fam Pract 1997; 14(1):63–68.
17.12  Haematuria and urothelial malignancy
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
476
renal disease (p. 497) should be considered and a renal 
biopsy may be indicated. Where there are no features of 
significant kidney disease, and malignancy and renal 
stones have been excluded, it may be appropriate to 
manage the patient by observation with periodic review, 
although occasionally these individuals develop signifi­
cant overt renal disease during follow-up. Management 
of haematuria should be directed at the underlying 
cause.
Proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome
Whilst moderate amounts of low-molecular-weight 
protein pass through the healthy GBM, these proteins 
are normally reabsorbed by receptors on tubular cells. 
In healthy individuals, less than 150 mg of protein is 
excreted in the urine each day. A proportion of this is 
Tamm–Horsfall protein, secreted by the renal tubules. 
The presence of larger amounts of protein is usually 
indicative of significant renal disease (Box 17.13).
Clinical assessment
Proteinuria is usually asymptomatic and is often picked 
up by urinalysis. Transient proteinuria can occur after 
vigorous exercise, during fever, in heart failure and in 
patients with urinary tract infection. Patients should be 
assessed for the presence of these conditions and urine 
testing repeated once the potential trigger has been 
treated or resolved. So-called orthostatic proteinuria 
may arise in the absence of renal disease. This occurs 
only during the day, in association with an upright 
posture, and the first morning sample is negative. Typi­
cally, less than 1 g protein per day is excreted. Ortho­
static proteinuria is regarded as a benign disorder which 
does not require treatment. Large amounts of protein 
make urine froth easily and this may be noticed by the 
patient. Very large amounts can cause nephrotic syn­
drome, which presents with oedema (Boxes 17.11 and 
17.14). In adults, this predominantly affects the lower 
limbs but extends to the genitalia and lower abdomen 
as it becomes more severe. The upper limbs and face 
may be more affected on waking in the morning. In 
children, ascites occurs early and oedema is often seen 
only in the face. Blood volume may be normal, reduced 
or increased. Renal sodium retention is an early and 
universal feature; the mechanisms of this are shown in 
Figure 16.5 (p. 435).
Microalbuminuria refers to the urinary excretion 
of small amounts of albumin. The consistent presence 
of albumin in the urine is abnormal and is clinically 
important in identifying the very early stages of glomer­
ular disease, as occurs in conditions like diabetic neph­
ropathy (p. 830). Because significant renal damage 
has already taken place before standard dipstick tests 
become positive, patients with diabetes mellitus should 
be screened regularly for microalbuminuria. Persistent 
microalbuminuria has also been associated with an 
increased risk of atherosclerosis and cardio­vascular 
Fig. 17.8  Investigation of haematuria. 
Yes
Exclude menstruation,
infection, trauma
Repeated haematuria
on dipstick
Image renal tract
Cystoscopy then CT or
IVU and ultrasound
Features of significant renal
disease present?
Proteinuria
Hypertension
Abnormal renal function
Family history of renal disease
Signs of systemic disease
No
Consider
renal biopsy
Observation
Urinalysis, blood pressure,
creatinine every 6 – 12 mths
Re-assess if anything changes
Anatomical
lesion
present
Anatomical
lesion
absent
Full assessment
and management
(urology/oncology)
ACR1
PCR2
Typical 
dipstick 
results3
Significance
< 3.5 (female)
< 2.5 (male)
–
Normal
~3.5–15
–
Microalbuminuria
~15–50
~15–50
+ to ++
Dipsticks positive; 
equivalent to 24-hr 
protein excretion  
< 0.5 g
50–200
> 250
++ to +++
Glomerular disease 
more likely
> 200
> 300
+++ to ++++
Nephrotic range: 
always glomerular 
disease, equivalent 
to 24-hr protein 
excretion > 3 g
1Urinary albumin (mg/L)/urine creatinine (mmol/L). 2Urine protein (mg/L)/
urine creatinine (mmol/L). (If urine creatinine is measured in mg/dL, 
reference values for PCR and ACR can be derived by dividing by 11.31.) 
3Dipstick results are affected by urine concentration and are occasionally 
weakly positive on normal samples.
17.13  Quantifying proteinuria in random 
urine samples
Presenting problems in renal and urinary tract disease
17
477
mortality but neither the mechanism of proteinuria 
nor an explanation for this association has been 
established.
Investigations
All patients with persistent proteinuria should have the 
amount of protein quantified to guide further investiga­
tions (Fig. 17.9). Since quantification by 24-hour urine 
collection is often inaccurate, the protein : creatinine ratio 
(PCR) in a spot sample of urine is preferred. This makes 
an allowance for the variable degree of urinary dilution 
and can be used to extrapolate to 24-hour values (see 
Box 17.13). Changes in PCR also give valuable informa­
tion about the progression of renal disease in CKD. It is 
possible to measure 24-hour albumin excretion or 
albumin : creatinine ratio (ACR), but this requires a more 
expensive immunoassay and is usually reserved for 
detection of the early stages of diabetic nephropathy 
(p. 830). When assessing protein excretion by analysis of 
spot urine samples, greater consistency can be achieved 
by using first morning urine samples but this is not 
essential for routine clinical use.
It is sometimes helpful to identify the type of protein 
in the urine. Low-molecular-weight proteins may appear 
in the urine in quantities greater than 150 mg/day. This 
is usually assessed by measurement of specific low-
molecular-weight proteins, such as β2-microglobulin 
(molecular weight 12 kDa). Large amounts of small pro­
teins in the urine suggest renal tubular damage and are 
referred to as tubular proteinuria. This rarely exceeds 
1.5–2 g/24 hours (maximum PCR 150–200 mg/mmol). 
When more than 2 g protein per day is being excreted, 
glomerular disease is likely and this is an indication for 
renal biopsy. The diseases that cause nephrotic syn­
drome all affect the glomerulus (see Fig. 17.21, p. 497), 
either directly, by damaging podocytes, or indirectly, by 
causing scarring or by depositing exogenous material 
such as amyloid into the glomerulus. A notable excep­
tion is in children, when heavy proteinuria and neph­
rotic syndrome are most commonly caused by minimal 
change glomerulonephritis. In this case, renal biopsy is 
not usually required unless the patient fails to respond 
to high-dose corticosteroid therapy.
Free immunoglobulin light chains (molecular weight 
25 kDa) are filtered freely at the glomerulus and can be 
identified as ‘Bence Jones protein’ in fresh urine samples. 
Bence Jones protein is poorly identified by dipstick tests 
and so specific immunodetection methods are required. 
This may occur in AL amyloidosis (p. 86) and in B-cell 
Feature
Mechanism
Consequence
Management
Hypoalbuminaemia
Urinary protein losses exceed synthetic 
capacity of liver
Reduced oncotic pressure
Oedema
Treat underlying cause
Avid sodium retention
Secondary hyper-aldosteronism
Additional poorly characterised intrarenal 
mechanisms
Oedema
Diuretics and a low-sodium 
diet*
Hypercholesterolaemia
Non-specific increase in lipoprotein synthesis 
by liver in response to low oncotic pressure
High rate of atherosclerosis
Statins, ezetimibe
Hypercoagulability
Relative loss of inhibitors of coagulation 
(antithrombin III, protein C and S) and increase 
in liver synthesis of procoagulant factors
Venous thromboembolism
Consider prophylaxis in 
chronic or severe nephrotic 
syndrome
Infection
Hypogammaglobulinaemia due to urinary loss 
of immunoglobulins
Pneumococcal and 
meningococcal infection
Consider vaccination
*Severe nephrotic syndrome may need very large doses of combinations of diuretics acting on different parts of the nephron (e.g. loop diuretic plus thiazide plus 
amiloride). In occasional patients with hypovolaemia, intravenous salt-poor albumin infusions may help to establish a diuresis, although efficacy is controversial. 
Over-diuresis risks secondary impairment of renal function through hypovolaemia.
17.14  Consequences of the nephrotic syndrome and their management
Fig. 17.9  Investigation of proteinuria. (ACR = albumin : creatinine 
ratio; PCR = protein : creatinine ratio.) 
Substantial
Total 24-hr
protein > 1 g/day
PCR > 100 mg/mL
ACR > 70 mg/mL
Yes
Quantify
Repeated proteinuria
on dipstick
Features of significant renal
disease?
Proteinuria
Hypertension
Abnormal renal function
Family history of renal disease
Signs of systemic disease
No
Consider renal biopsy
Observation
Urinalysis, blood pressure,
creatinine every 6 – 12 mths
Re-assess if anything changes
Moderate or low-grade
Total 24-hr
protein < 1 g/day
PCR < 100 mg/mL
ACR < 70 mg/mL
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
478
disorders, but is particularly important as a marker for 
myeloma (p. 1046).
Management
Management of proteinuria should be directed at the 
underlying cause. This may involve immunosuppres­
sive therapy in glomerulonephritis and supportive man­
agement for nephrotic syndrome (Box 17.14).
Oedema
Oedema is caused by an excessive accumulation of 
fluid within the interstitial space. Clinically, this can be 
detected by persistence of an indentation in tissue fol­
lowing pressure on the affected area (pitting oedema). 
Non-pitting oedema is typical of lymphatic obstruction 
and may also occur as the result of excessive matrix 
deposition in tissues – for example, in hypothyroidism 
(p. 743) or scleroderma (p. 1112). There are various pos­
sible causes (Box 17.15). Pitting oedema tends to accu­
mulate in the ankles during the day and improves 
overnight as the interstitial fluid is reabsorbed. In devel­
oped countries, the most common causes of oedema are 
local venous problems and heart failure (p. 546), but it 
is important to identify other causes.
Clinical assessment
The ankles and lower parts of the leg are typically 
affected first but oedema can be restricted to the sacrum 
in bed-bound patients. With increasing severity, oedema 
spreads to affect the upper parts of the legs, the genitalia 
and abdomen. Ascites is common and often an earlier 
feature in children or young adults, and in liver disease. 
Pleural effusions are common and can be a feature of 
any cause of generalised oedema. Facial oedema on 
waking is common. Features of intravascular volume 
depletion (tachycardia, postural hypotension) may 
occur when oedema is due to decreased oncotic pressure 
or increased capillary permeability. If oedema is local­
ised – for example, to one ankle but not the other, then 
venous thrombosis, inflammation or lymphatic disease 
should be suspected.
Investigations
The cause of oedema is usually apparent from the 
history and examination of the cardiovascular system 
and abdomen. Blood should be taken for measurement 
of urea and electrolytes and serum albumin, and the 
urine tested for protein. Further imaging of the liver, 
heart or kidneys may be indicated, based on history and 
clinical examination. Where ascites or pleural effusions 
occur in isolation, aspiration of fluid with measurement 
of protein and glucose, and microscopy for cells, will 
usually help to clarify the diagnosis in differentiating a 
transudate (typical of oedema) from an exudate (more 
suggestive of local pathology, p. 662).
Management
Mild oedema usually responds to a thiazide or a low 
dose of a loop diuretic, such as furosemide or bumeta­
nide. In nephrotic syndrome, renal failure and severe 
cardiac failure, very large doses of diuretics, sometimes 
in combination, may be required to achieve a negative 
sodium and fluid balance. In resistant cases, restriction 
of sodium intake and fluid intake may be required. Diu­
retics are not helpful in the treatment of oedema caused 
by venous or lymphatic obstruction or by increased cap­
illary permeability. Specific causes of oedema, such as 
venous thrombosis, should be treated.
Hypertension
Hypertension is a very common feature of renal disease. 
Additionally, the presence of hypertension identifies a 
population at risk of developing CKD and current rec­
ommendations are that patients on anti­hypertensive 
medication should have renal function checked annu­
ally. Control of hypertension is very important in 
patients with renal impairment because of its close rela­
tionship with further decline of renal function (p. 486) 
and because of the exaggerated cardiovascular risk asso­
ciated with CKD. Pathophysiology and management are 
discussed on pages 606–613.
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
Acute kidney injury (AKI), also referred to as acute renal 
failure, describes the situation where there is a sudden 
and often reversible loss of renal function, which devel­
ops over days or weeks and is usually accompanied by 
a reduction in urine volume. Approximately 7% of all 
hospitalised patients and 20% of acutely ill patients 
develop signs of AKI. In uncomplicated AKI, such as 
that due to haemorrhage or drugs, mortality is low, even 
when renal replacement therapy is required. In AKI 
associated with serious infection and multiple organ 
failure, mortality is 50–70% and the outcome is usually 
determined by the severity of the underlying disorder 
and other complications, rather than by renal failure 
itself.
Increased total extracellular fluid
• Congestive heart failure
• Renal failure
• Liver disease
High local venous pressure
• Deep venous thrombosis or 
venous insufficiency
• Pregnancy
• Pelvic tumour
Low plasma oncotic pressure/serum albumin
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Liver failure
• Malnutrition/malabsorption
Increased capillary permeability
• Leakage of proteins into the interstitium, reducing the 
osmotic pressure gradient which draws fluid into the 
lymphatics and blood
• Infection/inflammation
• Severe sepsis
• Calcium channel blockers
Lymphatic obstruction
• Infection: filariasis, 
lymphogranuloma 
venereum (pp. 372  
and 424)
• Malignancy
• Radiation injury
• Congenital abnormality
17.15  Causes of oedema
Acute kidney injury
17
479
on arrival and should undergo a risk assessment for the 
likelihood of developing AKI. This includes looking at 
coexisting diseases such as diabetes, vascular disease 
and liver disease, which make AKI more likely, as well 
as gathering information on drug treatments such as 
ACE inhibitors and NSAIDs, which may be associated 
with renal dysfunction. If a patient is found to have a 
high serum creatinine, it is important to establish 
whether this is an acute or acute-on-chronic phenome­
non, or a sign of chronic kidney disease. Previous meas­
urements of renal function can be of great value in 
differentiating these possibilities. Patients with AKI 
need to be assessed quickly to determine the likely 
underlying cause. Investigations that are required in all 
cases are shown in Box 17.16. Additional investigations 
that are required in some cases, depending on the clini­
cal picture are shown in Box 17.17. The diagnosis of 
pre-renal AKI is usually obvious clinically (see below). 
Various criteria have been proposed to classify AKI and 
to help identify high-risk patients, guide treatment and 
provide information regarding prognosis. The most 
commonly used are the KDIGO and RIFLE criteria 
(Box 17.18), which use serum creatinine and urine output 
as biomarkers of kidney function.
Pre-renal AKI
Patients with pre-renal AKI are typically hypotensive 
and tachycardic with signs of poor peripheral perfusion, 
such as delayed capillary return. Tachycardia and 
postural hypotension (a fall in blood pressure of 
> 20/10 mmHg from lying to standing) are valuable 
signs of early hypovolaemia. Many patients with sepsis 
initially present with poor peripheral perfusion, as men­
tioned above, but then show evidence of peripheral 
vasodilatation once they have undergone initial resusci­
tation with intravenous fluids. However, this is accom­
panied by relative underfilling of the arterial tree and 
the kidney responds as it would to absolute hypovolae­
mia, with renal vasoconstriction leading to AKI with 
acute tubular necrosis. Biochemical assessment in pre-
renal AKI usually reveals evidence of a metabolic acido­
sis and hyperkalaemia. It is important to note that 
pre-renal AKI may also occur without systemic hypoten­
sion, particularly in patients taking NSAIDs or ACE 
inhibitors. The cause of the hypotension is usually 
obvious clinically, but concealed blood loss can occur 
into the gastrointestinal tract, following trauma (particu­
larly where there are fractures of the pelvis or femur), 
and into the pregnant uterus. Large volumes of intravas­
cular fluid may also be lost into tissues after crush inju­
ries or burns, and in severe inflammatory skin diseases 
or sepsis.
Renal AKI
Factors that can help differentiate the various causes 
of renal and post-renal AKI are summarised in Box 
17.19. Patients with glomerulonephritis usually demon­
strate significant haematuria and proteinuria and may 
have clinical manifestations of an underlying disease, 
such as SLE or systemic vasculitis. Although blood tests, 
including an immunological screen, should be per­
formed to clarify the diagnosis in glomerulonephritis, a 
renal biopsy is usually required. Drug-induced acute 
interstitial nephritis is harder to spot but should be sus­
pected in a previously well patient if there is an acute 
Pathophysiology
There are many causes of AKI and it is frequently multi­
factorial. It is often classified into three subtypes: ‘pre-
renal’, when perfusion to the kidney is reduced; ‘renal’, 
when the primary insult affects the kidney itself; and 
‘post-renal’, when there is obstruction to urine flow at 
any point from the tubule to the urethra (Fig. 17.10). In 
pre-renal AKI, the kidney becomes damaged as the 
result of hypoperfusion, leading to acute tubular necro­
sis. Histologically, the kidney shows inflammatory 
changes, focal breaks in the tubular basement membrane 
and interstitial oedema. Dead tubular cells may also be 
shed into the tubular lumen, leading to tubular obstruc­
tion. Although tubular cell damage is the dominant 
feature under the microscope, there may also be pro­
found alterations in the renal microcirculation. Renal 
AKI may be caused by nephrotoxic drugs (p. 522), which 
can cause acute tubular necrosis and a similar histologi­
cal picture to pre-renal AKI or interstitial nephritis. The 
other common cause is glomerulonephritis, in which 
there is direct inflammatory damage to the glomeruli 
(p. 498). Post-renal AKI occurs as the result of obstruc­
tion to the renal tract, with kidney damage arising as the 
result of back pressure. Anaemia is common in AKI and 
may occur as the result of blood loss, haemolysis or 
decreased erythropoiesis. In established AKI, there is an 
increased risk of bleeding and spontaneous gastrointes­
tinal haemorrhage due to the uraemia.
Clinical features
Early recognition and intervention is important in AKI; 
all emergency admissions to hospital should have renal 
function, blood pressure, temperature and pulse checked 
Fig. 17.10  Causes of acute kidney injury. 
RENAL
Glomerulonephritis
Small-vessel vasculitis
Acute tubular necrosis
• Drugs
• Toxins
• Prolonged hypotension
Interstitial nephritis
• Drugs
• Toxins
• Inflammatory disease
• Infection
PRE-RENAL
Impaired perfusion:
• Cardiac failure
• Sepsis
• Blood loss
• Dehydration
• Vascular occlusion
POST-RENAL
Urinary calculi
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Benign prostatic
enlargement
Prostate cancer
Cervical cancer
Urethral stricture/valves
Meatal stenosis/phimosis
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
480
Initial test
Interpretation and further tests
Urea and 
creatinine
Compare to previous results. Chronically abnormal in CKD (see Box 17.26)
Electrolytes
If potassium > 6 mmol/L, treat urgently (p. 442)
Calcium and 
phosphate
Low calcium and high phosphate may indicate CKD (see Box 17.26)
Calcium low in rhabdomyolysis: measure creatine kinase
Hypercalcaemia in myeloma
Albumin
Low albumin in nephrotic syndrome (see urinalysis below)
Low albumin in sepsis: take blood cultures
Full blood count
Clotting screen
Anaemia may indicate CKD (see Box 17.26) or myeloma (see Box 17.17)
Anaemia and fragmented RBC on blood film with raised LDH in thrombotic microangiopathy
Low platelets and abnormal coagulation in DIC, including in sepsis: take blood cultures
C-reactive protein
ESR is misleading in renal failure
High CRP may indicate sepsis or inflammatory disease
Urinalysis
Less reliable in an oliguric catheterised patient
Seek earlier results if possible
Marked haematuria suggests glomerulonephritis, tumour of renal tract or bleeding disorder
Heavy proteinuria suggests glomerular disease: measure PCR or ACR
Urine microscopy
Casts or dysmorphic red cells suggest glomerulonephritis
Leucocytes suggest infection/interstitial nephritis
Crystals may be observed in drug-induced or uric acid nephropathy
Renal ultrasound
Hydronephrosis ± enlarged bladder in urinary tract obstruction: consider PSA and further imaging of urinary tract
Small kidneys suggest CKD (see Box 17.26)
Asymmetric kidneys suggest renovascular or developmental disease: consider renal artery imaging
Cultures
Culture blood, urine, sputum, wounds as appropriate
Treat all infections
Chest X-ray
Pulmonary oedema in fluid overload
Globular heart in pericardial (uraemic) effusion: perform echocardiogram
‘Bat wing’ appearance with normal heart size (± low Hb) may suggest pulmonary haemorrhage: measure CO 
transfer factor
Fibrotic change in systemic inflammatory disease with lung and kidney involvement: request pulmonary function 
and high-resolution CT
Serology
HIV and hepatitis serology is urgent if dialysis is needed
ECG
If patient is > 40 yrs or has electrolyte abnormalities or risk of cardiac disease
(ACR = albumin:creatinine ratio; CKD = chronic kidney disease; CRP = C-reactive protein; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; ESR = erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate; Hb = haemoglobin; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; PCR = protein:creatinine ratio; PSA = prostate-specific antigen; RBC = red blood cells)
17.16  Investigation of patients with established acute kidney injury
Possibility
Consider
Vascular occlusion
Aorta, or renal artery to single kidney; pointers include newly 
missing pulses, complete anuria
Urgent arteriography
Doppler ultrasound
Malignant hypertension
BP very high; RBC fragments on blood film and haemolysis
Examine optic fundi for typical features
Check previous BP readings
Scleroderma
Sclerodactyly, other features of scleroderma, severe hypertension
Autoantibodies to extractable nuclear antigens
Imaging for involvement of other organs (p. 1112)
Systemic inflammatory disease
Multi-organ involvement, rash and evidence of glomerular disease
Differential diagnosis includes infection, especially endocarditis or 
tuberculosis
Complement (see Box 17.40), ANCA, ANF, anti-GBM antibodies, 
cryoglobulins and tissue biopsy
Cultures, echocardiogram
17.17  Clinical features and investigations of specific causes of acute kidney injury
Continued
Acute kidney injury
17
481
KDIGO (Kidney disease: 
improving global outcomes)
RIFLE (Risk, injury, failure, 
loss, end-stage)
Stage 1: serum creatinine 
increase > 1.5–1.9-fold, urine 
production of < 0.5 mL/kg/hr for 
6–12 hrs
= Risk
Stage 2: serum creatinine 
increase > 2.0–2.9-fold, urine 
production of < 0.5 mL/kg/hr for 
≥ 12 hrs
= Injury
Stage 3: serum creatinine 
increase > 3.0-fold, urine 
production of < 0.3 mL/kg/hr for 
≥ 24 hrs or absolute anuria for 
≥ 12 hrs, or absolute serum 
creatinine > 354 µmol/L with an 
acute rise of > 44 µmol/L
= Failure
Loss: persistent AKI, or 
complete loss of kidney 
function for > 4 wks
End-stage renal disease: 
need for renal replacement 
therapy for > 3 mths
17.18  Criteria for acute kidney injury
Urinary tract obstruction
• Suggested by a history of loin pain, haematuria, renal colic or 
difficulty in micturition but often clinically silent
• Can usually be excluded by renal ultrasound: essential in any 
patient with unexplained AKI
• Prompt relief of the obstruction restores renal function
Drugs and toxins
• Poisoning, paraphenylenediamine hair dye, snake bite, 
paraquat, paracetamol, herbal medicines, Cortinarius 
mushrooms
• Therapeutic agents: direct toxicity (aminoglycosides, 
amphotericin, tenofovir); or haemodynamic effects (NSAIDs, 
ACE inhibitors), often with other factors. Phosphate 
crystallisation after IV administration or from bowel 
preparation
• Sometimes associated with systemic vasculitis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Goodpasture’s (anti-GBM) 
disease
• Useful blood tests include: antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies (ANCA), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-GBM 
antibodies, complement, immunoglobulins
• Renal biopsy shows aggressive glomerular inflammation, 
usually with crescent formation
Acute interstitial nephritis
• Usually caused by an adverse drug reaction
• Characterised by small amounts of blood and protein in 
urine, often with leucocyturia
• Kidneys are normal size
• Requires cessation of drug and often prednisolone treatment
17.19  Acute kidney injury in a haemodynamically 
stable, non-septic patient
Possibility
Consider
Glomerular disease
Heavy proteinuria and/or haematuria
Screen for systemic inflammatory disease as above
Plus urgent renal biopsy, unless cause already known
Interstitial nephritis
Consider if urinary abnormalities minor but leucocytes present. 
Usually non-oliguric in early stages. Take detailed history of 
exposure to drugs and other possible causes
Eosinophilia and urinary eosinophils
Renal biopsy
Uric acid if tumour lysis possible
Myeloma
Extra renal features may be present, including bone pain and 
hypercalcaemia. Renal disease can occur without overt myeloma. 
Often presents with interstitial nephritis but cast formation can be 
acute, so patients frequently oliguric
FBC, calcium, skeletal survey, bone marrow aspirate
Serum immunoglobulins and protein electrophoresis
Check urinary light chains
Consider renal biopsy
Infections
Leptospirosis, hantavirus, syphilis, post-streptococcal 
glomerulonephritis
ASO titre and other serological tests for infection
(ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; ANF = antinuclear factor; ASO = anti-streptolysin O; BP = blood pressure; FBC = full blood count; GBM = 
glomerular basement membrane; RBC = red blood cells)
17.17  Clinical features and investigations of specific causes of acute kidney injury – cont’d
deterioration of renal function coinciding with introduc­
tion of a new drug treatment. Drugs that are commonly 
implicated include gentamicin, omeprazole, cisplatin 
and amphotericin B.
Post-renal AKI
Patients should be examined clinically to look for evi­
dence of bladder enlargement and should also undergo 
imaging with ultrasound to detect evidence of obstruc­
tion above the level of the bladder. Post-renal AKI is 
usually accompanied by hydronephrosis, but this can be 
absent if the ureters are affected by fibrosis or malig­
nancy, or if obstruction of the renal tract occurs in 
combination with a renal disorder such as acute tubular 
necrosis that causes reduced urinary flow.
Management
Management options common to all forms of AKI are 
discussed in more detail below and summarised in 
Box 17.20.
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
482
intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV). Once 
initial resuscitation has been performed, fluid intake 
should be matched to urine output plus 500 mL to cover 
insensible losses, unless diarrhoea is present, in which 
case additional fluids might be required.
Electrolyte disturbances
Electrolyte disturbances, such as dilutional hyponatrae­
mia, may occur if the patient has continued to drink 
freely despite oliguria or has received inappropriate 
amounts of intravenous dextrose. They can be avoided 
by paying careful attention to fluid balance and by 
giving intravenous fluids slowly. Modest hypocalcae­
mia is common but rarely requires treatment. Serum 
phosphate levels are usually high but may fall to 
‘Dopamine at low, “renal” doses has been used in the belief that 
it may increase renal blood flow in critically ill patients (as it 
does in normal individuals) and prevent AKI. However, 
meta-analysis of clinical trials does not support its use in 
patients with, or at risk of, acute kidney injury.’
• Friedrich JO, et al. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142(7):510–524.
17.22  Low-dose dopamine in acute kidney injury
‘A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled 
trials comparing hydroxyethyl starch (HES) with crystalloid or 
albumin solutions in the resuscitation of critically ill patients with 
sepsis revealed that, in trials with a low risk of bias, HES was 
associated with increased mortality (relative risk 1.11. 95% 
confidence interval 1.0–1.23), a greater requirement for renal 
replacement therapy (1.36 [1.03–1.80]) and more serious 
adverse events (1.30 [1.02–1.67]).’
• Haase N, et al. BMJ 2103; 346:f839.
17.21  Colloid resuscitation fluids in the 
critically ill
• Correct hypovolaemia and optimise systemic haemodynamic 
status with inotropic drugs if necessary
• Administer glucose and insulin to correct hyperkalaemia if K+ 
> 6.5 mmol/L
• Consider administering sodium bicarbonate (100 mmol) to 
correct acidosis if pH < 7.0 (> 100 nmol/L)
• Discontinue potentially nephrotoxic drugs and reduce doses 
of therapeutic drugs according to level of renal function
• Match fluid intake to urine output plus an additional 500 mL 
to cover insensible losses once patient is euvolaemic
• Measure body weight on a regular basis as a guide to fluid 
requirements
• Ensure adequate nutritional support
• Administer proton pump antagonists to reduce the risk of 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding
• Screen for intercurrent infections and treat promptly if 
present
17.20  Management of acute kidney injury
Haemodynamic status
If hypovolaemia is present, it should be corrected by 
replacement of intravenous fluid or blood; excessive 
administration of fluid should be avoided, since this 
can worsen outcome in AKI due to the development of 
pulmonary oedema. Monitoring of the central venous 
pressure may be of value in determining the rate of 
administration of fluid in these circumstances. Balanced 
salt solutions, such as Hartmann’s or Ringer’s lactate, 
may be preferable to isotonic (0.9%) saline when large 
volumes of fluid resuscitation are required, in order to 
avoid hyperchloraemic acidosis, but whether this sub­
stantially influences outcome remains unclear. Admin­
istration of hydroxyethyl starch solutions should be 
avoided, since they have been associated with higher 
rates of established AKI (Box 17.21). Critically ill patients 
may require inotropic drugs to restore an effective blood 
pressure but clinical trials do not support a specific role 
for low-dose dopamine (Box 17.22).
Hyperkalaemia and acidosis
Hyperkalaemia is common, particularly in patients with 
sepsis, burns, haemolysis or metabolic acidosis (p. 442). 
If serum K+ concentration is > 6.5 mmol/L, this should 
be treated immediately, as described in Box 16.17  
(p. 443), to prevent life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. 
Metabolic acidosis develops unless prevented by loss of 
hydrogen ions through vomiting or aspiration of gastric 
contents. Severe acidosis can be ameliorated with 
sodium bicarbonate if volume status allows. Restoration 
of blood volume will correct acidosis by restoring kidney 
function. Infusions of sodium bicarbonate (50 mL of 
8.4%) may also be used, if acidosis is severe, to reduce 
life-threatening hyperkalaemia.
Cardiopulmonary complications
Pulmonary oedema (Fig. 17.11) may result from the 
administration of excessive amounts of fluids relative to 
urine output and because of increased pulmonary capil­
lary permeability. If pulmonary oedema is present 
and urine output cannot be rapidly restored, treatment 
with dialysis may be required to remove excess fluid. 
Temporary respiratory support may also be necessary 
with continuous positive airways pressure (CPAP) or 
Fig. 17.11  Pulmonary oedema in acute kidney injury. The 
appearances are indistinguishable from left ventricular failure but the heart 
size is usually normal. Blood pressure is often high. 
Chronic kidney disease
17
483
dangerously low levels in patients on daily or continu­
ous dialysis or haemofiltration, necessitating phosphate 
replacement.
Dietary measures
Adequate nutritional support should be ensured and it 
is important to give sufficient amounts of energy and 
adequate amounts of protein; high protein intake should 
be avoided. This is particularly important in patients 
with sepsis and burns who are hypercatabolic. Enteral 
or parenteral nutrition may be required (p. 123).
Infection
Patients with AKI are at substantial risk of intercurrent 
infection because humoral and cellular immune mecha­
nisms are depressed. Regular clinical examination, 
supplemented by microbiological investigation where 
appropriate, is required to diagnose infection. If infec­
tion is discovered, it should be treated promptly accord­
ing to standard principles (Ch. 6).
Medications
Patients with drug-induced acute tubular necrosis (see 
Fig. 17.24B, p. 503) or drug-induced acute interstitial 
nephritis should have the offending drug withdrawn. 
Additionally, vasoactive drugs, such as NSAIDs and 
ACE inhibitors, should be discontinued, as they may 
prolong AKI. H2-receptor antagonists should be given to 
prevent gastrointestinal bleeding. Other drug treat­
ments should be reviewed and the doses adjusted if 
necessary, to take account of renal function. Non-
essential drug treatments should be stopped.
Immunosuppression
Patients with glomerulonephritis may require immuno­
suppressive drugs (p. 498), plasma infusion and plasma 
exchange (p. 501).
Renal tract obstruction
In post-renal AKI, the obstruction should be relieved as 
soon as possible. This may involve catheterisation in 
urethral obstruction, or correction of ureteric obstruction 
with a ureteric stent or percutaneous nephrostomy.
Renal replacement therapy
Conservative management can be successful in AKI 
with meticulous attention to fluid balance, electrolytes 
and nutrition, but renal replacement therapy (RRT) may 
be required in patients who are not showing signs of 
recovery with these measures. Typically, the decision to 
start RRT is driven by hyperkalaemia, fluid overload or 
acidosis. Severe uraemia with pericarditis and neuro­
logical signs (uraemic encephalopathy) is uncommon in 
AKI but, when present, is a strong indication for RRT. 
No specific cut-off values for serum urea or creatinine 
have been identified at which RRT should be com­
menced, and clinical trials of earlier versus later RRT in 
unselected patients with AKI have not shown differ­
ences in outcome. Furthermore, RRT can be a risky inter­
vention in patients with comorbidity, since it requires 
the placement of large intravenous catheters that may 
become infected and can also represent a major haemo­
dynamic challenge in unstable patients. Accordingly, 
the decision to institute RRT should be made on an 
individual basis, taking account of the potential risks 
and benefits, comorbidity and other aspects of the 
patient’s care, including an assessment of whether early 
or delayed recovery is likely. The two main options for 
RRT in AKI are haemodialysis and high-volume haemo­
filtration, or the hybrid approach of haemodiafiltration. 
Peritoneal dialysis is also an option if haemodialysis is 
not available (p. 490).
Recovery from AKI
This is usually heralded by a gradual return of urine 
output and a steady improvement in plasma biochemis­
try. During recovery, there is often a diuretic phase in 
which urine output increases rapidly and remains exces­
sive for several days before returning to normal. This 
may be due in part to tubular damage and to temporary 
loss of the medullary concentration gradient. This gradi­
ent plays a key role in concentrating urine in the collect­
ing duct, and depends on continued delivery of filtrate 
to the ascending limb of the loop of Henle and active 
tubular transport. After a few days, urine volume falls 
to normal as the concentrating mechanism and tubular 
reabsorption are restored. During the recovery phase of 
AKI, it may be necessary to provide supplements of 
sodium chloride, sodium bicarbonate, potassium chlo­
ride and sometimes phosphate temporarily, to compen­
sate for increased urinary losses.
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), previously termed 
chronic renal failure, refers to an irreversible deteriora­
tion in renal function which usually develops over a 
period of years (see Box 17.3, p. 467). Initially, it is mani­
fest only as a biochemical abnormality but, eventually, 
loss of the excretory, metabolic and endocrine func­
tions of the kidney leads to the clinical symptoms and 
signs of renal failure, collectively referred to as uraemia. 
When death is likely without RRT (CKD stage 5), it 
is called end-stage renal disease or failure (ESRD 
or ESRF).
Epidemiology
The social and economic consequences of CKD are 
considerable. In most countries, estimates of the preva­
lence of CKD stage 3–5 (eGFR < 60) are around 5-7%, 
mostly affecting people aged 65 years and above. The 
• Physiological change: nephrons decline in number with age 
and average GFR falls progressively.
• Creatinine: as muscle mass falls with age, less creatinine is 
produced each day. Serum creatinine can be misleading as a 
guide to renal function.
• Renal tubular function: declines with age, leading to loss of 
urinary concentrating ability.
• Drugs: increased drug prescription in older people (diuretics, 
ACE inhibitors and NSAIDs) may contribute to risk of AKI.
• Causes: infection, renal vascular disease, prostatic 
obstruction, hypovolaemia and severe cardiac dysfunction 
are common.
• Mortality: rises with age, primarily because of comorbid 
conditions.
17.23  Acute kidney injury in old age
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
484
biopsy would not alter treatment. Many patients diag­
nosed at a late stage have bilateral small kidneys; renal 
biopsy is rarely undertaken in this group since it is more 
risky, less likely to provide a histological diagnosis 
because of the severity of damage, and unlikely to alter 
management.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with a raised urea and creati­
nine found during routine blood tests, frequently accom­
panied by hypertension, proteinuria or anaemia. The 
rate of change in renal function varies between patients 
but is relatively constant for an individual and provides 
useful prognostic information. A plot of GFR, or of the 
reciprocal of the plasma creatinine concentration against 
time (Fig. 17.12), can demonstrate whether a patient has 
a stable GFR over time, predict when ESRF will be 
reached if decline is progressive, and can detect any 
unexpected worsening of kidney disease. It can also be 
used to monitor the success of interventions.
General symptoms
Most patients with slowly progressive disease are 
asymptomatic until GFR falls below 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 
(stage 4 or 5) and some can remain asymptomatic with 
much lower GFR values than this. An early symptom is 
nocturia, due to the loss of concentrating ability and 
increased osmotic load per nephron, but this is non-
specific. When GFR falls below 15–20 mL/min/1.73 m2, 
symptoms and signs are common and can affect almost 
all body systems (Fig. 17.13). They typically include 
tiredness or breathlessness, which may, in part, be 
related to renal anaemia, pruritus, anorexia, weight loss, 
nausea and vomiting. With further deterioration in 
renal function, patients may suffer hiccups, experience 
unusually deep respiration related to metabolic acidosis 
(Kussmaul’s respiration), and develop muscular twitch­
ing, fits, drowsiness and coma.
Disease
Proportion
Comments
Congenital and 
inherited
5%
Polycystic kidney 
disease, Alport’s 
syndrome
Renovascular 
disease
5%
Mostly atheromatous, 
may be more common
Hypertension
5–20%
Causality controversial, 
much may be renal 
disease
Glomerular 
diseases
10–20%
IgA nephropathy is most 
common
Interstitial diseases
20–30%
Often drug-induced
Systemic 
inflammatory 
diseases
5–10%
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus, vasculitis
Diabetes mellitus
20–40%
Large racial and 
geographical differences
Unknown
5–20%
17.24  Common causes of end-stage renal failure
Fig. 17.12  Plot of the reciprocal of serum creatinine concentration against time in a patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus. After 
approximately 6 years of monitoring (blue arrow), he entered an aggressive treatment programme aimed at optimising blood pressure (BP) and glycaemic 
control. The reduction in blood pressure was accompanied by a fall in proteinuria (protein : creatinine ratio, PCR; mg/mmol) and a stabilisation in renal 
function. 
BP 162/88
PCR 284
BP 177/104
PCR 397
BP 146/77
PCR 170
1000
0
60
30
15
10
eGFR mL/min/1.73 m2
Serum creatinine (µmol/L)
BP 207/101
PCR 367
BP 122/68
PCR 107
2
4
Time (years)
6
8
10
500
300
200
100
prevalence of CKD in hypertension, diabetes and vascu­
lar disease is substantially higher, and targeted screen­
ing for CKD should be considered in these and other 
high-risk groups. The great majority of patients with 
earlier CKD (stages 1–3) never develop ESRD, which is 
fortunate, given the numbers (see Box 17.3).
Pathophysiology
Common causes of CKD are shown in Box 17.24. In 
many cases, the underlying diagnosis is unclear, espe­
cially among the large number of elderly patients with 
moderate GFR reductions (stage 3 CKD; see Box 17.3), 
in whom the additional information gained from a 
Chronic kidney disease
17
485
sodium salts, to prevent fluid depletion and worsening 
of renal function. Acidosis is common. Although it 
is usually asymptomatic, it may be associated with 
increased tissue catabolism and decreased protein syn­
thesis, and may exacerbate bone disease and the rate of 
decline in renal function.
Endocrine function
A number of hormonal abnormalities may also be 
observed. In both genders, there is loss of libido related, 
at least in part, to hypogonadism as a consequence of 
hyperprolactinaemia (p. 790). The half-life of insulin is 
prolonged in CKD due to reduced tubular metabolism 
of insulin but there is also insulin resistance and reduced 
appetite. Because of this, insulin requirements are 
unpredictable in diabetic patients in advanced CKD.
Neurological and muscle function
Generalised myopathy may occur due to a combination 
of poor nutrition, hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D defi­
ciency and disorders of electrolyte metabolism. Muscle 
cramps are common. The ‘restless leg syndrome’, in 
which the patient’s legs are jumpy during the night, may 
Fig. 17.13  Physical signs in advanced chronic kidney disease. (*Features of renal replacement therapy) 
Yellow complexion
Pallor
Dual-lumen central venous catheter
for dialysis access (right or left)*
Pericardial friction rub
Arteriovenous fistulae for
dialysis access*
Transplanted kidney (right or left)
with overlying scar*
‘Brown line’ pigmentation
of nails
Excoriation of pruritus
Bruising easily
Peripheral neuropathy
 
Absent reflexes
 
Reduced sensation
 
Paraesthesia
 
‘Restless legs’
Jugular venous pressure
raised in fluid overload or
pericardial tamponade
Pulsus paradoxus in
pericardial tamponade
Tenckhoff catheter for peritoneal
dialysis (right or left)*
Increased respiratory
rate and depth in
metabolic acidosis
Immune dysfunction
Cellular and humoral immunity is impaired in advanced 
CKD and there is increased susceptibility to infections, 
the second most common cause of death in dialysis 
patients, after cardiovascular disease. Many infections 
are associated with access devices but some are common 
infections, such as pneumonia.
Haematological
There is an increased bleeding tendency in advanced 
CKD, which manifests as cutaneous ecchymoses and 
mucosal bleeds. Platelet function is impaired and bleed­
ing time prolonged. Adequate dialysis partially corrects 
the bleeding tendency in those with severe uraemia, but 
these patients are at significantly increased risk of com­
plications from all anticoagulants, including those that 
are required during dialysis. Anaemia is common and is 
due in part to reduced erythropoietin production. Hae­
moglobin can be as low as 50–70 g/L in CKD stage 5, 
although it is often less severe or absent in patients with 
polycystic kidney disease. Several mechanisms are 
implicated, as summarised in Box 17.25.
Electrolyte abnormalities
Patients with CKD often develop electrolyte abnormali­
ties and metabolic acidosis (p. 445). Fluid retention is 
common in advanced CKD and disproportionate fluid 
retention may occur in milder disease, sometimes 
leading to episodic pulmonary oedema. This is particu­
larly associated with renal artery stenosis. Conversely, 
some patients with tubulo-interstitial disease can 
develop ‘salt-wasting’ disease and may require a high 
sodium and water intake, including supplements of 
• Deficiency of erythropoietin
• Toxic effects of uraemia on marrow precursor cells
• Reduced red cell survival
• Increased blood loss due to capillary fragility and poor 
platelet function
• Reduced intake, absorption and utilisation of dietary iron
17.25  Causes of anaemia in chronic 
kidney disease
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
486
be troublesome. Both sensory and motor neuropathy can 
arise, presenting as paraesthesia and foot drop, respec­
tively, but appear late during the course of CKD. They 
are now unusual, given the widespread availability of 
RRT; if present, they can often improve once dialysis is 
established.
Cardiovascular disease
The risk of cardiovascular disease is substantially 
increased in patients with CKD stage 3 or worse (GFR 
< 60 mL/min/1.73 m2) and those with proteinuria or 
microalbuminuria. Left ventricular hypertrophy may 
occur, secondary to hypertension, and may account for 
the increased risk of sudden death (presumed to be 
caused by dysrhythmias) in this patient group. Pericar­
ditis may complicate untreated or inadequately treated 
ESRD and cause pericardial tamponade or constrictive 
pericarditis. Medial vascular calcification is common 
and may be due, in part, to the high serum phosphate 
levels which are present in stage 3b CKD and above. 
Hyperphosphataemia may also contribute to the itching 
that arises in advanced CKD and probably contributes 
in an important way to the increased risk of cardiovas­
cular disease. Reflecting this fact, serum fibroblast 
growth factor 23 (FGF23) levels (which increase in 
response to serum phosphate – see below) are an inde­
pendent predictor of mortality in CKD.
Metabolic bone disease
Disturbances of calcium and phosphate metabolism are 
almost universal in advanced CKD, and various types 
of metabolic bone disease may also occur, including 
osteitis fibrosa cystica, osteomalacia and osteoporosis 
(Fig. 17.14). The sequence of events that leads to renal 
bone disease is complex. There is impaired conversion 
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to its active metabolite, 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, due in part to renal tubular 
cell damage and elevated FGF23 levels. The reduced 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels impair intestinal absorp­
tion of calcium, thereby causing hypocalcaemia, which 
leads in turn to increased PTH production by the para­
thyroid glands. Serum phosphate levels also start to 
rise because of the reduction in GFR. This leads to 
increased production of the hormone FGF23 from osteo­
cytes (p. 1061). The FGF23 promotes phosphate excre­
tion, thereby compensating in part for the reduced 
glomerular filtration of phosphate. This homeostatic 
response eventually fails, however, as renal failure 
progresses and hyperphosphataemia develops. The 
raised levels of serum phosphate complex with calcium 
in the extracellular space, causing ectopic calcification in 
blood vessels and other tissues. Patients with CKD com­
monly develop parathyroid gland hypertrophy and sec­
ondary hyperparathyroidism. In some cases, tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism supervenes, due to autonomous 
production of PTH by the enlarged parathyroid glands; 
this presents with hypercalcaemia. The histological 
picture in renal bone disease is complex. In osteitis 
fibrosa cystica, there is increased bone turnover due 
to the high levels of PTH, whereas low bone turnover 
(adynamic bone disease) may be observed in patients 
who have been over-treated with vitamin D metabolites. 
Fig. 17.14  Pathogenesis of renal osteodystrophy. Low 1,25(OH)2D levels cause calcium malabsorption and this, combined with high phosphate 
levels, causes hypocalcaemia, which increases PTH production by the parathyroid glands. The raised level of PTH increases osteoclastic bone resorption 
and bone formation. Although production of FGF23 from osteocytes also increases, promoting phosphate excretion, this is insufficient to prevent 
hyperphosphataemia in advanced CKD. 
Impaired renal function
Osteoclastic bone
resorption and
bone formation
Decreased
conversion of
25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D
PO4 excretion
1,25(OH)2D
FGF23
Stimulation of
parathyroid glands
leading to hyperplasia
↑ PT
↑
↓
H
↑
   
↓ PO4 excretion
↑ Plasma [PO4]
↓ Ca2+
   absorption
↓ Plasma [Ca2+]
Impaired
mineralisation
of bone
Chronic kidney disease
17
487
125/75 mmHg for CKD complicated by significant pro­
teinuria of more than 1 g/day (PCR > 100 mg/mmol or 
ACR > 70 mg/mmol). Achieving these blood pressure 
targets often requires multiple drugs, and therapeutic 
success may be limited by adverse effects and poor 
compliance.
Reduction of proteinuria
There is a clear relationship between the degree of pro­
teinuria and the rate of progression of renal disease, and 
strong evidence that reducing proteinuria reduces the 
risk of progression. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers 
(ARBs) reduce proteinuria and retard the progression of 
CKD (Box 17.28). These effects are partly due to the 
reduction in blood pressure but there is evidence for a 
specific beneficial effect in patients with proteinuria 
(PCR > 50 mg/mmol or ACR > 30 mg/mmol) and those 
with incipient or overt diabetic nephropathy. In addi­
tion, ACE inhibitors have been shown to reduce the risk 
of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality in CKD. 
Treatment with ACE inhibitors and ARBs may be 
accompanied by an immediate reduction in GFR when 
treatment is initiated, due to a reduction in glomerular 
perfusion pressure. Treatment can be continued so long 
Osteomalacia can occur with over-treatment of hyper­
phosphataemia (p. 449).
Investigations
The recommended investigations in patients with CKD 
are shown in Box 17.26. Their main aims are:
•	 to identify the underlying cause where possible, 
since this may influence the treatment
•	 to identify reversible factors that may worsen renal 
function, such as hypertension, urinary tract 
obstruction, nephrotoxic drugs, and salt and water 
depletion
•	 to screen for complications of CKD, such as 
anaemia and renal osteodystrophy
•	 to screen for cardiovascular risk factors.
Referral to a nephrologist is appropriate for patients 
with potentially treatable underlying disease and those 
who are likely to progress to ESRD. Suggested referral 
criteria are listed in Box 17.27.
Management
The aims of management in CKD are to prevent or 
slow further renal damage; to limit the adverse physio­
logical effects of renal impairment on the skeleton and 
on haematopoiesis; to treat risk factors for cardiovascu­
lar disease; and to prepare for RRT, if appropriate 
(p. 489).
Antihypertensive therapy
Lowering of blood pressure slows the rate at which renal 
function declines in CKD, independently of the agent 
used (Box 17.28), and has additional benefits in lowering 
the risk of hypertensive heart failure, stroke and periph­
eral vascular disease, as well as reducing proteinuria 
(see below). No threshold for beneficial effects has been 
identified and any reduction of blood pressure appears 
to be beneficial. Various targets have been suggested, 
such as 130/80 mmHg for uncomplicated CKD, and 
• Age < 40 years
• Stage 4 CKD or worse (eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2)
• Rapid deterioration in renal function1
• Significant proteinuria (PCR > 100 mg/mmol or ACR 
> 70 mg/mmol)
• Significant haematuria2
17.27  Criteria for referral of chronic kidney 
disease patients to a nephrologist
1Fall in eGFR > 5 mL/min/1.73 m2/yr or > 10 mL/min/1.73 m2 over 5 yrs.
2After exclusion of urinary tract infection and urological abnormalities such 
as stones and tumours.
Initial tests
Interpretation
Urea and creatinine
To assess stability/progression: compare to previous results
Urinalysis and quantification 
of proteinuria
Haematuria and proteinuria may indicate cause. Proteinuria indicates risk of progressive CKD requiring 
preventive ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy
Electrolytes
To identify hyperkalaemia and acidosis
Calcium, phosphate, 
parathyroid hormone and 
25(OH)D
Assessment of renal osteodystrophy
Albumin
Low albumin: consider malnutrition, inflammation
Full blood count (± Fe, 
ferritin, folate, B12)
If anaemic, exclude common non-renal explanations then manage as renal anaemia
Lipids, glucose ± HbA1c
Cardiovascular risk high in CKD: treat risk factors aggressively
Renal ultrasound
Only if there are urinary symptoms (to exclude obstruction) or progressive CKD. Small kidneys suggest 
chronicity. Asymmetric renal size suggests renovascular or developmental disease
Hepatitis and HIV serology
If dialysis or transplant is planned. Hepatitis B vaccination recommended if seronegative
ECG
If patient is > 40 yrs or hyperkalaemic, or there are risk factors for cardiac disease
Other tests
Consider relevant tests from Boxes 17.16 and 17.17 (p. 480), especially if the cause of CKD is unknown
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB = angiotensin II receptor blocker)
17.26  Suggested investigations in chronic kidney disease
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
488
as the reduction in GFR is less than 20% and is not pro­
gressive. Accordingly ACE inhibitors and/or ARBs 
should be prescribed to all patients with diabetic neph­
ropathy and those with proteinuria, irrespective of 
whether or not hypertension is present, providing that 
hyperkalaemia does not occur.
Dietary and lifestyle interventions
There is experimental evidence that restricting dietary 
protein can reduce progression of CKD in animal models 
but the results are less clear-cut in humans. All patients 
with stage 4 and 5 CKD should be given dietetic advice 
aimed at preventing excessive consumption of protein, 
ensuring adequate calorific intake and limiting potas­
sium and phosphate intake. Severe protein restriction is 
not recommended. All patients should be advised to 
stop smoking, since there is evidence that this slows the 
decline in renal function in addition to reducing cardio­
vascular risk. Exercise and weight loss may also reduce 
proteinuria and have beneficial effects on cardiovascular 
risk profile.
Lipid-lowering therapy
Hypercholesterolaemia is almost universal in patients 
with significant proteinuria, and increased triglyceride 
levels are also common in patients with CKD. Lipid 
lowering has been shown to reduce vascular events in 
non-dialysis CKD patients (Box 17.29). There is some 
evidence that control of dyslipidaemia with statins may 
slow the rate of progression of renal disease.
Treatment of anaemia
Anaemia is common in patients with a GFR below 
30 mL/min/1.73 m2 and contributes to many of the 
non-specific symptoms of CKD. Recombinant human 
erythropoietin is effective in correcting the anaemia of 
CKD and improving the associated morbidity. Erythro­
poietin treatment does not influence mortality, however, 
and correcting haemoglobin to normal levels may carry 
some extra risk, including hypertension and thrombosis 
(including thrombosis of the arteriovenous fistulae used 
for haemodialysis). The target haemoglobin is usually 
between 100 and 120 g/L (10–20 g/dL). Erythropoietin 
is less effective in the presence of iron deficiency, active 
inflammation or malignancy, and in patients with alu­
minium overload, which may occur in dialysis.
Maintaining fluid and electrolyte balance
Patients with evidence of fluid retention should have 
dietary sodium intake limited to about 100 mmol/day, 
but often loop diuretics may also be required to treat 
fluid overload. If hyperkalaemia occurs, drug therapy 
should be reviewed, to reduce or stop potassium-sparing 
diuretics, ACE inhibitors and ARBs. Correction of acido­
sis may be helpful, and limiting potassium intake to 
about 70 mmol/day may be necessary in late CKD. 
Potassium-binding resins, such as calcium resonium, 
may be useful in the short term but should not be used 
chronically. The plasma bicarbonate should be main­
tained above 22 mmol/L by giving sodium bicarbonate 
supplements (starting dose of 1 g 3 times daily, increas­
ing as required). If the increased sodium intake induces 
hypertension or oedema, calcium carbonate (up to 3 g 
daily) may be used as an alternative, since this has the 
advantage of also binding dietary phosphate.
Renal bone disease
Treatment should be initiated with active vitamin D 
metabolites (either 1-α-hydroxyvitamin D or 1,25-
dihydroxyvitamin D) in patients who are found to have 
hypocalcaemia or serum PTH levels more than twice 
the upper limit of normal. The dose should be adjusted 
to try to reduce PTH levels to between 2 and 4 times 
the upper limit of normal to avoid over-suppression of 
bone turnover and adynamic bone disease, but care 
must be exercised in order to avoid hypercalcaemia. 
Hyperphosphataemia should be treated by dietary 
restriction of foods with high phosphate content (milk, 
cheese, eggs and protein-rich foods) and by the use of 
phosphate-binding drugs. Various drugs are available, 
including calcium carbonate, aluminium hydroxide, 
lanthanum carbonate and polymer-based phosphate 
binders such as sevelamer. The aim is to maintain serum 
phosphate values at 1.8 mmol/L (5.6 mg/dL) or below 
if possible, but many of these drugs are difficult to take 
and compliance may be a problem.
Parathyroidectomy may be required for the treatment 
of tertiary hyperparathyroidism. An alternative is to 
employ calcimimetic agents, such as cinacalcet, which 
bind to the calcium-sensing receptor and reduce PTH 
secretion. They have a place if parathyroidectomy is 
unsuccessful or not possible.
RENAL REPLACEMENT THERAPY
Renal replacement therapy (RRT) may be required on a 
temporary basis in patients with AKI or on a permanent 
‘The SHARP trial of lipid-lowering in patients with CKD studied 
approximately 9500 patients aged 40 years or more, with a 
median follow-up of 4.9 years. The combination of ezetimibe 
10 mg and simvastatin 20 mg reduced major atherosclerotic 
events by 17%, compared to placebo in patients not on dialysis 
(approximately 6000) (p < 0.01) and by 10% in patients on 
dialysis (not significant), although there was no overall benefit 
for mortality.’
• Baigent C, et al. Lancet 2011; 377:2181–2192.
17.29  Effects of lipid-lowering therapy in 
chronic kidney disease
‘A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials, including over 
50 000 patients, showed that the risk of progression to 
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) was reduced as blood pressure 
was lowered. Patients with the greatest reduction in blood 
pressure (−6.9 mmHg; 95% confidence interval −9.1 to −4.8) 
had a relative risk of ESRD of 0.74 (0.59–0.92).’
‘Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II 
receptor blockers reduce proteinuria and slow the progression of 
CKD in hypertensive patients to a greater extent than can be 
explained by the reduction in blood pressure alone.’
• Casas JP, et al. Lancet 2005; 366:2026–2033.
• Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network 103. Diagnosis and management of 
chronic kidney disease.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ed.ac.uk
17.28  Lowering blood pressure in chronic 
kidney disease
Renal replacement therapy
17
489
basis for those with CKD secondary to the many differ­
ent types of renal disease discussed in this chapter.
Since the advent of long-term RRT in the 1960s, the 
numbers of patients with ESRD who are kept alive by 
dialysis and transplantation have increased considera­
bly. For example, in the UK, there was a 3.3% increase 
per year between 2005 and 2010. By the end of 2010, over 
51 000 patients (832 per million) were on RRT, and the 
incidence of new patients starting RRT was 107 per 
million of the adult population. Whilst these numbers 
have been relatively steady over the last few years in the 
UK, they are still rising in the USA. The median age of 
patients starting RRT in the UK is now 65 years and 24% 
have a primary renal diagnosis of diabetic nephropathy. 
There are variations in the numbers of patients receiving 
RRT in different countries due to differences in the inci­
dence of predisposing disease, as well as differences in 
medical practice. For example, in the USA, incidence 
rates for RRT in 2010 were about three times higher than 
in the UK at 348 per million population, and prevalence 
rates more than twice as high at 1752 per million popula­
tion. Nearly half of these patients had a primary diag­
nosis of diabetes mellitus.
At the present time, RRT is commenced in about 1 
in 10 000 of the general population in the UK each year. 
Of patients starting dialysis in 2010, about 68% were 
still being treated with haemodialysis 3 months later – 
18% by peritoneal dialysis, 8% by renal transplant 
(often before dialysis has been initiated) – and 6% had 
died or stopped treatment. Of prevalent patients estab­
lished on RRT, about 48% had been transplanted, 44% 
were maintained on haemodialysis (approximately 1.5% 
on home haemodialysis) and 8% were on peritoneal 
dialysis.
Following initiation of dialysis in the UK, the survival 
is 84% at 1 year and 50% after 5 years. Mortality is 
strongly influenced by age; patients over 65 have a 76% 
survival at 1 year and 29% survival at 5 years, whereas 
corresponding figures for patients aged less than 65 
are 91% and 71%, respectively. Although many young 
patients without extrarenal disease lead normal and 
active lives on RRT, those aged 30–34 have a mortality 
rate 25 times higher than age-matched controls. Comor­
bid conditions, such as diabetes mellitus (47% 5-year 
survival versus 66% for non-diabetics starting at age 
45–64 years) and generalised vascular disease, also have 
a strong influence on mortality.
The aim of RRT is to replace the excretory functions 
of the kidney, and to maintain normal electrolyte 
concentrations and fluid balance. Various options are 
available, including haemodialysis, haemofiltration, 
haemodiafiltration, peritoneal dialysis and renal trans­
plantation, and each of these is discussed in more detail 
below.
Preparing for renal replacement therapy
It is crucial that patients who are known to have pro­
gressive CKD are prepared well in advance for the insti­
tution of RRT. This involves ensuring that they are 
referred to a nephrologist in a timely manner, as those 
who are referred late, when they are either at the stage 
of or very close to requiring dialysis (about 20% of refer­
rals in the UK), tend to have poorer outcomes. It is often 
possible to predict when RRT will be required from 
serial measurements of serum creatinine in patients with 
progressive CKD (see Box 17.3, p. 467). In such patients, 
preparations for the initiation of RRT should be started 
at least 12 months before the predicted start date.
At the present time, the average eGFR at the time 
of initiating RRT in the UK is about 8 mL/min/1.73 m2 
but there is wide variation. Since there is no evidence 
that early initiation of RRT improves outcome, the 
overall aim is to commence RRT by the time symptoms 
of CKD have started to appear but before serious com­
plications have occurred. Preparation for RRT involves 
providing the patient with psychological and social 
support, assessing home circumstances and discussing 
the various choices of treatment (Fig. 17.15). Depression 
is common in patients who are on or approaching RRT, 
and support from the renal multidisciplinary team 
should be provided for both them and their relatives, to 
explain and help them adapt to the changes to lifestyle 
that may be necessary once RRT starts; this may help to 
reduce their anxieties about these changes.
Several decisions need to be taken in discussion with 
the patient and their family. The first is to decide whether 
RRT is an appropriate choice or whether conservative 
treatment might be preferable (p. 490). This is especially 
relevant in older people with significant comorbidity. 
For those that decide to go ahead with RRT, there are 
further choices between haemodialysis and peritoneal 
dialysis (Box 17.30), between hospital and home treat­
ment, and on referral for renal transplantation.
Haemodialysis
Peritoneal dialysis
Efficient; 4 hrs three times per 
wk is usually adequate
Less efficient; 4 exchanges 
per day are usually required, 
each taking 30–60 mins 
(continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis) or 
8–10 hrs each night 
(automated peritoneal dialysis)
2–3 days between treatments
A few hours between 
treatments
Requires visits to hospital 
(although home treatment is 
possible for some patients)
Performed at home
Requires adequate venous 
circulation for vascular access
Requires an intact peritoneal 
cavity without major scarring 
from previous surgery
Careful compliance with diet 
and fluid restrictions required 
between treatments
Diet and fluid less restricted
Fluid removal compressed into 
treatment periods; may cause 
symptoms and haemodynamic 
instability
Slow continuous fluid removal, 
usually asymptomatic
Infections related to vascular 
access may occur
Peritonitis and catheter-related 
infections may occur
Patients are usually dependent 
on others
Patients can take full 
responsibility for their 
treatment
17.30  Comparison of haemodialysis and 
peritoneal dialysis
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
490
conservative therapy and palliative care when quality of 
life on dialysis is inadequate.
Haemodialysis
Haemodialysis is the most common form of RRT in 
ESRD and is also used in AKI. Haemodialysis involves 
gaining access to the circulation, either through an arte­
riovenous fistula, a central venous catheter or an arterio­
venous shunt, such as a Scribner shunt. The patient’s 
blood is pumped through a haemodialyser, which 
allows bidirectional diffusion of solutes between blood 
and the dialysate across a semipermeable membrane 
down a concentration gradient (Fig. 17.15A). The com­
position of the dialysate can be varied to achieve the 
desired gradient and fluid can be removed by applying 
negative pressure to the dialysate side.
Conservative treatment
In older patients with multiple comorbidities, conserva­
tive treatment of stage 5 CKD, aimed at limiting the 
adverse symptomatic effects of ESRD without com­
mencing RRT, is increasingly viewed as a positive choice 
(Box 17.31). Current evidence suggests that survival of 
these patients without dialysis can be similar or only 
slightly shorter than that of patients who undergo RRT, 
but they avoid the hospitalisation and interventions 
associated with dialysis. Patients are offered full medical, 
psychological and social support to optimise and sustain 
their existing renal function and to treat complications, 
such as anaemia, for as long as possible, with appropri­
ate palliative care in the terminal phase of their disease. 
Many of these patients enjoy a good quality of life for 
several years. It is also appropriate to discontinue dialy­
sis treatment, with the consent of the patient, and to offer 
Fig. 17.15  Options for renal replacement therapy.  A In haemodialysis, there is diffusion of solutes from blood to dialysate across a semi-
permeable membrane down a concentration gradient.  B In haemofiltration, both water and solutes are filtered across a porous semipermeable membrane 
by a pressure gradient. Replacement fluid is added to the filtered blood before it is returned to the patient.  C In peritoneal dialysis (PD), fluid is introduced 
into the abdominal cavity using a catheter. Solutes diffuse from blood across the peritoneal membrane to PD fluid down a concentration gradient and water 
diffuses through osmosis (see text for details).  D In transplantation, the blood supply of the transplanted kidney is anastomosed to the internal iliac 
vessels and the ureter to the bladder. The transplanted kidney replaces all functions of the failed kidney. 
Haemodialysis
Dialysate
Haemofiltration
Ultrafiltrate
Replacement
fluid
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal cavity
Transplantation
External iliac artery
Peritoneal membrane
PD fluid
Catheter
Transplanted
kidney
External iliac vein
Donor artery
Donor vein
Donor ureter
Bladder
Blood from patient
Blood to patient
Blood to patient
Blood from patient
A
B
C
D
Renal replacement therapy
17
491
under the skin to reduce infection risk. All patients must 
be screened in advance for hepatitis B, hepatitis C and 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and vaccinated 
against hepatitis B if they are not immune. All dialysis 
units should have segregation facilities for hepatitis 
B-positive patients, given its easy transmissibility. 
Patients with hepatitis C and HIV are less infectious and 
can be treated satisfactorily using machine segregation 
and standard infection control measures.
Haemodialysis is usually carried out for 3–5 hours 
three times weekly, either at home or in an outpatient 
dialysis unit. The intensity and frequency of dialysis 
should be adjusted to achieve a reduction in urea during 
dialysis (urea reduction ratio) of over 65%. Most patients 
notice an improvement in symptoms during the first 
6 weeks of treatment. Plasma urea and creatinine are 
lowered by each treatment but do not return to normal. 
The intensity of dialysis can be increased by escalating 
the number of standard sessions to four or more per 
week; by performing short, frequent dialysis sessions of 
2–3 hours 5–7 times per week; or by performing noctur­
nal haemodialysis, when low blood-pump speeds and 
single-needle dialysis are used for approximately 
8 hours overnight 5–6 times per week.
More frequent dialysis and nocturnal dialysis can 
achieve better fluid balance and electrolyte control than 
standard dialysis and, in particular, better control of 
serum phosphate levels. Studies are currently in progress 
to determine whether these different modes of dialysis 
improve clinical outcome. Box 17.32 summarises some 
of the problems related to haemodialysis.
Haemofiltration
This technique is principally used in the treatment of 
AKI. Water and solutes are filtered from blood across 
a porous semipermeable membrane under a pressure 
gradient. Replacement fluid of a suitable electrolyte 
composition is added to the blood after it exits from the 
haemofilter. If removal of fluid is required, then less 
• Quality of life: age itself is not a barrier to good quality of 
life on RRT.
• Coexisting cardiovascular disease: older people are more 
sensitive to fluid balance changes, predisposing to 
hypotension during dialysis with rebound hypertension 
between dialyses. A failing heart cannot cope with fluid 
overload, and pulmonary oedema develops easily.
• Provision of treatment: often only hospital-provided 
haemodialysis is suitable and older patients require more 
medical and nursing time.
• Survival on dialysis: difficult to predict for an individual 
patient, but old age plus substantial comorbidity are 
associated with poor median survival.
• Withdrawal from dialysis: a common cause of death in 
older patients with comorbid disease.
• Transplantation: relative risks of surgery and 
immunosuppression, and limited organ availability exclude 
most older people from transplantation.
• Conservative therapy: without dialysis but with adequate 
support; is an appropriate option for patients at high risk of 
complications from dialysis, who have a limited prognosis 
and little hope of functional recovery.
17.31  Renal replacement therapy in old age
Haemodialysis in AKI
Haemodialysis offers the best rate of small solute clear­
ance in AKI, as compared with other techniques such as 
haemofiltration, but should be started gradually because 
of the risk of confusion and convulsions due to cerebral 
oedema (dialysis disequilibrium). Typically, 1–2 hours 
of dialysis is prescribed initially but, subsequently, 
patients with AKI who are haemodynamically stable can 
be treated by 4–5 hours of haemodialysis on alternate 
days, or 2–3 hours every day. During dialysis, it is stand­
ard practice to anticoagulate patients with heparin but 
the dose may be reduced if there is a bleeding risk. Epo­
prostenol can be used as an alternative but carries a risk 
of hypotension. For short dialyses and in patients with 
abnormal clotting, it may be possible to avoid anticoagu­
lation altogether. In AKI, dialysis is performed through 
a large-bore, dual-lumen catheter inserted into the 
femoral or internal jugular vein. Subclavian lines are 
avoided where possible, as thromboses or stenoses here 
will compromise the ability to form a functioning fistula 
in the arm if the patient fails to recover renal function 
and needs chronic dialysis.
Haemodialysis in CKD
In CKD, vascular access for haemodialysis is gained by 
formation of an arteriovenous fistula, usually in the 
forearm, up to a year before dialysis is contemplated. 
After 4–6 weeks, increased pressure transmitted from 
the artery to the vein leading from the fistula causes 
distension and thickening of the vessel wall (arterialisa­
tion). Large-bore needles can then be inserted into the 
vein to provide access for each haemodialysis treatment. 
Figure 17.16 shows a patient undergoing haemodialysis 
through such a fistula. Preservation of arm veins is thus 
very important in patients with progressive renal disease 
who may require haemodialysis in the future. If this 
access is not possible, venous or Gortex grafts may be 
fashioned or plastic catheters in central veins can be 
used for short-term access. These may be tunnelled 
Fig. 17.16  Haemodialysis. A patient receiving haemodialysis through a 
forearm subcutaneous (Brescia–Cimino) fistula. She subsequently received 
a live related transplant. 
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
492
Problem
Clinical features
Cause
Treatment
Hypotension during 
dialysis
Sudden ↓BP; often leg cramps; 
sometimes chest pain
Fluid removal and hypovolaemia
Saline infusion; exclude cardiac 
ischaemia; quinine may help cramp
Cardiac arrhythmias
Hypotension, sometimes chest 
pain
Potassium and acid–base shifts
Check K+ and arterial blood gases; 
review dialysis prescription; stop 
dialysis
Haemorrhage
Blood loss (overt or occult); 
hypotension
Anticoagulation
Venous needle disconnection
Stop dialysis; seek source; consider 
heparin-free treatment
Air embolism
Circulatory collapse; cardiac 
arrest
Disconnected or faulty lines and 
equipment malfunction
Stop dialysis
Dialyser hypersensitivity
Acute circulatory collapse
Allergic reaction to dialysis 
membrane or sterilisant
Stop dialysis; change to different 
artificial kidney
Between treatments
Pulmonary oedema
Breathlessness
Fluid overload
Ultrafiltration ± dialysis
Systemic sepsis
Rigors; fever; ↓BP
Usually involves vascular access 
devices (catheter or fistula)
Blood cultures; antibiotics
17.32  Problems with haemodialysis
fluid is added back than is removed (Fig. 17.15B). 
Haemofiltration may be either intermittent or continu­
ous, and typically 1–2 litres of filtrate is replaced per 
hour (equivalent to a GFR of 15–30 mL/min); higher 
rates of filtration may be of benefit in patients with sepsis 
and multi-organ failure. In continuous arteriovenous 
haemofiltration (CAVH), the extracorporeal blood circuit 
is driven by the arteriovenous pressure difference, but 
poor filtration rates and clotting of the filter are common 
and this treatment has fallen out of favour. Continuous 
venovenous haemofiltration (CVVH) is pump-driven, 
providing a reliable extracorporeal circulation. Issues 
concerning anticoagulation are similar to those for 
haemodialysis, but may be more problematic because 
longer or continuous anticoagulation is necessary.
Haemodiafiltration
This technique combines haemodialysis with approxi­
mately 20–30 litres of ultrafiltration (with replacement 
of filtrate) over a 3–5-hour treatment. It uses a large-pore 
membrane and combines the improved middle-molecule 
clearance of haemofiltration with the higher small-solute 
clearance of haemodialysis. It is sometimes used in the 
treatment of AKI but is increasingly favoured in the 
treatment of CKD. It is more expensive than haemo­
dialysis, however, and the long-term benefits are not 
yet established.
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis is principally used in the treatment 
of CKD. It requires the insertion of a permanent Silastic 
catheter into the peritoneal cavity (Fig. 17.15C). Two 
types are in common use. In continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), about 2 litres of sterile, iso­
tonic dialysis fluid are introduced and left in place for 
approximately 4–6 hours. Metabolic waste products 
diffuse from peritoneal capillaries into the dialysis fluid 
down a concentration gradient. The fluid is then drained 
and fresh dialysis fluid introduced, in a continuous 
four-times-daily cycle. The inflow fluid is rendered 
hyperosmolar by the addition of glucose or glucose 
polymer; this results in net removal of fluid from the 
patient during each cycle, due to diffusion of water from 
the blood through the peritoneal membrane down an 
osmotic gradient (ultrafiltration). The patient is mobile 
and able to undertake normal daily activities. Auto­
mated peritoneal dialysis (APD) is similar to CAPD but 
uses a mechanical device to perform the fluid exchanges 
during the night, leaving the patient free, or with only a 
single exchange to perform, during the day.
CAPD is particularly useful in children, as a first 
treatment in adults with residual renal function, and as 
a treatment for elderly patients with cardiovascular 
instability. The long-term use of peritoneal dialysis may 
be limited by episodes of bacterial peritonitis and 
damage to the peritoneal membrane, including scleros­
ing peritonitis, but some patients have been treated suc­
cessfully for more than 10 years. Box 17.33 summarises 
some of the problems related to CAPD treatment.
Renal transplantation
Renal transplantation offers the best chance of long-term 
survival in ESRD, and is the most cost-effective treat­
ment. Transplantation can restore normal kidney func­
tion and correct all the metabolic abnormalities of CKD 
but requires long-term immunosuppression with its 
attendant risks (see below). All patients with ESRD 
should be considered for transplantation, unless there 
are contraindications (Box 17.34).
Kidney grafts may be taken from a cadaver in the UK 
after brain death (51%) or circulatory death (11%), or 
from a living donor (38%). As described on page 94, 
matching of a donor to a specific recipient is strongly 
influenced by immunological factors, since graft rejec­
tion is the major cause of transplant failure. Compatibil­
ity of ABO blood group between donor and recipient is 
usually required and the degree of matching for major 
histocompatibility (MHC) antigens, particularly HLA- 
DR, influences the incidence of rejection. Immediately 
prior to transplantation, tests should be performed for 
Renal replacement therapy
17
493
antibodies against HLA antigens and for antibodies that 
can bind to lymphocytes of the donor (p. 95). Positive 
tests predict early rejection. Although some ABO- and 
HLA-incompatible transplants are now possible, this 
involves appropriate preparation with pre-transplant 
plasma exchange and/or immunosuppression, so that 
recipient antibodies to the donor’s tissue are reduced to 
acceptably low levels. This option is generally only 
available for living donor transplants because of the 
preparation required. Paired exchanges, in which a 
donor–recipient pair which has compatibility issues, 
either blood group or HLA, is computer-matched with 
another pair to overcome the mismatch, are also used to 
help increase the number of successful transplants that 
can be performed.
During the transplant operation, the kidney is placed 
in the pelvis; the donor vessels are usually anastomosed 
to the recipient’s internal iliac artery and vein, and the 
donor ureter anastomosed to the bladder (Fig. 17.15D). 
The failed kidneys are usually left in place. Peri-operative 
problems include:
•	 Fluid balance. Careful matching of input to output is 
required. Patients can be very polyuric in the initial 
period after transplantation.
Problem
Clinical features
Cause
Treatment
Peritonitis
Cloudy drainage fluid; 
abdominal pain and 
systemic sepsis are 
variable
Usually entry of skin 
contaminants via catheter; bowel 
organisms less common
Culture of peritoneal dialysis fluid
Intraperitoneal antibiotics, tobramycin, 
vancomycin
Catheter removal sometimes required
Catheter exit site 
infection
Erythema and pus around 
exit site
Usually skin organisms
Antibiotics; sometimes surgical drainage
Ultrafiltration failure
Fluid overload
Damage to peritoneal membrane, 
leading to rapid transport of 
glucose and loss of osmotic 
gradient
Replace glucose with synthetic, poorly 
absorbed polymers for some exchanges 
(icodextrin)
Peritoneal membrane 
failure
Inadequate clearance of 
urea etc.
Scarring/damage to peritoneal 
membrane
Increase exchange volumes; consider 
automated peritoneal dialysis or switch to 
haemodialysis
Sclerosing peritonitis
Intermittent bowel 
obstruction
Malnutrition
Unknown; typically occurs after 
many years
Switch to haemodialysis (may still progress)
Surgery and tamoxifen may be used
17.33  Problems with continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
•	 Primary graft non-function. Causes include 
hypovolaemia, preservation injury/acute  
tubular necrosis during storage and transfer,  
other pre-existing renal damage, hyperacute 
rejection, vascular occlusion and urinary tract 
obstruction.
•	 Sepsis. In addition to risks of sepsis associated with 
any operation, there is an increased risk due to the 
uraemia and immunosuppression.
Once the graft begins to function, near-normal bio­
chemistry is usually achieved within days to weeks. The 
median eGFR of patients in the UK receiving a deceased 
donor transplant at 1 year is 51 mL/min/1.73 m2.
All transplant patients require regular life-long 
follow-up to monitor renal function and immunosup­
pression. Life-long immunosuppressive therapy (see 
Box 4.25, p. 96) is required to prevent rejection but needs 
to be more intensive in the early post-transplantation 
period, when the risk is highest. A common regimen is 
triple therapy with prednisolone; ciclosporin or tac­
rolimus; and azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil. 
Sirolimus (rapamycin) is an alternative that can be intro­
duced later. Antibodies to deplete or modulate specific 
lymphocyte populations are increasingly used; target­
ing the lymphocyte interleukin (IL)-2 receptor is partic­
ularly effective for preventing rejection. Acute rejection 
is usually treated, in the first instance, by short courses 
of high-dose corticosteroids, such as methylpred­
nisolone 500 mg IV on 3 consecutive days. Other thera­
pies, such as antilymphocyte antibodies, intravenous 
immunoglobulin and plasma exchange, can be used for 
episodes of acute rejection that do not respond to high-
dose corticosteroids.
Complications of immunosuppression include infec­
tions and malignancy (p. 95). Approximately 50% of 
white patients develop skin malignancy by 15 years after 
transplantation.
The prognosis after kidney transplantation is good. 
Recent UK statistics for transplants from cadaver donors 
indicate 96% patient survival and 93% graft survival at 
1 year, and 88% patient survival and 84% graft survival 
at 5 years. Even better figures are obtained with living 
donor transplantation (91% graft survival at 5 years). 
Absolute
• Active malignancy: a period of at least 2 yrs of complete 
remission recommended for most tumours
• Active vasculitis or recent anti-GBM disease
• Severe heart disease
• Severe occlusive aorto-iliac vascular disease
Relative
• Age: while practice varies, transplants are not routinely 
offered to very young children (< 1 yr) or older people 
(> 75 yrs)
• High risk of disease recurrence in the transplant kidney
• Disease of the lower urinary tract: in patients with impaired 
bladder function, an ileal conduit may be considered
• Significant comorbidity
17.34  Contraindications to renal transplantation
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
494
renal artery stenosis may occur as a complication of 
large-vessel vasculitis, such as Takayasu’s arteritis and 
polyarteritis nodosa (pp. 1116 and 1117). Untreated, 
atheromatous renal artery stenosis is thought to progress 
to complete arterial occlusion in about 15% of cases. This 
figure increases with more severe degrees of stenosis. 
If the progression is gradual, collateral vessels may 
develop and some function may be preserved, prevent­
ing infarction and loss of kidney structure. Conversely, 
at least 85% of patients with renal artery stenosis will 
not develop progressive renal impairment, and indeed, 
in many patients, the stenosis may be haemodynami­
cally insignificant and not responsible for coexisting 
essential hypertension. Unfortunately, methods of pre­
dicting which patients are at risk of progression or who 
will respond to treatment are still imperfect.
Clinical features
Renal artery stenosis can present in various ways 
(Box 17.35), including hypertension, renal failure (with 
bilateral disease), a deterioration in renal function when 
ACE inhibitors or ARBs are used, or acute pulmonary 
oedema. Although many patients experience a slight 
drop in GFR when commencing these drugs, an increase 
in serum creatinine of 25% or more raises the possibility 
of renal artery stenosis. Acute pulmonary oedema 
is particularly characteristic of bilateral renovascular 
disease. It is associated with severe hypertension, occur­
ring without other obvious cause in patients with normal 
or only mildly impaired renal function. Clinical evi­
dence of generalised vascular disease may be observed, 
particularly in the legs, in older patients with athero­
sclerotic renal artery stenosis. Clinical features associ­
ated with an increased risk of renal artery stenosis in 
hypertensive patients are summarised in Box 17.35. The 
presence of one or more of these features should prompt 
investigation for possible renal artery stenosis, as 
described below, provided that intervention is being 
contemplated to improve renal perfusion.
Investigations
When appropriate, imaging of the renal vasculature 
with either CT angiography or MR angiography should 
be performed to confirm the diagnosis (Fig. 17.17). Both 
give good views of the main renal arteries, the vessels 
predominantly involved and the most amenable to inter­
vention. Biochemical testing may reveal impaired renal 
function and an elevated plasma renin activity, some­
times with hypokalaemia due to hyperaldosteronism. 
Ultrasound may also reveal a discrepancy in size 
between the two kidneys. While these investigations 
Advances in immunosuppression have greatly improved 
results from using genetically unrelated donors, such as 
spouses.
RENAL VASCULAR DISEASES
Diseases which affect renal blood vessels may cause 
renal ischaemia, leading to acute or chronic kidney 
disease or secondary hypertension. The rising preva­
lence of atherosclerosis and diabetes mellitus in ageing 
populations has made renovascular disease an impor­
tant cause of ESRD.
Renal artery stenosis
Renal artery stenosis is a relatively uncommon disorder, 
which presents clinically with hypertension. It has been 
estimated to occur in about 2% of unselected patients 
with hypertension but may affect up to 4% of older 
patients with hypertension who have evidence of 
atherosclerotic disease elsewhere. Most cases of renal 
artery stenosis are caused by atherosclerosis but fibro­
muscular dysplasia involving the vessel wall may be 
responsible in younger patients. Rare causes include 
vasculitis, thromboembolism and aneurysms of the 
renal artery.
Pathophysiology
Renal artery stenosis results in a reduction in renal per­
fusion pressure, which activates the renin–angiotensin 
system, leading to increased circulating levels of angio­
tensin II. This provokes vasoconstriction and increases 
aldosterone production by the adrenal, causing sodium 
retention by the renal tubules. Significant reduction of 
renal blood flow occurs when there is greater than 70% 
narrowing of the artery, and this is commonly associated 
with a dilated region more distally (post-stenotic dilata­
tion). Atherosclerosis is the most common cause. The 
characteristic lesion is an ostial stenosis that is associated 
with atherosclerosis within the aorta and affects other 
major branches, particularly the iliac vessels. The picture 
is often complicated by small-vessel disease in affected 
kidneys, which may be related to subclinical athero­
emboli or other vascular disease. As the stenosis becomes 
more severe, global renal ischaemia leads to shrinkage 
of the affected kidney and may cause renal failure 
(ischaemic nephropathy). However, the progression of 
stenosis is not easily predictable, and many patients die 
from coronary, cerebral or other vascular disease rather 
than renal failure.
In younger patients, fibromuscular dysplasia is a 
more likely cause of renal artery stenosis. This is an 
uncommon disorder of unknown cause. It is character­
ised by hypertrophy of the media (medial fibroplasia), 
which narrows the artery but rarely leads to total occlu­
sion. It may be associated with disease in other arteries; 
for example, those who have carotid artery dissections 
are more likely to have renal arteries with this appear­
ance. It most commonly presents with hypertension in 
patients aged 15–30 years, and women are affected more 
frequently than men. Irregular narrowing (beading) 
may occur in the distal renal artery and this sometimes 
extends into the intrarenal branches of the vessel. Rarely, 
Renal artery stenosis is more likely if:
• hypertension is severe, of recent onset or difficult to control
• kidneys are asymmetrical in size
• flash pulmonary oedema occurs repeatedly*
• there is peripheral vascular disease of the lower limbs
• there is renal impairment*
• renal function has deteriorated on ACE inhibitors or 
angiotensin II receptor blockers
17.35  Presentation and clinical features of 
renal artery stenosis
*Particularly with bilateral disease.
Renal vascular diseases
17
495
occlusion, renal infarction, and atheroemboli (p. 496) 
from manipulations in a severely diseased aorta. Small-
vessel disease distal to the stenosis may preclude sub­
stantial functional recovery.
Acute renal infarction
This is an uncommon condition that occurs as the result 
of sudden occlusion of the renal arteries. The presenta­
tion is typically with loin pain of acute onset, usually in 
association with haematuria detected on dipstick testing 
or urine microscopy, but pain may be absent in some 
cases. Severe hypertension is common but not universal, 
presumably because some residual renal perfusion is 
required to generate renin release. Blood levels of lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) and CRP are commonly raised. 
The condition may be caused by local atherosclerosis 
(atheroembolic) or by thromboemboli from a distant 
source, where occlusion may occur in branch arteries 
distal to the main renal artery. This can cause multiple 
infarcts within the renal parenchyma of both kidneys, 
which may be visualised by CT scanning. If occlusion of 
the main renal arteries is bilateral or if there is occlusion 
of a single functioning kidney, the presentation is with 
AKI and the patient is typically anuric. Patients with 
bilateral occlusion usually have evidence of widespread 
vascular disease and may show evidence of aortic occlu­
sion, with absent femoral pulses and reduced lower 
limb perfusion. Management is largely supportive, and 
includes anticoagulation if a source of thromboembo­
lism is an identified source. It is sometimes possible to 
carry out stenting of an acutely blocked main renal 
artery to try to restore renal blood flow and kidney 
function.
Diseases of small intrarenal vessels
A number of conditions are associated with acute 
damage and occlusion of small blood vessels (arterioles 
and capillaries) in the kidney (Box 17.37). They are often 
found in conjunction with similar changes elsewhere in 
the body. A common feature of these syndromes is 
microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia, in which haemo­
lysis and red cell fragmentation arise as consequences of 
damage incurred to red blood cells during passage 
through the abnormal vessels.
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) is characterised 
by thrombotic microangiopathy that causes damage to 
provide supportive information, they are insufficiently 
sensitive or specific to be of value in diagnosis of reno­
vascular disease in hypertensive patients.
Management
The first-line management in patients with renal artery 
stenosis is medical therapy with antihypertensive 
drugs, supplemented, where appropriate, by statins 
and low-dose aspirin in those with atherosclerotic 
disease. Interventions to correct the vessel narrowing 
should be considered in young patients (age below 40) 
suspected of having renal artery stenosis; those in whom 
blood pressure cannot easily be controlled with anti­
hypertensive agents; those who have a history of ‘flash’ 
pulmonary oedema or accelerated phase (malignant) 
hypertension; and those in whom renal function is dete­
riorating. The most commonly used technique is angio­
plasty. The best results are obtained in non-atheromatous 
fibromuscular dysplasia, where correction of the steno­
sis has a high chance of success in improving blood 
pressure and protecting renal function. Angioplasty and 
stenting can sometimes be successful in atherosclerotic 
disease but randomised trials have produced no con­
vincing evidence for overall benefit in terms of renal 
function or blood pressure control (Box 17.36). The 
risks of angioplasty and stenting include renal artery 
Fig. 17.17  Renal artery stenosis. A magnetic resonance angiogram 
following injection of contrast. The abdominal aorta is severely irregular 
and atheromatous. The left renal artery is stenosed (arrow). 
‘The ASTRAL trial compared medical therapy to revascularisation 
in 806 patients with atherosclerotic renal disease and found 
substantial risks but no evidence of a worthwhile clinical benefit 
from revascularisation over 5 years of follow-up. Specifically, 
there was no statistical difference in blood pressure or rate of 
change of renal function between the groups, but serious 
complications associated with revascularisation occurred in  
23 patients, including 2 deaths and 3 amputations of toes or 
limbs.’
• ASTRAL Investigators. N Engl J Med 2009; 361:1953–1962.
17.36  Stenting for renal artery stenosis
• Thrombotic microangiopathy (haemolytic uraemic syndrome 
and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura)
Associated with verotoxin-producing E. coli
Other (familial, drugs, cancer)
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation
• Malignant hypertension
• Small-vessel vasculitis
• Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
• Atheroemboli (‘cholesterol’ emboli)
17.37  Microvascular disorders associated with 
acute renal damage
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
496
endothelial cells of the microcirculation. This is accom­
panied by swelling of the endothelial cells, increased 
platelet adherence and intravascular thrombosis. There 
is a marked reduction in the platelet count and anaemia, 
with features of intravascular haemolysis (p. 1026), 
such as a raised unconjugated bilirubin level, raised 
levels of LDH and decreased circulating levels of hap­
toglobin. A reticulocytosis is often seen. The kidney 
microcirculation tends to be most affected in HUS, with 
involvement of other organs (including the brain) in 
more severe cases. The most common cause of classical 
HUS is infection associated with organisms that produce 
enterotoxins called verotoxins: so-called diarrhoea-
positive HUS (D+HUS). In about 10% of cases, however, 
no infective cause can be identified and this is termed 
atypical HUS.
The organisms most commonly implicated in D+HUS 
are enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (p. 342). The 
O157:H7 serotype is the best known but other sero­
types that produce verotoxins can also be responsible. 
Although these bacteria live as commensals in the gut of 
cattle and other domestic livestock, they can cause 
haemorrhagic diarrhoea in humans when the infection 
is contracted from contaminated food products, water 
or other infected individuals. In a proportion of cases, 
verotoxin produced by the organisms enters the circula­
tion and binds to specific glycolipid receptors that are 
expressed on the surface of microvascular endothelial 
cells. In developed countries, D+HUS is now the most 
common cause of AKI in children. Recovery is good in 
most patients but sometimes RRT may be required for 
up to 14 days. No other specific treatments have been 
shown to help the renal lesion.
Atypical HUS is subclassified into familial and spo­
radic subtypes but both are associated with abnormali­
ties of the complement system. Up to 70% of sporadic 
cases are associated with the development of autoanti­
bodies to complement factor H, whereas the inherited 
forms are due to mutations in various genes that encode 
components of the complement cascade, including factor 
H (CFH), factor B (CFB) and complement component 3 
(C3). The penetrance of familial HUS is incomplete, indi­
cating that environmental triggers are also involved, but 
the nature of these triggers is poorly understood. Man­
agement of atypical HUS involves supportive care, opti­
mising fluid and electrolyte balance, transfusion and 
RRT if necessary. Infusion of fresh frozen plasma can be 
helpful (presumably by replacing complement compo­
nents), as can plasma exchange (presumably by remov­
ing pathogenic autoantibodies). Recently, impressive 
results have been reported with the anti-C5 monoclonal 
antibody, eculizumab, which binds to C5, thereby pre­
venting activation of the terminal complement cascade.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
Like HUS, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) 
is characterised by thrombotic microangiopathy, which 
causes damage to endothelial cells of the microcircula­
tion. This leads to swelling of the endothelial cells, 
increased platelet adherence and intravascular thrombo­
sis. In contradistinction to HUS, the brain is more com­
monly affected in TTP and involvement of the kidney is 
usually less prominent. TTP is an autoimmune disorder 
caused by antibodies against ADAMTS-13, which is 
involved in regulating platelet aggregation. More details 
are provided on page 1056.
Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
This may occur as a complication of a range of illnesses 
and can be accompanied by multi-organ failure and 
renal failure. Pathogenesis and management are dis­
cussed in more detail on pages 201 and 1055.
Systemic sclerosis
Renal involvement is a serious complication of systemic 
sclerosis, which is more likely to occur in diffuse cutane­
ous systemic sclerosis (DCSS) than in limited cutaneous 
systemic sclerosis (LCSS). The renal lesion is caused by 
intimal cell proliferation and luminal narrowing of intra­
renal arteries and arterioles. There is intense intrarenal 
vasospasm and plasma renin activity is markedly ele­
vated. Renal involvement usually presents clinically 
with severe hypertension, microangiopathic features 
and progressive oliguric renal failure (scleroderma renal 
crisis). Use of ACE inhibitors to control the hypertension 
has improved the 1-year survival from 20% to 75% but 
about 50% of patients continue to require RRT. Onset or 
acceleration of the syndrome after stopping ACE inhibi­
tors is now well described.
Cholesterol emboli
These present with renal impairment, haematuria, pro­
teinuria and sometimes eosinophilia with inflammatory 
features that can mimic a small-vessel vasculitis. The 
symptoms are provoked by showers of cholesterol-
containing 
microemboli, 
arising 
in 
atheromatous 
plaques in major arteries. The diagnosis should be sus­
pected when these clinical features occur in patients 
with widespread atheromatous disease, who have 
undergone interventions such as surgery or arteriogra­
phy. It may also be precipitated by anticoagulants and 
thrombolytic agents. On clinical examination, signs of 
large-vessel disease and microvascular occlusion in the 
lower limbs (ischaemic toes, livedo reticularis) are 
common but not invariable (Fig. 17.18). There is no spe­
cific treatment.
Fig. 17.18  The foot of a patient who suffered extensive 
atheroembolism following coronary artery stenting. 
Small-vessel vasculitis
Renal disease caused by small-vessel vasculitis usually 
affects the glomeruli, as described in the next section and 
on page 519.
Glomerular diseases
17
497
Accelerated phase hypertension
Accelerated phase hypertension (p. 609) is deemed to 
exist when it is associated with acute damage to renal 
and other arterioles. It is often symptomatic, with head­
ache, impaired vision and renal impairment (Fig. 17.19). 
Physical examination reveals severe hypertension with 
evidence of hypertensive retinopathy. Papilloedema is 
almost always present. Clinical features of microangio­
pathy, such as fragmented red cells and anaemia, may 
be present and, in the absence of a previous history, it 
may be difficult to distinguish patients with accelerated 
phase hypertension from those with HUS and hyperten­
sion. Most patients respond to effective control of blood 
pressure, although renal function is permanently lost in 
20% of cases.
Fig. 17.19  Glomerular capillary thrombosis in malignant 
hypertension. Similar changes occur in thrombotic microangiopathy. 
The adjacent arteriole (arrow) shows gross intimal thickening. From Beutler 
and Koomans 1977 – see p. 523.
Fig. 17.20  Cells of the glomerulus and targets of immunity and 
autoimmunity. Antibodies and antigen–antibody (immune) complexes are 
described according to their site of deposition: subepithelial, between 
podocyte and GBM; intramembranous, within the GBM; subendothelial, 
between endothelial cell and GBM; and mesangial, within the mesangial 
matrix. (GBM = glomerular basement membrane; SLE = systemic lupus 
erythematosus) 
Endothelium
?Small-vessel vasculitis
GBM
Goodpasture's disease
Podocyte
Membranous
nephropathy
Planted
antigens
?SLE
?Infections
Circulating immune
complexes
Cryoglobulinaemia
Serum sickness
?Endocarditis
Mesangial cell
Fig. 17.21  Spectrum of glomerular diseases. At one extreme, specific injury to podocytes or structural alteration of the glomerulus affecting 
podocyte function (for example, by scarring or deposition of excess matrix or other material) causes proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome (see Box 17.11,  
p. 475). The histology to the left shows diabetic nephropathy. At the other end of the spectrum, inflammation leads to cell damage and proliferation,  
breaks form in the GBM and blood leaks into urine. In its extreme form, with acute sodium retention and hypertension, such disease is labelled nephritic 
syndrome. The histology to the right shows a glomerulus with many extra nuclei from proliferating intrinsic cells, and influx of inflammatory cells shows 
crescent formation (arrows) in response to severe post-infectious glomerulonephritis. (FSGS = focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis; MCGN = 
mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis) 
Nephrotic
Mechanism
• Injury to podocytes
• Changed architecture
 
Scarring
 
Deposition of matrix
 
or other elements
Nephritic
Mechanism
• Inflammation
• Reactive cell
   proliferation
• Breaks in GBM
• Crescent formation
Haematuria
Proteinuria
SLE
IgA nephropathy
Minimal
change
nephropathy
Diabetic
nephropathy
MCGN
Anti-GBM
disease
FSGS
Membranous
nephropathy
Amyloid
Small-
vessel
vasculitis
Post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis
GLOMERULAR DISEASES
Glomerular diseases account for a significant proportion 
of acute and chronic kidney disease. There are many 
causes of glomerular damage, including immunological 
injury, inherited diseases such as Alport’s syndrome 
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
498
• Leakage of cells and macromolecules across the glomerular 
filtration barrier
Proteinuria: characteristic of diseases that affect the 
podocyte, scarring and deposition of foreign material
Haematuria: characteristic of inflammatory and destructive 
processes
• Impaired renal function and reduced GFR
• Hypertension
17.38  Clinical and laboratory features of 
glomerular injury
Fig. 17.22  Histopathology of glomerular disease. ( A – E light microscopy) A A normal glomerulus. Note the open capillary loops and 
thinness of their walls – ‘should look as if you could cut yourself on them’.  B Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (GS). The portion of the glomerulus 
arrowed shows loss of capillary loops and cells, which are replaced by matrix.  C Focal necrotising glomerulonephritis (GN). A portion of the glomerulus 
(N = focal necrotising lesion) is replaced by bright pink material with some ‘nuclear dust’. Neutrophils may be seen elsewhere in the glomerulus. There is 
surrounding interstitial inflammation (I). This is most commonly associated with small-vessel vasculitis and may progress to crescentic nephritis (see  E ).
 D Membranous glomerulonephritis. The capillary loops (C) are thickened (compare with the normal glomerulus) and there is expansion of the mesangial 
regions by matrix deposition (M). However, there is no gross cellular proliferation or excess of inflammatory cells. E Crescentic glomerulonephritis. The 
lower part of Bowman’s space is occupied by a semicircular formation (‘crescent’, Cr) of large pale cells, compressing the glomerular tuft. This is seen in 
aggressive inflammatory glomerulonephritis. Antibody deposition in the glomerulus. ( F – H direct immunofluorescence) F Granular deposits of 
IgG along the basement membrane in a subepithelial pattern, typical of membranous GN.  G Immunoglobulin A (IgA) deposits in the mesangium, as seen 
in IgA nephropathy.  H Ribbon-like linear deposits of anti-GBM antibodies along the glomerular basement membrane in Goodpasture’s disease. The 
glomerular structure is well preserved in all of these examples. 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Normal glomerulus
Focal segmental GS
Membranous GN
Focal necrotising GN
Crescentic GN
Membranous GN
IgA nephropathy
Anti-GBM disease
C
N
I
Cr
M
(p. 502), metabolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus 
(p. 830), and deposition of abnormal proteins such as 
amyloid in the glomeruli. The cell types of the glomeru­
lus that may be the target of injury are shown in Figure 
17.20. The response of the glomerulus to injury and 
hence the predominant clinical features vary according 
to the nature of the insult (Fig. 17.21). Clinical and labo­
ratory features common to many glomerular diseases 
are shown in Box 17.38. Most patients with glomerular 
disease do not present acutely and are asymptomatic 
until abnormalities are detected on routine screening of 
blood or urine samples.
Glomerulonephritis
Glomerulonephritis literally means ‘inflammation of 
glomeruli’. The term is used to describe all types of 
glomerular disease, even though some of these (such as 
minimal change nephropathy) are not associated with 
inflammation.
Most types of glomerulonephritis are immunologi­
cally mediated and several respond to immunosuppres­
sive drugs. Deposition of antibody occurs in many 
types of glomerulonephritis (Box 17.39) but, frequently, 
the presumed mechanisms involve cellular immunity, 
which is more difficult to investigate. Although deposi­
tion of circulating immune complexes was previously 
thought to be a common mechanism, it now seems that 
most granular deposits of immunoglobulin are formed 
‘in situ’ by antibodies which complex with glomerular 
antigens, or with other extraneous antigens derived 
from viruses and bacteria that have become deposited 
in the glomeruli (see Fig. 17.20).
Glomerulonephritis is generally classified in terms of 
the histopathological appearances, as summarised in 
Box 17.39 and Figure 17.22. The most common subtypes 
are discussed in more detail below.
Minimal change nephropathy
Minimal change disease occurs at all ages but accounts 
for nephrotic syndrome (see Box 17.11, p. 475) in most 
children and about one-quarter of adults. It is caused by 
reversible dysfunction of podocytes. The presentation is 
with proteinuria or nephrotic syndrome, which typically 
remits with high-dose corticosteroid therapy (1 mg/kg 
prednisolone for 6 weeks). Some patients who respond 
incompletely or relapse frequently need maintenance 
Glomerular diseases
17
499
Histology
Immune deposits
Pathogenesis
Associations
Comments
Minimal change
Normal, except on 
electron microscopy, 
where fusion of 
podocyte foot 
processes is seen (a 
non-specific finding)
None
Unknown
Atopy
HLA-DR7
Drugs
Acute and often severe 
nephrotic syndrome
Good response to 
corticosteroids
Dominant cause of idiopathic 
nephrotic syndrome in 
childhood
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS)
Segmental scars in 
some glomeruli
No acute inflammation
Podocyte foot process 
fusion seen in primary 
FSGS with nephrotic 
syndrome
Non-specific 
trapping in focal 
scars
Unknown; in some, 
circulating factors increase 
glomerular permeability
Injury to podocytes may be 
a common feature
Healing of previous 
local glomerular injury
HIV infection
Heroin misuse
Morbid obesity
Primary FSGS presents as 
idiopathic nephrotic 
syndrome but is less 
responsive to treatment than 
minimal change; may 
progress to renal impairment, 
can recur after 
transplantation
Secondary FSGS presents 
with variable proteinuria and 
outcome
Focal segmental glomerulonephritis
Segmental 
inflammation and/or 
necrosis in some 
glomeruli ± crescent 
formation
Variable according 
to cause, but 
typically negative 
(or ‘pauci-immune’)
Small-vessel vasculitis
Primary or secondary 
small-vessel vasculitis
Often occurs in systemic 
disease. Responds to 
treatment with corticosteroids 
and immunosuppressants
Check ANCA, ANA
Membranous glomerulonephritis
Thickening of GBM
Progressing to 
increased matrix 
deposition and 
glomerulosclerosis
Granular 
subepithelial IgG
Antibodies to a podocyte 
surface antigen, with 
complement-dependent 
podocyte injury
HLA-DR3 (for idiopathic)
Drugs
Mercury, heavy metals
Hepatitis B virus
Malignancy
Usually idiopathic; common 
cause of adult idiopathic 
nephrotic syndrome
One-third progress;  
may respond to 
corticosteroids and  
immunosuppressants
IgA nephropathy
Increased mesangial 
matrix and cells
Focal segmental 
nephritis in acute 
disease
Mesangial IgA
Unknown
Usually idiopathic
Liver disease
Common disease with a 
range of presentations, 
usually including haematuria 
and hypertension
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
Immunoglobulin type
Immunoglobulins
Deposition of circulating 
immune complexes or 
‘planted’ antigens
Infections,
autoimmunity, or
monoclonal 
immunoglobulin-related
Most common pattern found 
in association with subacute 
bacterial infection, but also 
with Cryoglobulinaemia ± 
hepatitis C virus, and others
Complement type
Complement 
components
Complement abnormalities, 
inherited or acquired. 
Dense deposit disease is 
associated with abnormal 
activation of the alternative 
complement pathway
Complement gene 
mutations
C3 nephritic factor and 
partial lipodystrophy
In dense deposit disease, 
intramembranous deposits
No proven treatments
Post-infection
Diffuse proliferation of 
endothelial and 
mesangial cells
Infiltration by 
neutrophils and 
macrophages ± 
crescent formation
Subendothelial
Immune response to 
streptococcal infection with 
presumed cross-reactive 
epitopes
Streptococcal and other 
infections
Now rare in developed 
countries
Presents with severe sodium 
and fluid retention, 
hypertension, haematuria, 
oliguria
Usually resolves 
spontaneously
17.39  Glomerulonephritis: types, associations and causes
Continued
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
500
Histology
Immune deposits
Pathogenesis
Associations
Comments
Goodpasture’s disease
Usually crescentic 
nephritis
Linear IgG along
GBM
Autoantibodies to α3 chain 
of type IV collagen in the 
GBM
HLA-DR15 (previously 
known as DR2)
Associated with lung 
haemorrhage but either may 
occur alone
Treat with corticosteroids, 
cyclophosphamide and 
plasma exchange
Lupus nephritis
Almost any 
histological type
Always positive and 
often profuse
Pattern varies 
according to type
Some anti-DNA antibodies 
also bind to glomerular 
targets
Complement 
deficiencies
Complement 
consumption
Variable presentation, 
sometimes as renal disease 
alone without systemic 
features
Responds to cytotoxic 
therapy in addition to 
prednisolone
(ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; ANA = antinuclear antibody; HLA = human leucocyte antigen)
17.39  Glomerulonephritis: types, associations and causes – cont’d
corticosteroids, cytotoxic therapy or other agents. 
Minimal change disease does not progress to CKD but 
can present with problems related to the nephrotic syn­
drome and complications of treatment.
Focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis
Primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) 
(Fig. 17.22B) can occur in all age groups. In some 
patients, FSGS can have specific causes, such as HIV 
infection, podocyte toxins and massive obesity, but in 
most cases the underlying cause is unknown (primary 
FSGS). Patients with primary FSGS present with massive 
proteinuria and idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Histo­
logical analysis shows sclerosis affecting segments of the 
glomeruli, which may also show positive staining for 
deposits of C3 and IgM on immunofluorescence. Since 
FSGS is a focal process, abnormal glomeruli may not be 
seen on renal biopsy if only a few are sampled, leading 
to an initial diagnosis of minimal change nephropathy. 
Juxtamedullary glomeruli are more likely to be affected 
in early disease. Although nephrotic syndrome is 
typical, some patients present with the histological fea­
tures of FSGS but less proteinuria. In these patients, the 
focal scarring may reflect healing of previous focal 
glomerular injury, such as HUS, cholesterol embolism 
or vasculitis. These examples of secondary FSGS have 
different course and treatments.
Primary FSGS can respond to high-dose corticoster­
oid therapy (0.5–2.0 mg/kg/day) but most patients 
show little or no response. Immunosuppressive drugs, 
such as ciclosporin, cyclophosphamide and mycopheno­
late mofetil, have also been used but their efficacy is 
uncertain. Progression to CKD is common in patients 
who do not respond to steroids and the disease fre­
quently recurs after renal transplantation, with an 
almost immediate return of proteinuria following trans­
plant in some cases.
Membranous glomerulonephritis
Membranous glomerulonephritis, also known as mem­
branous nephropathy, is the most common cause of 
nephrotic syndrome in adults. It is caused by antibodies 
(usually autoantibodies) directed at antigen(s) expressed 
on the surface of podocytes. Recent studies suggest that 
one such antigen is the M-type phospholipase A2 recep­
tor 1. A proportion of cases are associated with other 
causes, such as heavy metal poisoning, drugs, infections 
and tumours (see Box 17.39 and Fig. 17.22D and F) 
but most are idiopathic. Approximately one-third of 
patients with idiopathic membranous glomerulonephri­
tis undergo spontaneous remission; one-third remain in 
a nephrotic state, and one-third go on to develop CKD. 
Short-term treatment with high doses of corticosteroids 
and cyclophosphamide may improve both the nephrotic 
syndrome and the long-term prognosis. However, 
because of the toxicity of these regimens, many neph­
rologists reserve such treatment for those with severe 
nephrotic syndrome or deteriorating renal function.
IgA nephropathy
This is one of the most common types of glomerulo­
nephritis and can present in many ways (Fig. 17.22G). 
Haematuria is the earliest sign and is almost universal, 
and hypertension is also very common. Proteinuria can 
also occur but is usually a later feature. In many cases, 
there is slowly progressive loss of renal function leading 
to ESRD. Clinical presentations are protean and vary 
with age. A particular hallmark of IgA nephropathy in 
young adults is the occurrence of acute self-limiting 
exacerbations, often with gross haematuria, in associa­
tion with minor respiratory infections. This may be so 
acute as to resemble acute post-infectious glomerulo­
nephritis, with fluid retention, hypertension and olig­
uria with dark or red urine. Characteristically, the 
latency from clinical infection to nephritis is short: a few 
days or less. Asymptomatic presentations dominate in 
older adults, with haematuria, hypertension and loss of 
GFR. Occasionally, IgA nephropathy progresses rapidly 
and crescent formation may be seen. The response to 
immunosuppressive therapy is usually poor. The man­
agement of less acute disease is largely directed towards 
the control of blood pressure in an attempt to prevent or 
retard progressive renal disease. There is some evidence 
Glomerular diseases
17
501
for additional benefit from several months of high-dose 
corticosteroid treatment in high-risk disease, but no 
strong evidence for other immunosuppressive agents. 
Other therapies are under investigation.
Henoch–Schönlein purpura
This condition most commonly occurs in children but 
can also be observed in adults. It is characterised by a 
systemic vasculitis that often arises in response to an 
infectious trigger. The presentation is with a character­
istic petechial rash typically affecting buttocks and lower 
legs, and abdominal pain due to the occurrence of 
vasculitis involving the gastrointestinal tract. The pres­
ence of glomerulonephritis is usually indicated by the 
occurrence of haematuria. When Henoch–Schönlein 
purpura occurs in older children or adults, the glomerulo­
nephritis is usually more prominent and less likely 
to resolve completely. Renal biopsy shows mesangial 
IgA deposition and appearances that are indistinguish­
able from acute IgA nephropathy. Treatment is support­
ive in nature; in most patients, the prognosis is good, 
with spontaneous resolution, but some, particularly 
adults, progress to develop ESRD.
Mesangiocapillary 
glomerulonephritis
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis (MCGN), also 
known as membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 
(MPGN), is characterised by an increase in mesangial 
cellularity with thickening of glomerular capillary walls 
and subendothelial deposition of immune complexes 
and/or components of the complement pathway. The 
typical presentation is with proteinuria and haematuria. 
Several underlying causes have been identified, as sum­
marised in Box 17.39. It can be classified into two main 
subtypes. The first is characterised by deposition of 
immunoglobulins within the glomeruli. This subtype is 
associated with chronic infections, autoimmune diseases 
and monoclonal gammopathy. The second is character­
ised by deposition of complement in the glomeruli and 
is associated with inherited or acquired abnormalities in 
the complement pathway. Within this category is 
so-called ‘dense deposit disease’, which is typified by 
deposition of electron-dense deposits within the GBM. 
A third subtype is recognised, in which neither immuno­
globulins nor complement are deposited in the glo­
meruli. This is associated with healing following 
thrombotic microangiopathies, such as HUS and TTP.
Treatment of MCGN associated with immunoglobu­
lin deposits consists of identifying and treating the 
underlying disease, if possible, and the use of immuno­
suppressive drugs such as mycophenolate mofetil or 
cyclophosphamide. There is no specific treatment for 
MCGN associated with deposition of complement in the 
glomeruli or for dense deposit disease.
Infection-related 
glomerulonephritis
Glomerulonephritis may occur in connection with 
infections of various types, including subacute bacterial 
endocarditis. The most common histological pattern in 
bacterial infection is mesangiocapillary glomerulo­
nephritis, often associated with extensive immunoglob­
ulin deposition in the glomeruli with evidence of 
complement consumption (low serum C3, Box 17.40). 
In the developed world, hospital-acquired infections 
with various organisms are a common cause of these 
syndromes.
Worldwide, glomerulonephritis more commonly 
follows hepatitis B, hepatitis C, schistosomiasis, leishma­
niasis, malaria and other chronic infections. Infection 
with HIV may be associated with FSGS (see above), par­
ticularly in people of African descent.
Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis
This is a specific subtype of post-infectious glomerulo­
nephritis. It is much more common in children than 
adults but is now rare in the developed world. The 
latency is usually about 10 days after a throat infection 
or longer after skin infection, suggesting an immune 
mechanism rather than direct infection. An acute nephri­
tis of varying severity occurs. Sodium retention, hyper­
tension and oedema are particularly pronounced. There 
is also reduction of GFR, proteinuria, haematuria and 
reduced urine volume. Characteristically, this gives the 
urine a red or smoky appearance. As in other causes of 
post-infectious glomerulonephritis, serum concentra­
tions of C3 and C4 are typically reduced, reflecting com­
plement consumption (see Box 17.40), and evidence of 
streptococcal infection may be found. Renal function 
begins to improve spontaneously within 10–14 days, 
and management by fluid and sodium restriction with 
diuretic and hypotensive agents is usually adequate. 
Remarkably, the renal lesion in almost all children and 
many adults seems to resolve com­pletely, despite the 
severity of the glomerular inflamma­tion and prolifera­
tion seen histologically.
Rapidly progressive 
glomerulonephritis
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (also known 
as crescentic glomerulonephritis) is characterised by 
rapid loss of renal function over days to weeks. Renal 
biopsy shows crescentic lesions, often associated with 
necrotising lesions within the glomerulus, termed focal 
segmental (necrotising) glomerulonephritis. It is typi­
cally seen in Goodpasture’s disease, where the under­
lying cause is the development of antibodies to the 
glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM antibod­
ies), and in small-vessel vasculitides (pp. 519 and 
1115). It can also be observed in SLE (pp. 520 and 1109) 
and occasionally IgA and other nephropathies. Rapid-
onset disease may be associated with relatively little 
proteinuria (see Fig. 17.21). Management depends on 
the underlying cause but immunosuppressive drugs 
are often required. Patients with anti-GBM disease 
should be treated with plasma exchange combined 
with corticosteroids and immunosuppressants. Patients 
• Post-infection glomerulonephritis
• Subacute bacterial infection: especially endocarditis
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Cryoglobulinaemia
• Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis, usually complement 
type
17.40  Causes of glomerulonephritis associated 
with low serum complement
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
502
TUBULO-INTERSTITIAL DISEASES
These diseases primarily affect the renal tubules and 
interstitial components of the renal parenchyma. They 
are characterised by tubular dysfunction with electrolyte 
abnormalities, moderate levels of proteinuria and 
varying degrees of renal impairment. Acute tubular 
necrosis falls into this category but this is described 
separately on page 479, since it usually presents 
with AKI.
Acute interstitial nephritis
Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) is characterised by 
acute inflammation affecting the tubulo-interstitium of 
the kidney. It is commonly drug-induced but can be 
caused by other factors, such as renal toxins, and can 
complicate a variety of systemic diseases and infections 
(Box 17.41).
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is typically with renal impair­
ment but, in some patients with drug-induced acute 
interstitial nephritis, there may be signs of a generalised 
drug hypersensitivity reaction with fever, rash and 
eosinophilia. Proteinuria is generally modest (PCR 
< 100 mg/mmol) and tubular in type (p. 476). The urine 
may contain red and white blood cells but is sterile on 
with renal involvement secondary to ANCA-associated 
vasculitis and SLE should also be treated with cortico­
steroids and immunosuppressants, as described on 
pages 1118 and 1112.
Inherited glomerular diseases
AIport’s syndrome
A number of uncommon diseases may involve the 
glomerulus in childhood, but the most important one 
affecting adults is Alport’s syndrome. Most cases arise 
from a mutation or deletion of the COL4A5 gene on the 
X chromosome, which encodes type IV collagen, result­
ing in inheritance as an X-linked recessive disorder 
(p. 53). Mutations in COL4A3 or COL4A4 genes are 
less common and cause autosomal recessive disease. 
The accumulation of abnormal collagen results in a 
progressive degeneration of the GBM (Fig. 17.23). 
Affected patients progress from haematuria to ESRD in 
their late teens or twenties. Female carriers of COL4A5 
mutations usually have haematuria but less commonly 
develop significant renal disease. Some other basement 
membranes containing the same collagen isoforms are 
similarly involved, notably in the cochlea, so that 
Alport’s syndrome is associated with sensorineural 
deafness and ocular abnormalities.
ACE inhibitors may slow but not prevent loss of 
kidney function. Patients with Alport’s syndrome are 
good candidates for RRT, as they are young and usually 
otherwise healthy. They can develop an immune 
response to the normal collagen antigens present in the 
GBM of the donor kidney and, in a small minority, anti-
GBM disease develops and destroys the allograft.
Thin glomerular basement 
membrane disease
In thin glomerular basement membrane disease there is 
glomerular bleeding, usually only at the microscopic or 
dipstick level, without associated hypertension, pro­
teinuria or a reduction in GFR. The glomeruli appear 
normal by light microscopy but, on electron microscopy, 
the GBM is abnormally thin. The condition may be 
familial and some patients are carriers of Alport muta­
tions. This does not appear to account for all cases, and 
in many patients the cause is unclear. Monitoring of 
these patients is advisable, as proteinuria may develop 
in some and there seems to be an increased rate of pro­
gressive CKD in the long term.
Fig. 17.23  Alport’s syndrome.  A Diagrammatic structure of the normal GBM.  B The normal GBM (electron micrograph) contains mostly the 
tissue-specific (α3, α4 and α5) chains of type IV collagen.  C In Alport’s syndrome, this network is disrupted and replaced by α1 and α2 chains. 
Although the GBM appears structurally normal in early life, in time thinning appears, progressing to thickening, splitting and degeneration. 
Urinary space
Foot process
of podocyte
Endothelial
cell
Glomerular
capillary
GBM
A
B
C
Allergic
Many drugs, but particularly
• Penicillins
• NSAIDs
• Proton pump inhibitors
• Mesalazine (delayed)
Immune
• Autoimmune nephritis ± 
uveitis
• Transplant rejection
Infections
• Acute bacterial 
pyelonephritis
• Leptospirosis
• Tuberculosis
• Hantavirus
Toxic
• Myeloma light chains
• Mushrooms (Cortinarius)
17.41  Causes of acute interstitial nephritis
Tubulo-interstitial diseases
17
503
Chronic interstitial nephritis
Chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN) is characterised by 
renal dysfunction with fibrosis and infiltration of the 
renal parenchyma by lymphocytes, plasma cells and 
macrophages, in association with tubular damage.
Pathophysiology
The disease may follow on from acute interstitial nephri­
tis that does not resolve, or may be associated with 
ingestion of various toxins and drugs, or with metabolic 
and chronic inflammatory diseases, as summarised in 
Box 17.42. In many patients, CIN presents at a late stage 
and no underlying cause can be identified. Toxins that 
have been associated with CIN include those contained 
within the plant Aristolochia clematitis. These are proba­
bly responsible for the severe nephrotoxicity that can be 
associated with treatment with herbal medicines in Asia. 
There is some evidence that these toxins are also respon­
sible for Balkan nephropathy, which affects isolated 
rural communities in Bosnia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania 
and Serbia. The nephropathy is commonly linked with 
tumours of the collecting system and is probably due to 
the mutagenic effects of the plant toxin on the urothelial 
epithelium. Ingestion of mushrooms within the Corti-
narius genus can cause a devastating and irreversible 
renal tubular toxicity. The typical scenario is when a 
Fig. 17.24  Tubular histopathology.  A Normal tubular histology. The tubules are back to back. Brush borders can be seen on the luminal borders of 
cells in the proximal tubule.  B Acute tubular necrosis. There are scattered breaks (B) in tubular basement membranes, swelling and vacuolation of tubular 
cells, and, in places, apoptosis and necrosis of tubular cells with shedding of cells into the lumen. During the regenerative phase, there is increased tubular 
mitotic activity. The interstitium (I) is oedematous and infiltrated by inflammatory cells. The glomeruli (not shown) are relatively normal, although there may 
be endothelial cell swelling and fibrin deposition.  C Acute bacterial pyelonephritis. A widespread inflammatory infiltrate that includes many neutrophils is 
seen. Granulocyte casts (G) are forming within some dilated tubules (T). Other tubules are scarcely visible because of the extent of the inflammation and 
damage.  D Acute (allergic) interstitial nephritis. In this patient who received an NSAID, an extensive mononuclear cell infiltrate (no neutrophils) involving 
tubules (T) is seen. This inflammation does not involve the glomeruli (not shown). Sometimes eosinophils are prominent. Transplant rejection looks similar 
to this. 
A
B
C
D
T
G
T
I
B
Normal tubular histology
Acute tubular necrosis
Acute pyelonephritis
Acute interstitial nephritis
culture. Eosinophils are present in up to 70% of patients 
but this is a non-specific finding. Many patients are not 
oliguric, despite moderately severe renal impairment, 
and AIN should always be considered in patients with 
non-oliguric AKI. There may be a rapid deterioration of 
renal function in some cases of drug-induced AIN, 
causing the condition to be mistaken for rapidly pro­
gressive glomerulonephritis.
Investigations
Renal biopsy is usually required to confirm the diagno­
sis (Fig. 17.24). This typically shows evidence of intense 
inflammation, with infiltration of the tubules and inter­
stitium by polymorphonuclear leucocytes, and lym­
phocytes. Eosinophils may also be observed, especially 
in drug-induced AIN. The degree of chronic inflamma­
tion in a biopsy is a useful predictor of the eventual 
outcome for renal function.
Management
Some patients with drug-induced AIN recover follow­
ing withdrawal of the drug alone, but high-dose 
corticosteroids (prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) accelerate 
recovery and may prevent long-term scarring. Dialysis 
is sometimes necessary but is usually only short-term. 
Other specific causes (see Box 17.41) should be treated, 
if possible.
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
504
Reflux nephropathy
This condition, which was previously known as chronic 
pyelonephritis, is a specific type of chronic interstitial 
nephritis (see previous section) associated with vesico-
ureteric reflux (VUR) in early life and with the appear­
ance of scars in the kidney, as demonstrated by various 
imaging techniques. About 12% of patients in Europe 
requiring treatment for ESRD may have this disorder 
but diagnostic criteria are imprecise.
Pathophysiology
Reflux nephropathy is thought to be due to chronic 
reflux of urine from the bladder into the ureters, in asso­
ciation with recurrent urinary tract infection (UTI) in 
childhood. It was previously assumed that ascending 
infection was necessary for progressive renal damage in 
patients with VUR, but there is evidence to suggest that 
renal scars can occur, even in the absence of infection. 
Furthermore, epidemiological surveys and controlled 
trials have found that efforts to correct VUR by using 
surgical or other means are ineffective in halting pro­
gression of the disease.
Susceptibility to VUR has a genetic component and 
may be associated with renal dysplasia and other con­
genital abnormalities of the urinary tract. It can be con­
nected with outflow obstruction, usually caused by 
urethral valves, but usually occurs with an apparently 
normal bladder.
Clinical features
Usually, the renal scarring and dilatation are asympto­
matic and the patient may present at any age with 
hypertension (sometimes severe), proteinuria or fea­
tures of CKD. There may be no history of overt UTI. 
However, symptoms arising from the urinary tract may 
be present and include frequency of micturition, dysuria 
and aching lumbar pain. VUR may occur in children but 
diminishes as the child grows, and usually has disap­
peared by adulthood. Urinalysis often shows the pres­
ence of leucocytes and moderate proteinuria (usually 
< l g/24 hrs) but these are not invariable. The risk of 
renal stone formation is increased. A number of women 
first present with hypertension and/or proteinuria in 
pregnancy. Children and adults with small or unilateral 
renal scars have a good prognosis, provided renal 
growth is normal. With significant unilateral scars there 
is usually compensatory hypertrophy of the contralat­
eral kidney. In patients with more severe bilateral 
disease, prognosis is related to the severity of renal dys­
function, hypertension and proteinuria. If the serum 
creatinine is normal and hypertension and proteinuria 
are absent, then the long-term prognosis is usually good.
Investigations
Renal scarring can be detected by ultrasound but it has 
poor sensitivity and is only capable of detecting major 
defects and excluding significant obstruction. Radio­
nuclide DMSA scans are more sensitive (see Fig. 17.6, 
p. 471), and longitudinal imaging by MRI or CT may be 
useful in assessing progression. Abnormalities may be 
unilateral or bilateral and of any grade of severity. Gross 
scarring of the kidneys, commonly at the poles, is seen, 
with reduced kidney size and narrowing of the cortex 
patient mistakes a poisonous mushroom for an edible 
type. It is encountered occasionally in Scandinavia and 
Scotland.
Clinical features
Most patients with CIN present in adult life with CKD, 
hypertension and small kidneys. The CKD is often 
moderate (stage 3) but, because of tubular dysfunction, 
electrolyte abnormalities are typically more severe, 
resulting in hyperkalaemia and acidosis. Urinalysis 
abnormalities are non-specific. A minority of patients 
present with salt-losing nephropathy, characterised by 
hypotension, polyuria and features of sodium and water 
depletion. Patients with CIN have an impairment of 
urine-concentrating ability and sodium conservation, 
which puts them at risk of AKI due to salt and water 
depletion during an acute illness. Renal tubular acidosis 
(p. 446) may complicate CIN but is seen most often 
in myeloma, sarcoidosis, cystinosis, amyloidosis and 
Sjögren’s syndrome.
Management
Management is supportive in nature, with correction of 
acidosis and hyperkalaemia; replacement of fluid and 
electrolytes, as required; and RRT if irreversible renal 
damage has occurred.
Acute interstitial nephritis
• Any of the causes of AIN, if persistent (see Box 17.41)
Glomerulonephritis
• Varying degrees of interstitial inflammation occur in 
association with most types of inflammatory 
glomerulonephritis
Immune/inflammatory
• Sarcoidosis
• Sjögren’s syndrome
• Chronic transplant rejection
• Systemic lupus 
erythematosus, primary 
autoimmune
Toxic
• Aristolochia in herbal 
medicines
• Lead
• Balkan nephropathy
• Mushrooms (Cortinarius)
Drugs
• All drugs causing AIN
• Tenofovir
• Lithium toxicity
• Analgesic nephropathy
• Ciclosporin, tacrolimus
Infection
• Consequence of severe pyelonephritis
Congenital/developmental
• Vesico-ureteric reflux: associated but causation not clear
• Renal dysplasias: often associated with reflux
• Inherited: now well recognised but mechanisms unclear
• Other: Wilson’s disease, medullary sponge kidney, sickle-cell 
nephropathy
Metabolic and systemic diseases
• Calcium phosphate crystallisation after excessive phosphate 
administration (e.g. phosphate enemas in patients with CKD)
• Hypokalaemia
• Hyperoxaluria
17.42  Causes of chronic interstitial nephritis
Cystic diseases of the kidney
17
505
Papillary necrosis
The renal papillae lie within a hypertonic environment 
in the renal medulla, at the end of the vasa recta. They 
are susceptible to ischaemic damage because of this and 
can undergo necrosis when their vascular supply is 
impaired as the result of diabetes mellitus and sickle-cell 
disease or with long-term ingestion of NSAID. The con­
dition may occasionally occur in other diseases. There is 
an association with pyelonephritis but it is difficult to 
determine whether this is a cause of papillary necrosis 
or a complication. The clinical presentation is variable. 
Some patients are asymptomatic and clinically silent, 
whereas others present with renal colic and renal impair­
ment as necrosed papillae slough off and cause ureteric 
obstruction. Urinalysis may be normal but, more fre­
quently haematuria and sterile pyuria are present. Sig­
nificant proteinuria is unusual, unless there is renal 
failure. The imaging method of choice to make the diag­
nosis is pyelography. Management is based on relieving 
obstruction, where present, and withdrawal of the 
offending drugs.
Sickle-cell nephropathy
The longer survival of patients with sickle-cell disease 
(p. 1033) means that a high proportion now live to 
develop chronic complications of microvascular occlu­
sion. In the kidney, these changes are most pronounced 
in the medulla, where the vasa recta are the site of sick­
ling because of hypoxia and hypertonicity. Loss of 
urinary concentrating ability and polyuria are the earli­
est changes; distal renal tubular acidosis and impaired 
potassium excretion are typical. Papillary necrosis may 
also occur (see above). A minority of patients develop 
ESRD. This is managed according to the usual princi­
ples, but response to recombinant erythropoietin is poor 
due to the haemoglobinopathy. Patients with sickle trait 
have an increased incidence of unexplained microscopic 
haematuria.
CYSTIC DISEASES OF THE KIDNEY
It is common to encounter patients with a single renal 
cyst or even multiple ones as an incidental finding, espe­
cially in those aged 50 years and over. Usually, these 
cysts are of no clinical consequence and are asympto­
matic, but occasionally they can cause pain or haemat­
uria. In addition, several specific diseases are recognised 
as being caused by the formation of multiple renal cysts. 
These are discussed in more detail below.
Adult polycystic kidney disease
Adult polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a common con­
dition, with a prevalence of approximately 1 : 1000, and 
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Small cysts 
lined by tubular epithelium develop from infancy or 
childhood and enlarge slowly and irregularly. The 
surrounding normal kidney tissue is compressed and 
progressively damaged. Mutations in the PKD1 gene 
account for 85% of cases and PKD2 for about 15%. ESRD 
occurs in approximately 50% of patients with PKD1 
and medulla. Renal scars may be juxtaposed to dilated 
calyces. In patients who develop heavy proteinuria and 
hypertension, renal biopsies show glomerulomegaly 
and focal glomerulosclerosis, prob­ably as a secondary 
response to reduced nephron numbers. Radionuclide 
techniques can also be used to demonstrate VUR as an 
alternative to micturating cystourethrography (MCUG; 
the bladder is filled with contrast media through a 
urinary catheter and images are taken during and after 
micturition – Fig. 17.25). However, as surgical inter­
vention for VUR has declined in popularity (see below), 
this type of imaging is used less often.
Management
Infection, if present, should be treated (Box 17.43); if 
recurrent, it should be prevented with prophylactic 
therapy, as described for UTI (p. 512). If recurrent 
pyelonephritis occurs in an abnormal kidney with 
minimal function, nephrectomy may be indicated. Occa­
sionally, hypertension is cured by the removal of a dis­
eased kidney when the disease is predominantly or 
entirely unilateral.
As most childhood reflux tends to disappear sponta­
neously and trials have shown small or no benefits 
from anti-reflux surgery, such intervention is now less 
common.
Fig. 17.25  Vesico-ureteric reflux (grade IV) shown by micturating 
cystogram. The bladder has been filled with contrast medium through a 
urinary catheter. After micturition, there was gross VUR into widely 
distended ureters and pelvicalyceal systems. 
‘Prophylactic antibiotics reduce recurrences of UTI but there is 
no evidence that they protect against further renal scarring or 
dysfunction.’
• Smellie JM, et al. Lancet 2001; 357:1329–1333.
For further information: 
www.clinicalevidence.org
17.43  Prophylactic antibiotics and vesico-
ureteric reflux
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
506
large that one or both have to be removed to make space 
for a renal transplant. Otherwise, unless they are a 
source of pain or infection, they are usually left in situ.
Medullary sponge kidney disease
Medullary sponge kidney is characterised by cysts con­
fined to papillary collecting ducts. The disease is not 
inherited and its cause is unknown. Patients usually 
present as adults with renal stones. These are often 
recurrent, and preventive measures (p. 509) need to be 
implemented if so, but the prognosis is generally good. 
The diagnosis is made by ultrasound or IVU (Fig. 17.27). 
Contrast medium is seen to fill dilated or cystic tubules, 
which are sometimes calcified.
Medullary cystic kidney disease
This is a heterogenous group of inherited disorders, 
known as nephronophthisis in children. Small cortical 
cysts are associated with progressive destruction of the 
nephron. The childhood variants are characterised by 
thirst and polyuria due to nephrogenic diabetes insip­
idus, often with a family history of similar disease. 
Sometimes, affected patients are ‘salt-losing’, which 
mutations, with a mean age of onset of 52 years, but in 
a minority of patients with PKD2 mutations, with a 
mean age of onset of 69 years. It has been estimated 
that between 5% and 10% of patients on RRT have 
adult PKD.
Clinical features
Common clinical features are shown in Box 17.44. 
Affected subjects are usually asymptomatic until later 
life but hypertension usually occurs from the age of 20 
onwards. One or both kidneys may be palpable and the 
surface may feel nodular. About 30% of patients with 
PKD also have hepatic cysts (see Fig. 23.38, p. 970) but 
disturbance of liver function is rare. Sometimes (almost 
always in women) this causes massive and symptomatic 
hepatomegaly, usually concurrent with renal enlarge­
ment but occasionally with only minor renal involve­
ment. Berry aneurysms of cerebral vessels are an 
associated feature and about 10% of patients have a sub­
arachnoid haemorrhage. This feature appears to be 
largely restricted to certain families (and presumably 
specific mutations). Mitral and aortic regurgitation is 
frequent but rarely severe, and colonic diverticula and 
abdominal wall hernias may occur.
Investigations
The diagnosis is usually based on family history, clinical 
findings and ultrasound examination. Ultrasound exam­
ination demonstrates cysts in approximately 95% of 
affected patients over the age of 20 and is the screening 
method of choice but may not detect small developing 
cysts in younger subjects. Cysts may also be identified 
by other imaging modalities, such as MRI (Fig. 17.26). It 
is now possible to make a molecular diagnosis by muta­
tion screening of PDK1 or PDK2 but this is seldom used 
in routine clinical practice. Screening for intracranial 
aneurysms is not generally indicated but can be done by 
MR angiography in families with a history of subarach­
noid haemorrhage. The yield of screening is low, 
however, and the risk–benefit ratio of intervention in 
asymptomatic aneurysms in this disease is not clear.
Management
Good control of blood pressure is important because 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality are so common 
in renal disease, but there is no evidence that control of 
moderate hypertension retards the development of renal 
failure in PKD, in contrast to the evidence for glomerular 
diseases. There is some evidence that the vasopressin V2 
receptor antagonist, tolvaptan, can slow cyst formation 
in some patients but its place in treatment has yet to be 
established.
Patients with PKD are usually good candidates for 
dialysis and transplantation. Sometimes kidneys are so 
• Vague discomfort in loin or abdomen due to increasing mass 
of renal tissue
• Acute loin pain or renal colic due to haemorrhage into a cyst
• Hypertension
• Haematuria (with little or no proteinuria)
• Urinary tract or cyst infections
• Renal failure
17.44  Adult polycystic kidney disease: common 
clinical features
Fig. 17.26  MRI images of the kidneys.  A Normal kidneys.
 B Polycystic kidneys; although the kidney enlargement is extreme, 
this patient had only slightly reduced GFR. 
A
B
Renal stone disease
17
507
common types are summarised in Box 17.45. A 
number of risk factors have been identified for renal 
stone formation (Box 17.46). In developed countries, 
however, most calculi occur in healthy young men, 
in whom investigations reveal no clear predisposing 
cause. Renal stones vary greatly in size. There may be 
particles like sand anywhere in the urinary tract, or 
large round stones in the bladder. In developing coun­
tries, bladder stones are common, particularly in chil­
dren. In developed countries, the incidence of childhood 
bladder stones is low; renal stones in adults are more 
common. Staghorn calculi fill the whole renal pelvis 
and branch into the calyces (Fig. 17.28); they are usually 
associated with infection and composed largely of 
struvite. Deposits of calcium may be present throughout 
the renal parenchyma, giving rise to fine calcification 
within it (nephrocalcinosis), especially in patients with 
renal tubular acidosis, hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D 
intoxication and healed renal tuberculosis. Cortical 
nephrocalcinosis may occur in areas of cortical necrosis, 
typically after AKI in pregnancy or other severe AKI.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is highly variable. Most patients 
with renal stone disease are asymptomatic, whereas 
others present with pain, haematuria, UTI or urinary 
tract obstruction. A common presentation is with acute 
aggravates the degree of renal failure. Even when they 
are treated appropriately, serious renal failure is usual. 
Several of these conditions are associated with retinal 
dystrophies and brain or other abnormalities. The 
genetic basis of these disorders is emerging; several 
genes are involved.
Other cystic diseases
A number of other rarer inherited cystic diseases are 
recognised that have some similarities to PKD but dis­
tinct genetic causes. Multicystic dysplastic kidneys are 
often unilateral and are a developmental abnormality 
found in children. Most of these seem to involute during 
growth, leaving a solitary kidney in adults. Acquired 
cystic kidney disease can develop in patients with a very 
long history of renal failure, including those who have 
had many years of dialysis. It is associated with increased 
erythropoietin production and sometimes with the 
development of renal cell carcinoma.
RENAL STONE DISEASE
Renal stone disease is common, affecting individuals of 
all countries and ethnic groups. In the UK, the preva­
lence is about 1.2%, with a lifetime risk of developing a 
renal stone at age 60–70 of about 7% in men. In some 
regions, the risk is higher, most notably in countries like 
Saudi Arabia, where the lifetime risk of developing a 
renal stone in men aged 60–70 is just over 20%.
Pathophysiology
Urinary calculi consist of aggregates of crystals, usually 
containing calcium or phosphate in combination with 
small amounts of proteins and glycoproteins. The most 
Fig. 17.27  Medullary sponge kidney. Intravenous urogram showing 
contrast medium filling both the collecting system and cavities arising from 
collecting ducts, especially within papillae of the upper pole. The cavities 
have been likened to bunches of grapes. A plain abdominal X-ray may 
show calcification in the same regions. 
Calcium oxalate1
60%
Calcium phosphate
15%
Uric acid
10%
Magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite)2
15%
Cystine and others
1%
1Stones often contain small amounts of calcium phosphate.
2Associated with urine infection.
17.45  Composition of renal stones
Environmental and dietary causes
• Low urine volumes: high ambient temperatures, low fluid 
intake
• Diet: high protein, high sodium, low calcium
• High sodium excretion
• High oxalate excretion
• High urate excretion
• Low citrate excretion
Acquired causes
• Hypercalcaemia of any cause (p. 767)
• Ileal disease or resection (increases oxalate absorption and 
urinary excretion)
• Renal tubular acidosis type I (distal, p. 446)
Congenital and inherited causes
• Familial hypercalciuria
• Medullary sponge kidney
• Cystinuria
• Renal tubular acidosis type I (distal)
• Primary hyperoxaluria
17.46  Predisposing factors for kidney stones
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
508
yield of more detailed investigation is low, and hence 
usually reserved for young patients, those with recur­
rent or multiple stones, or those with complicated or 
unexpected presentations. Chemical analysis of stones is 
often helpful in defining the underlying cause. Since 
most stones pass spontaneously through the urinary 
tract, urine should be sieved for a few days after an 
episode of colic in order to collect the calculus for 
analysis.
loin pain radiating to the anterior abdominal wall, 
together with haematuria: a symptom complex termed 
renal or ureteric colic. This is most commonly caused by 
ureteric obstruction by a calculus but the same symp­
toms can occur in association with a sloughed renal 
papilla, tumour or blood clot. The patient is suddenly 
aware of pain in the loin, which radiates round the flank 
to the groin and often into the testis or labium, in the 
sensory distribution of the first lumbar nerve. The pain 
steadily increases in intensity to reach a peak in a few 
minutes. The patient is restless and generally tries 
unsuccessfully to obtain relief by changing position or 
pacing the room. There is pallor, sweating and often 
vomiting. Frequency, dysuria and haematuria may 
occur. The intense pain usually subsides within 2 hours 
but may continue unabated for hours or days. It is 
usually constant during attacks, although slight fluctua­
tions in severity may be seen. Subsequent to an attack of 
renal colic, intermittent dull pain in the loin or back may 
persist for several hours.
Investigations
Patients with symptoms of renal colic should be inves­
tigated to determine whether or not a stone is present, 
to identify its location and to assess whether it is causing 
obstruction. About 90% of stones contain calcium and 
these can be visualised on plain abdominal X-ray but 
CTKUB is the gold standard for diagnosing a stone 
within the kidney or ureter, as 99% are visible using this 
method. Alternatively, an IVU can be performed. The 
advantage of CTKUB over IVU is that it is more sensitive 
and can identify non-radio-opaque stones, such as those 
containing uric acid and cystine. When the stone is in 
the ureter, an IVU shows delayed excretion of contrast 
from the kidney, and a ureter that is dilated down as far 
as the stone (Fig. 17.29). Ultrasound can show stones 
within the kidney and dilatation of the renal pelvis and 
ureter if the stone is obstructing urine flow; it is useful 
in unstable patients or young women, in whom expo­
sure to ionising radiation is undesirable.
A minimum set of investigations (Box 17.47) should 
be performed in patients with a first renal stone. The 
Fig. 17.28  Radio-opaque bilateral staghorn calculi visible during 
intravenous urography. The intravenous pyelogram demonstrates that, 
while some dye is being excreted by the right kidney, there is little function 
on the left. 
Fig. 17.29  Unilateral ureteric obstruction. Intravenous urogram of a 
patient with a stone (not visible) at the lower end of the right ureter. This 
film, taken 2 hours post-contrast injection, demonstrates persistence of 
contrast medium in the right kidney, pelvicalyceal system and ureter, 
whereas only a small amount remains visible in the normal left 
pelvicalyceal system. 
Sample
Test
First stone
Recurrent 
stone
Stone
Chemical composition1
✓
Blood
Calcium
✓
✓
Phosphate
✓
✓
Uric acid
✓
✓
Urea and electrolytes
✓
✓
Bicarbonate
✓
✓
Parathyroid hormone2
(✓)
Urine
Dipstick test for protein, 
blood, glucose
✓
✓
Amino acids
✓
24-hr 
urine
Urea
✓
Creatinine clearance
✓
Sodium
✓
Calcium
✓
Oxalate
✓
Uric acid
✓
1The most valuable test if a stone can be obtained.
2Only if serum calcium or urinary calcium excretion high.
17.47  Investigations for renal stones
Renal stone disease
17
509
stagnant urine proximal to the stone (pyonephrosis), and 
in patients with a solitary kidney who develop anuria in 
association with a stone in the ureter.
Stones that do not pass spontaneously through the 
urinary tract may need to be removed surgically or 
fragmented by extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy 
(ESWL), in which shock waves generated outside the 
body are focused on the stone, breaking it into small 
pieces that can pass easily down the ureter. The indica­
tions for intervention to remove stones from the renal 
tract are summarised in Box 17.48. Procedures vary, 
depending on the site (Fig. 17.30).
Measures to prevent further stone formation are 
guided by the investigations in Box 17.47. Some general 
principles apply to almost every patient with calcium-
containing stones (Box 17.49). More specific measures 
Management
The immediate treatment of renal colic is with analgesia 
and antiemetics. Renal colic is often unbearably painful 
and demands powerful analgesia; diclofenac orally or as 
a suppository (100 mg) is often very effective, followed 
by morphine (10–20 mg) or pethidine (100 mg) intra­
muscularly. Around 90% of stones of less than 4 mm 
diameter pass spontaneously, but only 10% of stones 
bigger than 6 mm, and these may require endoscopic 
surgical intervention (see below). Patients with renal 
stones are at high risk of infection; if surgery is contem­
plated, it should be covered with appropriate antibiotics. 
Immediate action is required if infection occurs in the 
Fig. 17.30  Options for removal of urinary stones.  A A patient 
undergoing extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL).  B The 
procedures that are used for removal of stones in the urinary tract, shown 
in relation to the site of the stone. Very rarely, open or laparoscopic 
surgery may be necessary for removal of stones in the upper renal tract, if 
other methods fail. (PCNL = percutaneous nephrolithotomy) 
A
B
Renal pelvis or kidney
ESWL
PCNL
Uteroscopy
Upper ureter
ESWL
Ureteroscopy
Bladder
Cystoscopic removal
or destruction
Endoscopic removal
or destruction
Open removal
or destruction
Lower ureter
ESWL
Ureteroscopy
Clinical presentation
Procedure
Obstruction and/or anuria
Emergency PCNL or stent
Pyonephrosis associated with 
stone
Emergency PCNL or stent
Stone in a patient with solitary 
kidney
Urgent PCNL, stent, ESWL or 
ureteroscopy*
Severe pain and persistence 
of stone in renal tract
Urgent PCNL, stent, ESWL or 
ureteroscopy*
Pain and persistence of stone 
in renal tract
Elective PCNL, ESWL or 
ureteroscopy*
*Procedure depends on site of stone – see Fig. 17.30.
17.48  Indications for intervention to remove 
stones from the urinary tract
(ESWL = extracorporeal 
shock wave lithotripsy; PCNL = percutaneous nephrolithotomy)
Diet
Fluid
• At least 2 L output per day (intake 3–4 L): check with 24-hr 
urine collections
• Intake distributed throughout the day (especially before bed)
Sodium
• Restrict intake
Protein
• Moderate, not high
Calcium
• Maintain good calcium intake (calcium forms an insoluble salt 
with dietary oxalate, lowering oxalate absorption and excretion)
• Avoid calcium supplements separate from meals (increase 
calcium excretion without reducing oxalate excretion)
Oxalate
• Avoid foods that are rich in oxalate (spinach, rhubarb)
Drugs
Thiazide diuretics
• Reduce calcium excretion
• Valuable in recurrent stone-formers and hypercalciuria
Allopurinol
• If urate excretion high (unproven except for urate stones)
Avoid
• Vitamin D supplements (increase calcium absorption and 
excretion)
• Vitamin C supplementation (increases oxalate excretion)
17.49  Measures to prevent calcium 
stone formation
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
510
Fig. 17.31  Congenital abnormalities of the urinary tract. 
Renal agenesis/
dysplasia
Ectopic kidney
Single kidney
PUJ obstruction
Horseshoe
kidney
Duplex ureter
Ectopic ureter
Megaureter
Ureterocele
Urethral valves
Vesico-ureteric
reflux
apply to some types. Urate stones can be prevented by 
allopurinol, but its role in patients with calcium stones 
and high urate excretion is uncertain. Stones formed in 
cystinuria can be reduced by penicillamine therapy. It 
may also be helpful to attempt to alkalinise the urine 
with sodium bicarbonate, as a high pH discourages 
urate and cystine stone formation.
ISOLATED DEFECTS OF  
TUBULAR FUNCTION
An increasing number of disorders have been identified 
that are caused by specific defects in transporter mole­
cules expressed in renal tubular cells. Only the most 
common are mentioned here. Renal glycosuria is a 
benign autosomal recessive defect of tubular reabsorp­
tion of glucose, caused by mutations of the sodium/
glucose co-transporter SGLT2. Glucose appears in the 
urine in the presence of a normal blood glucose concen­
tration. Cystinuria is a rare condition, in which reabsorp­
tion of filtered cystine, ornithine, arginine and lysine 
is defective. It is caused by mutations in the SLC3A1 
amino acid transporter gene. The high concentration 
of cystine in urine leads to cystine stone formation 
(p. 507).
Other uncommon tubular disorders include heredi­
tary hypophosphataemic rickets (pp. 127 and 1128), in 
which reabsorption of filtered phosphate is reduced; 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (p. 794), in which the 
tubules are resistant to the effects of vasopressin; and 
Bartter’s and Gitelman’s syndromes, in which there is 
sodium-wasting and hypokalaemia (p. 440).
The term ‘Fanconi syndrome’ is used to describe 
generalised proximal tubular dysfunction. The condi­
tion typically presents with low blood phosphate and 
uric acid, glycos­uria, amino aciduria and proximal renal 
tubular acidosis. In addition to the causes of interstitial 
nephritis described above, some congenital metabolic 
disorders are associated with Fanconi syndrome, notably 
Wilson’s disease, cystinosis and hereditary fructose 
intolerance.
Renal tubular acidosis describes the common end-
point of a variety of diseases affecting distal (classical or 
type 1) or proximal (type 2) renal tubular function. These 
syndromes are described on page 446.
DISEASES OF THE COLLECTING 
SYSTEM AND URETERS
Congenital abnormalities
Various congenital anomalies of the urinary tract can 
occur (Fig. 17.31); they affect more than 10% of infants. 
If not immediately lethal, they can lead to compli­
cations in later life, including obstructive nephropathy 
and CKD.
Single kidneys
About 1 in 500 infants is born with only one kidney. 
Although this is usually compatible with normal life, it 
may be associated with other abnormalities.
Ureterocele
A ureterocele occurs behind a pin-hole ureteric orifice 
when the intramural part of the ureter dilates and bulges 
into the bladder. It can become very large and cause 
lower urinary tract obstruction. Incision of the pin-hole 
opening relieves the obstruction.
Ectopic ureters and  
duplex kidneys
Ectopic ureters occur with congenital duplication of one 
or both kidneys (duplex kidneys). Developmentally, the 
ureter has two main branches and, if this arrangement 
persists, the two ureters of the duplex kidneys may 
drain separately into the bladder. The lower pole moiety 
enters the bladder superiorly and laterally, while the 
upper pole moiety enters the bladder inferomedially 
to the lower pole moiety ureter or, more rarely, the 
vagina or seminal vesicle. The lower pole moiety has an 
ineffective valve mechanism, so that urine passes up 
the ureter on voiding (vesico-ureteric reflux, p. 504), 
whereas the upper pole moiety is often associated with 
a ureterocele.
Obstructive megaureter
In primary obstructive megaureter, there is dilatation of 
the ureter in all but its terminal segment without obvious 
cause and without vesico-ureteric reflux. Radiographic 
and pressure/flow studies may be needed to determine 
whether there is obstruction to urine flow. Narrowing of 
the ureter and re-implantation may be necessary.
Pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction
This causes idiopathic hydronephrosis and results from 
a functional obstruction at the junction of the ureter and 
renal pelvis. The abnormality is likely to be congenital 
and is often bilateral. It can be seen in very young 
Infections of the urinary tract
17
511
organisms then depends on a number of factors, includ­
ing the size of the inoculum and virulence of the bacte­
ria. Conditions that predispose to UTI are shown in 
Box 17.51.
Clinical features
Typical features of cystitis and urethritis include:
•	 abrupt onset of frequency of micturition and 
urgency
•	 scalding pain in the urethra during micturition 
(dysuria)
•	 suprapubic pain during and after voiding
•	 intense desire to pass more urine after micturition, 
due to spasm of the inflamed bladder wall 
(strangury)
•	 urine that may appear cloudy and have an 
unpleasant odour
•	 microscopic or visible haematuria.
Systemic symptoms are usually slight or absent. 
However, infection in the lower urinary tract can spread 
(see Box 17.50); acute pyelonephritis is suggested by 
prominent systemic symptoms with fever, rigors, vomit­
ing, hypotension and loin pain, guarding or tenderness, 
and may be an indication for hospitalisation. Only about 
30% of patients with acute pyelonephritis have associ­
ated symptoms of cystitis or urethritis. Prostatitis is sug­
gested by perineal or suprapubic pain, pain on ejaculation 
and prostatic tenderness on rectal examination.
The differential diagnosis of lower urinary tract 
symptoms includes urethritis due to sexually transmit­
ted disease, notably chlamydia (p. 422) or Reiter’s syn­
drome (p. 1107). Some patients, usually female, have 
symptoms suggestive of urethritis and cystitis but no 
bacteria are cultured from the urine (the ‘urethral syn­
drome’). Possible explanations include infection with 
children but gross hydronephrosis may present at any 
age. The common presentation is ill-defined renal pain 
or ache, exacerbated by drinking large volumes of liquid 
(Dietl’s crisis). Rarely, it is asymptomatic. The diagnosis 
is often suspected after ultrasound or IVU, and can be 
confirmed with a 99mTc-MAG3 renogram followed by 
diuretic. Treatment is surgical excision of the PUJ and 
re-anastomosis (pyeloplasty), which can now be per­
formed laparoscopically. Less invasive alternatives are 
also possible, including balloon dilatation and endo­
scopic pyelotomy, but are generally less effective.
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Fibrosis of the retroperitoneal connective tissues may 
encircle and compress the ureter(s), causing obstruction. 
The fibrosis is most commonly idiopathic, but can 
represent a reaction to infection, radiation or aortic 
aneurysm, or be caused by cancer or a drug reaction –
methysergide, for example. Patients usually present 
with ill-defined symptoms of ureteric obstruction. Typi­
cally, there is an acute-phase response (high CRP and 
ESR). Imaging with UVI or CT shows ureteric obstruc­
tion with medial deviation of the ureters. Idiopathic 
retroperitoneal fibrosis responds well to corticosteroids 
and may respond more slowly to tamoxifen, but ureteric 
stenting is often necessary to relieve obstruction. Failure 
to improve indicates the need for surgery (ureterolysis) 
both to relieve obstruction and to exclude malignancy.
INFECTIONS OF THE URINARY TRACT
In health, bacterial colonisation is confined to the lower 
end of the urethra and the remainder of the urinary tract 
is sterile (see Ch. 6). The urinary tract can become 
infected with various bacteria but the most common is 
E. coli derived from the gastrointestinal tract. The most 
common presenting problem is cystitis with urethritis 
(generally referred to as urinary tract infection) but this 
is only part of a spectrum of severity (Box 17.50).
Urinary tract infection
Urinary tract infection (UTI) is the term used to describe 
acute urethritis and cystitis caused by a microorganism. 
It is a common disorder accounting for 1–3% of consulta­
tions in general medical practice. The prevalence of UTI 
in women is about 3% at the age of 20, increasing by 
about 1% in each subsequent decade. In males, UTI is 
uncommon, except in the first year of life and in men 
over 60, when it may complicate bladder outflow 
obstruction.
Pathophysiology
Urine is an excellent culture medium for bacteria; in 
addition, the urothelium of susceptible persons may 
have more receptors, to which virulent strains of E. coli 
become adherent. In women, the ascent of organisms 
into the bladder is easier than in men; the urethra is 
shorter and the absence of bactericidal prostatic secre­
tions may be relevant. Sexual intercourse may cause 
minor urethral trauma and transfer bacteria from the 
perineum into the bladder. Instrumentation of the 
bladder may also introduce organisms. Multiplication of 
• Asymptomatic bacteriuria
• Symptomatic acute urethritis and cystitis
• Acute pyelonephritis (p. 513)
• Acute prostatitis (p. 515)
• Septicaemia (usually Gram-negative bacteria)
17.50  The spectrum of presentations of 
urinary tract infection
Incomplete bladder emptying
• Bladder outflow obstruction
Benign prostatic 
enlargement
Prostate cancer
Urethral stricture
Vesico-ureteric reflux
• Uterine prolapse
• Neurological problems
Multiple sclerosis
Spina bifida
Diabetic neuropathy
Foreign bodies
• Urethral catheter or ureteric 
stent
• Urolithiasis
Loss of host defences
• Atrophic urethritis and vaginitis in post-menopausal women
• Diabetes mellitus
17.51  Risk factors for urinary tract infection
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
512
Typical organisms causing UTI in the community 
include E. coli derived from the gastrointestinal tract 
(about 75% of infections), Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp., 
streptococci and Staphylococcus epidermidis. In hospital, 
E. coli still predominates, but Klebsiella or streptococci are 
more common. Certain strains of E. coli have a particular 
propensity to invade the urinary tract.
Investigations to detect underlying predisposing 
factors for UTI are used selectively, most commonly in 
children, men or patients with recurrent infections (see 
Box 17.52).
Management
Antibiotics are recommended in all cases of proven UTI 
(Box 17.54). If urine culture has been performed, treat­
ment may be started while awaiting the result. For infec­
tion of the lower urinary tract, treatment for 3 days is 
the norm and is less likely to induce significant altera­
tions in bowel flora than more prolonged therapy. Tri­
methoprim is the usual choice for initial treatment; 
however, between 10% and 40% of organisms causing 
UTI are resistant to trimethoprim, the lower rates being 
seen in community-based practice. Nitrofurantoin, quin­
olone antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin, 
and cefalexin are also generally effective. Co-amoxiclav 
or amoxicillin should only be used when the organism 
is known to be sensitive. Penicillins and cephalosporins 
are safe to use in pregnancy but trimethoprim, sul­
phonamides, quinolones and tetracyclines should be 
avoided.
In more severe infection, antibiotics should be contin­
ued for 7–14 days. Seriously ill patients may require 
intravenous therapy with a cephalosporin, quinolone or 
gentamicin for a few days (see Box 17.54), later switch­
ing to an oral agent.
A fluid intake of at least 2 L/day is usually recom­
mended, although this is not based on evidence and may 
make symptoms of dysuria worse.
Persistent or recurrent UTI
If the causative organism persists on repeat culture 
despite treatment, or if there is re-infection with any 
organism after an interval, then an underlying cause 
is more likely to be present (see Box 17.51) and 
more detailed investigation is justified (see Box 17.52). 
In women, recurrent infections are common and 
organisms not readily cultured by ordinary methods 
(such as Chlamydia and certain anaerobes), intermittent 
or low-count bacteriuria, reaction to toiletries or disin­
fectants, symptoms related to sexual intercourse, or 
post-menopausal atrophic vaginitis.
The differential diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis 
includes pyelonephrosis, acute appendicitis, diverticuli­
tis, cholecystitis, salpingitis, ruptured ovarian cyst or 
ectopic pregnancy. In pyelonephrosis due to upper 
urinary tract obstruction, patients may become extremely 
ill, with fever, leucocytosis and positive blood cultures. 
With a perinephric abscess, there is marked pain and 
tenderness, and often bulging of the loin on the affected 
side. Urinary symptoms may be absent in this situation 
and urine testing negative, containing neither pus cells 
nor organisms.
Investigations
An approach to investigation is shown in Box 17.52. In 
an otherwise healthy woman with a single lower urinary 
tract infection, urine culture prior to treatment is not 
mandatory. Investigation is necessary, however, in 
patients with recurrent infection or after failure of initial 
treatment, during pregnancy, or in patients susceptible 
to serious infection, such as the immunocompromised, 
those with diabetes or an indwelling catheter, and older 
people (Box 17.53). The diagnosis can be made from the 
combination of typical clinical features and abnormali­
ties on urinalysis. Most urinary pathogens can reduce 
nitrate to nitrite, and neutrophils and nitrites can usually 
be detected in symptomatic infections by urine dipstick 
tests for leucocyte esterase and nitrite, respectively. The 
absence of both nitrites and leucocyte esterase in the 
urine makes UTI unlikely. Interpretation of bacterial 
counts in the urine, and of what is a ‘significant’ culture 
result, is based on probabilities. Urine taken by supra­
pubic aspiration should be sterile, so the presence of any 
organisms is significant. If the patient has symptoms and 
there are neutrophils in the urine, a small number of 
organisms is significant. In asymptomatic patients, more 
than 105 organisms/mL is usually regarded as signifi­
cant (asymptomatic bacteriuria, see below).
• Prevalence of asymptomatic bacteriuria: rises with age. 
Amongst the most frail in institutional care it rises to 40% in 
women and 30% in men.
• Decision to treat: treating asymptomatic bacteriuria does 
not improve chronic incontinence or decrease mortality or 
morbidity from symptomatic urinary infection. It risks adverse 
effects from the antibiotic and promoting the emergence of 
resistant organisms.
• Source of infection: the urinary tract is the most frequent 
source of bacteraemia in older patients admitted to hospital.
• Incontinence: new or increased incontinence is a common 
presentation of UTI in older women.
• Treatment: post-menopausal women with acute lower 
urinary tract symptoms may require longer than 3 days’ 
therapy.
17.53  Urinary infection in old age
All patients
• Dipstick* estimation of nitrite, leucocyte esterase and glucose
• Microscopy/cytometry of urine for white blood cells, 
organisms
• Urine culture
Infants, children, and anyone with fever or  
complicated infection
• Full blood count; urea, electrolytes, creatinine
• Blood cultures
Pyelonephritis; males; children; women with  
recurrent infections
• Renal tract ultrasound or CT
• Pelvic examination in women, rectal examination in men
Continuing haematuria or other suspicion of bladder lesion
• Cystoscopy
17.52  Investigation of patients with 
urinary tract infection
*May substitute for microscopy and culture in simple uncomplicated 
infection.
Infections of the urinary tract
17
513
those aged over 65. There is no evidence that this condi­
tion causes renal scarring in adults who are not pregnant 
and have a normal urinary tract and, in general, treat­
ment is not indicated. However, up to 30% will develop 
symptomatic infection within 1 year. Treatment is 
required in infants, pregnant women and those with 
urinary tract abnormalities.
Catheter-related bacteriuria
In patients with a urethral catheter, bacteriuria increases 
the risk of Gram-negative bacteraemia fivefold. Bacteri­
uria is common, however, and almost universal during 
long-term catheterisation. Treatment is usually avoided 
in asymptomatic patients, as this may promote antibiotic 
resistance. Careful sterile insertion technique is impor­
tant, and the catheter should be removed as soon as it is 
not required.
Acute pyelonephritis
The kidneys are infected in a minority of patients with 
UTI. Acute renal infection (pyelonephritis) presents 
as a classic triad of loin pain, fever and tenderness 
over the kidneys. The renal pelvis is inflamed and small 
abscesses are often evident in the renal parenchyma 
(see Fig. 17.24C, p. 503).
Renal infection is almost always caused by organisms 
ascending from the bladder, and the bacterial profile is 
the same as for lower urinary tract infection (p. 512). 
Rarely, bacteraemia may give rise to renal or perinephric 
abscesses, most commonly due to staphylococci. Predis­
posing factors, such as cysts or renal scarring, facilitate 
infection.
investigation is only justified if infections are frequent 
(three or more per year) or unusually severe. Recurrent 
UTI, particularly in the presence of an underlying cause, 
may result in permanent renal damage, whereas uncom­
plicated infections rarely (if ever) do so (see chronic 
reflux nephropathy, p. 504).
If an underlying cause cannot be treated, suppressive 
antibiotic therapy (see Box 17.54) can be used to prevent 
recurrence and reduce the risk of septicaemia and renal 
damage. Urine should be cultured at regular intervals; 
a regime of two or three antibiotics in sequence, rotating 
every 6 months, is often used in an attempt to reduce 
the emergence of resistant organisms. Other simple 
measures may help to prevent recurrence (Box 17.55).
Asymptomatic bacteriuria
This is defined as more than 105 organisms/mL in the 
urine of apparently healthy asymptomatic patients. 
Approximately 1% of children under the age of one, 1% 
of schoolgirls, 0.03% of schoolboys and men, 3% of non-
pregnant adult women and 5% of pregnant women have 
asymptomatic bacteriuria. It is increasingly common in 
2See Hartford nomogram (p. 157).
• Fluid intake of at least 2 L/day
• Regular complete emptying of bladder
• Good personal hygiene
• Emptying of bladder before and after sexual intercourse
• Cranberry juice may be effective
17.55  Prophylactic measures to be adopted by 
women with recurrent urinary infections
1In all cases, the choice of drug should take locally determined antibiotic resistance patterns into account. 
17.54  Antibiotic regimens for urinary tract infection in adults1
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
514
Rarely, acute pyelonephritis is associated with papil­
lary necrosis. Fragments of renal papillary tissue are 
passed per urethra and can be identified histologically. 
They may cause ureteric obstruction and, if this occurs 
bilaterally or in a single kidney, it may lead to AKI. 
Predisposing factors include diabetes mellitus, chronic 
urinary obstruction, analgesic nephropathy and sickle-
cell disease. A necrotising form of pyelonephritis with 
gas formation, ‘emphysematous pyelonephritis’, is occa­
sionally seen in patients with diabetes mellitus. Xantho­
granulomatous pyelonephritis is a chronic infection that 
can resemble renal cell cancer. It is usually associated 
with obstruction, is characterised by accumulation of 
foamy macrophages and generally requires nephrec­
tomy. Infection of cysts in polycystic kidney disease 
(p. 505) calls for prolonged antibiotic treatment.
Appropriate investigations are shown in Box 17.52 
and management is described above and in Box 17.54. 
Intravenous rehydration may be needed in severe cases. 
If complicated infection is suspected or response to treat­
ment is not prompt, urine should be recultured and 
renal tract ultrasound performed to exclude urinary 
tract obstruction or a perinephric collection. If obstruc­
tion is present, drainage by a percutaneous nephros­
tomy or ureteric stent should be considered.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis of the kidney and renal tract is secondary 
to tuberculosis elsewhere (p. 688) and is the result of 
blood-borne infection. Initially, lesions develop in the 
renal cortex; these may ulcerate into the renal pelvis and 
involve the ureters, bladder, epididymis, seminal vesi­
cles and prostate. Calcification in the kidney and stric­
ture formation in the ureter are typical.
Clinical features may include symptoms of bladder 
involvement (frequency, dysuria); haematuria (some­
times macroscopic); malaise, fever, night sweats, lassi­
tude and weight loss; loin pain; associated genital 
disease; and chronic renal failure as a result of urinary 
tract obstruction or destruction of kidney tissue.
Neutrophils are present in the urine but routine urine 
culture may be negative (‘sterile pyuria’). Special tech­
niques of microscopy and culture may be required to 
identify tubercle bacilli and are most usefully performed 
on early morning urine specimens. Bladder involvement 
should be assessed by cystoscopy. Radiology of the 
urinary tract and a chest X-ray to look for pulmonary 
tuberculosis are mandatory. Anti-tuberculous chemo­
therapy follows standard regimes (p. 693). Surgery to 
relieve urinary tract obstruction or to remove a very 
severely infected kidney may be required.
BENIGN PROSTATIC ENLARGEMENT
Benign prostatic enlargement (BPE) is extremely 
common. It has been estimated that about half of all men 
aged 80 years and over will have lower urinary tract 
symptoms associated with BPE. Benign prostatic hyper­
plasia (BPH) is the histological abnormality that under­
lies BPE.
Pathophysiology
The prostate gland increases in volume by 2.4 cm3 per 
year on average from 40 years of age. The process begins 
in the peri-urethral (transitional) zone and involves both 
glandular and stromal tissue to a variable degree. The 
cause is unknown, although BPE does not occur in 
patients with hypogonadism, suggesting that hormonal 
factors may be important.
Clinical features
The primary symptoms of BPE arise because of difficulty 
in voiding urine due to obstruction of the urethra by the 
prostate; they consist of hesitancy, poor urinary flow 
and a sensation of incomplete emptying. Other symp­
toms include urinary frequency, urgency of micturition 
and urge incontinence, although these are not specific 
to BPE. Some patients present suddenly with acute 
urinary retention, when they are unable to micturate 
and develop a painful distended bladder. This is often 
precipitated by excessive alcohol intake, constipation 
and prostatic infection. Severity of symptoms can be 
ascertained by using the International Prostate Symptom 
Score questionnaire (IPSS, Box 17.56), which serves as a 
valuable starting point for assessment of the patient. 
Once a baseline value is established, any improvement 
or deterioration may be monitored on subsequent 
visits. The IPSS may be combined with a quality of life 
score, in which patients are asked the following question 
‘If you were to spend the rest of your life with your 
Symptom
Question
Example 
score
Straining
How often have you had to 
push or strain to begin 
urination?
1
Urgency
How often have you found it 
difficult to postpone urination?
2
Hesitancy
How often have you found that 
you stopped and started again 
several times when you 
urinated?
1
Incomplete 
emptying
How often have you had a 
sensation of not emptying your 
bladder completely after you 
finished urinating?
3
Frequency
How often have you had to 
urinate again less than 2 hours 
after you finished urinating?
1
Weak stream
How often have you had a 
weak urinary stream?
2
Nocturia
How many times did you most 
typically get up to urinate from 
the time you went to bed at 
night until the time you got up 
in the morning?
1
Total score
11
0 = not at all; 1 = less than one-fifth of the time; 2 = less than 
half the time; 3 = about half of the time; 4 = more than half of 
the time; 5 = almost always
A score of 0–1 indicates mild symptoms, 8–19 moderate 
symptoms and 20–35 severe symptoms. In the example 
shown, the patient had moderate symptoms.
17.56  The International Prostate Symptom 
Score (IPSS)
Tumours of the kidney and urinary tract
17
515
urinary condition the way it is now, how would you feel 
about that?’ Responses range from 0 (delighted) to 6 
(terrible).
Patients may also present with chronic urinary reten­
tion. Here, the bladder slowly distends due to inade­
quate emptying over a long period of time. Patients 
with chronic retention can also develop acute retention: 
so-called acute-on-chronic retention. This condition is 
characterised by pain-free bladder distension, which 
may result in hydroureter, hydronephrosis and renal 
failure (high-pressure chronic retention). On digital 
rectal examination, patients with BPE have evidence of 
prostatic enlargement with a smooth prostate gland. 
Abdominal examination may also reveal evidence 
of bladder enlargement in patients with urinary 
retention.
Investigations
The diagnosis of BPE is a clinical one but flow rates can 
be accurately measured with a flow meter, and prostate 
volume by transrectal ultrasound scan (TRUS). Objec­
tive assessment of obstruction is possible by urodynam­
ics but this is seldom required. If symptoms or signs, 
such as a palpable bladder, nocturnal enuresis, recurrent 
urinary tract infections or a history of renal stones, are 
present, renal function should be assessed; if it is abnor­
mal, screening should be conducted for evidence of 
obstructive nephropathy by ultrasound examination.
Management
Patients who present with acute retention require urgent 
treatment and should undergo immediate catheterisa­
tion to relieve the obstruction. Those with mild to mod­
erate symptoms can be treated by medication (Boxes 
17.57 and 17.58). The first-line treatments are α1A-
adrenoceptor blockers such as tamsulosin, which reduce 
the tone of smooth muscle cells in the prostate and 
bladder neck, thereby reducing the obstruction. The 
5α-reductase inhibitors, finasteride and dutasteride, 
inhibit conversion of testosterone to the more potent 
dihydrotestosterone in the prostate and so cause the 
prostate to shrink. This class of drugs is indicated in 
patients with an estimated prostate size of more than 
30 g or a prostate specific antigen (PSA) of more than 
1.4 µg/L. Patients who fail to respond to a single drug 
may be treated with a combination of α-blockers and 
5α-reductase inhibitors, since this is more efficacious 
than either agent alone. Symptoms that are resistant to 
medical therapy require surgical treatment to remove 
some of the prostate tissue that is causing urethral 
obstruction. This is usually achieved by transurethral 
resection of the prostate (TURP) but enucleation of the 
prostate by holmium laser is equally effective and has 
potentially fewer complications. Open surgery is rarely 
needed, unless the gland is very large.
Prostatitis
This condition is due to inflammation of the prostate 
gland. Acute or chronic bacterial prostatitis can be 
caused by infection with the same bacteria that are asso­
ciated with UTI (p. 511) but prostatitis can also be ‘non-
bacterial’, in which case no organism can be cultured 
from the urine. This is also known as chronic pelvic pain 
syndrome. Clinical features of prostatitis include fre­
quency, dysuria, painful ejaculation, perineal or groin 
pain, difficulty passing urine and, in acute disease, con­
siderable systemic disturbance. The prostate is enlarged 
and tender. Bacterial prostatitis is confirmed by a posi­
tive culture from urine or from urethral discharge 
obtained after prostatic massage, and the treatment 
of choice is trimethoprim or a quinolone antibiotic. A 
4–6-week course is required (see Box 17.54). Treatment 
of chronic pelvic pain syndrome is challenging but some 
patients respond to a combination of α-blockers, NSAIDs 
and amitriptyline.
TUMOURS OF THE KIDNEY AND 
URINARY TRACT
Several malignant tumours can affect the kidney and 
urinary tract, including renal adenocarcinoma, bladder 
carcinoma, prostate carcinoma, and tumours of the testis 
and penis. The urogenital tract can also be affected by 
benign tumours and secondary tumour deposits, which 
can cause obstructive uropathy.
Renal adenocarcinoma
Renal adenocarcinoma is by far the most common malig­
nant tumour of the kidney in adults, making up 2.5% of 
all adult cancers, with a prevalence of 16 cases per 
100 000 population. It is twice as common in males as in 
females. The peak incidence is between 65 and 75 years 
of age and it is uncommon before 40. The tumour arises 
from renal tubular cells. Haemorrhage and necrosis give 
the cut surface a characteristic mixed golden-yellow and 
red appearance (Fig. 17.32B). Microscopically, clear cell 
carcinomas are the most common histological subtype 
(85%), with papillary, chromophobe and collecting duct 
tumours making up the remaining 15%. With clear cell 
‘Oral α-adrenoceptor blockers produce rapid improvement in 
urinary flow in 60–70% of patients. The 5α-reductase inhibitor, 
finasteride, causes slow shrinkage of large prostate glands with 
improvement in symptoms.’
• Clifford GM, et al. Eur Urol 2000; 38:2–19.
• Boyle R, et al. Urology 2001; 58:717–722.
17.58  Medical management of benign prostatic 
enlargement
Medical
• Prostate < 30 g: α-adrenoceptor blockers
• Prostate > 30 g: 5α-reductase inhibitors ± α-adrenoceptor 
blockers
Surgical
• Transurethral resection of prostate (TURP)
• Holmium laser enucleation
• Open prostatectomy
17.57  Treatment for benign prostatic 
enlargement
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
516
open surgery. Partial nephrectomy is recommended for 
tumours of 4 cm or less, as there is a lower incidence of 
cardiac and renal morbidity. Patients at high operative 
risk, who have small tumours, may also be treated 
percutaneously by cryoablation or radiofrequency abla­
tion. Surgery may also play a role in the treatment of 
solitary metastases, since these can remain single for 
long periods and excision may be worthwhile.
Renal adenocarcinoma is resistant to most chemo­
therapeutic agents. For many years, cytokine therapy 
with interferon and interleukin-2 was used in metastatic 
renal cancer but, in recent years, two new classes of 
targeted drugs have been introduced and are now the 
mainstay of therapy. These are the tyrosine kinase inhib­
itors, sunitinib and pazopanib, and the mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, temsirolimus 
and everolimus.
In previous years, patients who presented with 
distant metastases were treated with cytoreductive 
nephrectomy, in which nephrectomy was coupled with 
systemic cytokine treatment, since this was shown to 
improved survival as compared with either treatment in 
isolation. It is, at present, unclear whether this survival 
benefit still prevails with the newer agents mentioned 
above.
Studies that antedate the introduction of these new 
agents show that, if the tumour is confined to the kidney, 
5-year survival is 75%, but this falls to 5% when there 
are distant metastases.
Urothelial tumours
Tumours arising from the transitional epithelium of the 
renal tract can affect the renal pelvis, ureter, bladder or 
urethra. They are rare under the age of 40, affect males 
about 3–4 times as commonly as females, and account 
for about 3% of all malignant tumours. The bladder 
is by far the most frequently affected site. Although 
almost all tumours are transitional cell carcinomas, 
squamous carcinoma may occur in urothelium that has 
undergone metaplasia, usually following chronic inflam­
mation or irritation due to stones or schistosomiasis. The 
carcinomas, there is early spread of the tumour into the 
renal pelvis, causing haematuria, and along the renal 
vein, often extending into the inferior vena cava. Direct 
invasion of perinephric tissues is common. Lymphatic 
spread to para-aortic nodes occurs, while blood-borne 
metastases (which may be solitary) most commonly 
develop in the lungs, bone and brain.
Clinical features
In 50% of patients, asymptomatic renal tumours are 
identified as an incidental finding during imaging inves­
tigations carried out for other reasons. Amongst symp­
tomatic patients, about 60% present with haematuria, 
40% with loin pain and 25% with a mass; about 10% 
present with a triad of pain, haematuria and a mass. A 
remarkable range of systemic effects may be present, 
including fever, raised ESR, polycythaemia, disorders 
of coagulation, hypercalcaemia, and abnormalities of 
plasma proteins and liver function tests. The patient 
may present with pyrexia of unknown origin or, rarely, 
with neuropathy. Some of these systemic effects are 
caused by secretion of products by the tumour, such as 
renin, erythropoietin, PTH-related protein (PTHrP) and 
gonadotrophins. The effects disappear when the tumour 
is removed but may re-appear when metastases develop, 
and so can be used as markers of tumour activity.
Investigations
Ultrasound is the investigation of first choice and allows 
differentiation between solid tumour and simple renal 
cysts. If the results are suggestive of a tumour, contrast-
enhanced CT of the abdomen and chest should be per­
formed for staging (see Fig. 17.32A). For tumours more 
than 3 cm in diameter with no evidence of metastatic 
spread and when the nature of the lesion is uncertain, 
ultrasound or CT-guided biopsy may be used to avoid 
nephrectomy for benign disease.
Management
Radical nephrectomy that includes the perirenal fascial 
envelope and ipsilateral para-aortic lymph nodes is the 
treatment of choice. Nephrectomy is commonly per­
formed laparoscopically, with equivalent outcomes to 
Fig. 17.32  Renal adenocarcinoma.  A In this CT, the right kidney is expanded by a low-density tumour, which fails to take up contrast material. 
Tumour is shown extending into the renal vein and inferior vena cava (arrow).  B Pathology specimen showing typical necrosis. 
A
B
Tumours of the kidney and urinary tract
17
517
chemotherapy with mitomycin C is usually adminis­
tered as a one-off treatment post resection to prevent 
tumour recurrence, or may be given as a prolonged 
course to treat multiple low-grade bladder tumours. 
Patients with carcinoma in situ have a high risk of pro­
gression to invasive cancer. These patients often respond 
well to intravesical bacille Calmette–Guérin (BCG) treat­
ment but more radical treatment may also be needed if 
this is unsuccessful. Following initial treatment and 
endoscopic clearance of bladder tumours, regular check 
cystoscopies are required to look for evidence of recur­
rence. Patients with recurrences of superficial disease 
can usually be treated by further resection and dia­
thermy, but if this is unsuccessful, a cystectomy may be 
needed.
The management of invasive bladder tumours 
involves radical cystectomy with urinary diversion into 
an incontinent ileal conduit or a continent catheterisable 
bowel pouch; the latter is usually reserved for patients 
under the age of 70 years.
The prognosis of bladder tumours depends on 
tumour stage and grade. About 5% of patients with low-
grade superficial bladder cancer progress to develop 
invasion of the bladder muscle, compared with about 
50% of those with high-grade superficial bladder 
cancers. Overall, the 5-year survival for patients with 
muscle-invasive bladder cancer of either grade is about 
50–70%.
Transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis and 
ureter is usually treated by open or laparoscopic nephro-
ureterectomy, but if the tumour is solitary and low-
grade, it can be treated endoscopically.
Prostate cancer
Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy in men 
in the UK, with a prevalence of 105 per 100 000 popula­
tion. It is also common in northern Europe and the USA 
(particularly in the black population) but is rare in China 
and Japan. It rarely occurs before the age of 50 and has 
a mean age at presentation of 70 years.
Pathophysiology
Prostate cancers tend to arise within the peripheral zone 
of the prostate and almost all are adenocarcinomas. 
Metastatic spread to pelvic lymph nodes occurs early 
and metastases to bone, mainly the lumbar spine and 
pelvis, are common. Genetic factors are known to play 
an important role in pathogenesis, and multiple predis­
posing loci have been found to predispose to the disease 
in genome-wide association studies. A family history of 
prostate cancer greatly increases a man’s chances of 
developing the disease. It seems likely that the differ­
ences in incidence between different ethnic groups may 
be explained by genetic factors.
Clinical features
Most patients either are asymptomatic or present with 
lower urinary tract symptoms indistinguishable from 
benign prostatic enlargement. On digital rectal examina­
tion (DRE), the prostate may feel nodular and stony-
hard, and the median sulcus may be lost, but up to 45% 
of tumours are impalpable. Symptoms and signs due to 
appearance of a transitional cell tumour ranges from a 
delicate papillary structure with relatively good progno­
sis to a solid ulcerating mass in more aggressive disease 
(Fig. 17.33).
Pathophysiology
Risk factors include cigarette smoking and exposure 
to industrial carcinogens like aromatic amines, aniline 
dyes and aldehydes. Chronic inflammatory processes, 
such as schistosomiasis and chronic bladder stones, pre­
dispose to squamous carcinomas by causing squamous 
metaplasia.
Clinical features
More than 80% of patients present with painless, visible 
haematuria. It should be assumed that such bleeding is 
from a tumour until proven otherwise (p. 474). Tumours 
of the ureter or bladder may also cause symptoms of 
obstruction, depending on the site of involvement, and 
tumours of the bladder present with dysuria or storage 
symptoms. Physical examination is usually unremark­
able, except in patients with very advanced disease, 
when bimanual examination may reveal a palpable 
mass.
Investigations
Cystoscopy (usually flexible cystoscopy under a local 
anaesthetic) is mandatory to evaluate the bladder in 
cases of haematuria or suspected bladder cancer. 
Imaging of the upper urinary tract (CT urogram is the 
gold standard but IVU and renal ultrasound are also 
acceptable) is also important to rule out abnormalities of 
the kidney, ureters and renal pelvis in patients with 
haematuria. If a suspicious defect is seen on CTU or IVU 
in the ureter or renal pelvis, a retrograde ureteropyelo­
gram, ureteroscopy and biopsy are required. If evidence 
of a solid invasive urothelial tumour is found, CT of the 
abdomen, pelvis and chest should be performed as a 
staging procedure.
Management
Most bladder tumours are low-grade superficial lesions 
that can be successfully treated endoscopically by 
transurethral resection of the tumour. Intravesical 
Fig. 17.33  Transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Stages are 
shown from carcinoma in situ (Cis) to invasive tumour progressing beyond 
the bladder and prostate (T4b). 
T2
T1
Ta
Cis
T4a
T4b
T3b
T3a
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
518
A small proportion of patients fail to respond to 
endocrine treatment. A larger number respond for a 
year or two but then the disease progresses. Chemo­
therapy with docetaxel can then be effective and provide 
a modest (around 3 months) survival advantage. Radio­
therapy is useful for localised bone pain but the basis of 
treatment remains pain control by analgesia (p. 286). 
Provided that patients do not die of another cause, the 
10-year survival rate of patients with tumours localised 
to the prostate is 95%, but if metastases are present, this 
falls to 10%. Life expectancy is not reduced in patients 
with small foci of tumour.
Testicular tumours
Testicular tumours are uncommon, with a prevalence of 
5 cases per 100 000 population. They occur mainly in 
young men aged between 20 and 40 years. They often 
secrete α-fetoprotein (AFP) and β-human chorionic 
gonadotrophin (β-hCG), which are useful biochemical 
markers for both diagnosis and prognosis. Seminoma 
and teratoma account for 85% of all tumours of the testis. 
Leydig cell tumours are less common.
Seminomas arise from seminiferous tubules and rep­
resent a relatively low-grade malignancy. Metastases 
can occur through lymphatic spread, however, and typi­
cally involve the lungs.
Teratomas arise from primitive germinal cells and 
tend to occur at a younger age than seminomas. They 
may contain cartilage, bone, muscle, fat and a variety of 
other tissues, and are classified according to the degree 
of differentiation. Well-differentiated tumours are the 
least aggressive; at the other extreme, trophoblastic tera­
toma is highly malignant. Occasionally, teratoma and 
seminoma occur together.
Leydig cell tumours are usually small and benign but 
secrete oestrogens, leading to presentation with gynaeco­
mastia (p. 762).
Clinical features and investigations
The common presentation is incidental discovery of a 
painless testicular lump, although some patients com­
plain of a testicular ache.
All suspicious scrotal lumps should be imaged by 
ultrasound. Serum levels of AFP and β-hCG are elevated 
in extensive disease. Oestradiol may be elevated, sup­
pressing luteinising hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH) and testosterone. Accurate staging 
is based on CT of the lungs, liver and retroperitoneal 
area.
metastases are much less common at the initial presenta­
tion but may include back pain, weight loss, anaemia 
and obstruction of the ureters.
Investigations
Measurement of PSA levels in a peripheral blood sample, 
together with DRE, is the cornerstone of diagnosis. Prior 
to a PSA test, men should be given careful counselling 
about the limitations of the test: namely, a normal level 
does not exclude prostate cancer; a high value does not 
confirm the diagnosis but will open a discussion about 
biopsy. The need for radical treatment of localised pros­
tate cancer is still not established; radical treatments 
have significant potential morbidity and mortality; and 
early identification and treatment of prostate cancer may 
save lives. Current evidence suggests that population-
based screening for prostate cancer with PSA is of 
limited value, due in part to the fact that over 
1000 patients would need to be screened to cure one man 
of prostate cancer. Individuals suspected of having pros­
tate cancer, based on an elevated PSA and/or abnormal 
DRE, should undergo transrectal ultrasound-guided 
prostate biopsies. About 40% of patients with a serum 
PSA of 4.0–10 ug/L or more will have prostate cancer 
on biopsy, although 25% patients with a PSA of less than 
4 ng/mL may also have prostate cancer. Occasionally, a 
small focus of tumour is found incidentally in patients 
undergoing transurethral resection of the prostate for 
benign hyperplasia. If the diagnosis of prostate cancer is 
confirmed, staging should be performed by pelvic MRI 
to assess the presence and extent of local involvement. 
An isotope bone scan should be carried out if distant 
metastases are suspected (rare if the PSA is below 20 ng/
mL); very high levels of serum PSA (> 100 ng/mL) 
almost always indicate distant bone metastases. Follow­
ing diagnosis, serial assessment of PSA levels is useful 
for monitoring response to treatment and disease 
progression.
Management
Tumour confined to the prostate is potentially curable 
by radical prostatectomy, radical radiotherapy or 
brachytherapy (implantation of small radioactive parti­
cles into the prostate). These options should only be 
considered in patients with more than 10 years’ life 
expectancy. Patients who are found to have small foci of 
tumour do not require specific treatment but should be 
followed up periodically with PSA, DRE and a schedule 
of biopsies; this is known as active surveillance. Prostatic 
cancer, like breast cancer, is sensitive to steroid hor­
mones; metastatic prostate cancer is treated by androgen 
depletion, involving either surgery (orchidectomy) or, 
more commonly, androgen-suppressing drugs (Box 
17.59). Androgen receptor blockers, such as bicaluta­
mide or cyproterone acetate, may also prevent tumour 
cell growth. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
analogues, such as goserelin, continuously occupy pitui­
tary receptors, preventing them from responding to the 
GnRH pulses that normally stimulate luteinising hor­
mone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 
release. This initially causes an increase in testosterone 
before producing a prolonged reduction, and for this 
reason the initial dose must be covered with an andro­
gen receptor blocker to prevent a tumour flare.
‘Reducing circulating testosterone levels (either by castration or 
by medication) results in a 70% initial response rate. Additional 
androgen blockade produces a small increase in survival but 
with poorer quality of life.’
• Huggins C, et al. Arch Surg 1941; 43:209.
• Huggins C. Cancer Res 1967; 27:1925–1930.
• Schmitt B, et al. Maximal androgen blockade for advanced prostate cancer. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 1999, issue 2. Art. no. CD001526.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
17.59  Hormone manipulation in prostate cancer
Renal involvement in systemic conditions 
17
519
tubular necrosis) in response to relatively minor insults, 
including bleeding and infection. Such patients are 
often difficult to treat by dialysis and have a poor prog­
nosis. Where treatment is justified – for example, if there 
is a good chance of recovery or of a liver transplant – 
slow or continuous treatments are less likely to pre­
cipitate or exacerbate hepatic encephalopathy. IgA 
nephropathy (p. 500) is more common in patients with 
liver disease.
Pulmonary-renal syndrome
The pulmonary–renal syndrome is a dramatic presenta­
tion with renal and respiratory failure that is not 
explained by excess intravascular fluid or by severe 
pneumonia; it occurs in Goodpasture’s (anti-GBM) 
disease and small-vessel vasculitis (see below). There are 
some other uncommon causes of a similar syndrome, 
including poisoning with the herbicide paraquat.
Malignant diseases
The kidney may be affected in many different ways in 
patients with malignant disease (Box 17.60). Direct 
involvement of the kidneys or other parts of the urinary 
tract can occur, causing obstructive uropathy, and 
glomerulonephritis may occur, presumably as the result 
of an immunological reaction to the tumour. Hypercal­
caemia can be caused by parathyroid hormone-related 
protein (PTHrP) production by tumours, whereas treat­
ment of leukaemia and lymphoma can sometimes be 
complicated by interstitial nephritic and acute kidney 
injury due to uric acid release from necrotic tumour 
cells. Finally, in myeloma and other monoclonal 
gammopathies, renal impairment can occur as the result 
of the nephrotoxic effects of immunoglobulin light 
chains released by the tumour.
Management and prognosis
The primary treatment is surgical orchidectomy. Subse­
quent treatment depends on the histological type and 
stage. Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice for early-
stage seminoma. Teratoma confined to the testes may be 
managed conservatively, but more advanced cancers are 
treated with chemotherapy, usually the combination of 
bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin. Follow-up is by CT 
and assessment of AFP and β-hCG. Retroperitoneal 
lymph node dissection is now only performed for resid­
ual or recurrent nodal masses.
The 5-year survival rate for patients with seminoma 
is 90–95%. For teratomas, the 5-year survival varies 
between 60% and 95%, depending on tumour type, stage 
and volume.
Inherited tumour syndromes affecting 
the renal tract
Some uncommon autosomal dominantly inherited con­
ditions are associated with multiple renal tumours in 
adult life. In tuberous sclerosis (p. 1302), replacement 
of renal tissue by multiple angiomyolipomas (tubers) 
may occasionally cause renal failure in adults. Other 
organs affected include the skin (adenoma sebaceum 
on the face) and brain (causing seizures and mental 
retardation). 
The 
von 
Hippel–Lindau 
syndrome 
(p. 1216) is connected with multiple renal cysts, renal 
adenomas and renal adenocarcinoma. Other organs 
affected include the central nervous system (haeman­
gioblastomas) and the adrenals (phaeochromocytoma).
RENAL INVOLVEMENT IN  
SYSTEMIC CONDITIONS
The kidneys may be directly involved in a number of 
multisystem diseases or secondarily affected by diseases 
of other organs. Involvement may be at a pre-renal, renal 
(glomerular or interstitial) or post-renal level. Many of 
the diseases are described in other sections of this 
chapter or in other chapters of the book.
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus is the most common cause of CKD in 
developed countries. In patients with diabetes, there is 
a steady advance from microalbuminuria to dipstick-
positive proteinuria, and a progression to renal failure, 
as described on page 830. Few patients require renal 
biopsy to establish the diagnosis, but atypical features 
or progression should lead to suspicion that an alterna­
tive condition could be present.
Management with ACE inhibitors and other hypoten­
sive agents to slow progression is described on page 831 
and has been dramatically effective. In some patients, 
proteinuria may be eradicated and progression com­
pletely halted, even if renal function is abnormal.
Hepatic–renal disease
Severe hepatic dysfunction may cause a haemodynami­
cally mediated type of renal failure, hepatorenal syn­
drome, described on page 940. Patients with chronic 
liver disease are also predisposed to develop AKI (acute 
Direct involvement
• Renal adenocarcinoma
• Urothelial tumours
• Cervical carcinoma
• Lymphoma
Immune reaction
• Glomerulonephritis*
Metabolic consequences
• Hypercalcaemia
• Uric acid nephropathy
Remote effects of tumour products
• Light chains in myeloma
17.60  Renal effects of malignancies
*Especially membranous nephropathy.
Systemic vasculitis
Small-vessel vasculitis (p. 1115) commonly affects the 
kidneys, with rapid and profound impairment of 
glomerular function. Histologically, there is a focal 
inflammatory glomerulonephritis, usually with focal 
necrosis (see Box 17.39, p. 499, and Fig. 17.22, p. 498) and 
often with crescentic changes. Typically, the patient is 
systemically unwell with an acute phase response, 
weight loss and arthralgia. In some patients, pulmonary 
haemorrhage may occur, which can be life-threatening. 
In others, it presents as a kidney-limited disorder, with 
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
520
presentation is with subacute disease and inflammatory 
features (haematuria, hypertension, variable renal 
impairment), accompanied by heavy proteinuria that 
often reaches nephrotic levels. In severely affected 
patients, the most common histological pattern is a pro­
liferative glomerulonephritis with substantial deposits 
of immunoglobulins on immunofluorescence. Ran­
domised controlled trials have shown that the risk of 
ESRD in lupus nephritis is significantly reduced by high-
dose steroids administered in combination with cyclo­
phosphamide, usually given as regular intravenous 
pulses. More recently, it has been shown that the com­
bination of corticosteroids and mycophenolate mofetil is 
as effective as corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide, at 
least in short-term studies.
Many patients with SLE who develop ESRD go into 
remission, possibly because of immunosuppression 
related to the ESRD. Patients with ESRD caused by SLE 
are usually good candidates for dialysis and transplan­
tation. Although it may recur in renal allografts, the 
immunosuppression required to prevent allograft rejec­
tion usually controls the SLE too.
PREGNANCY AND RENAL DISEASE
Pregnancy has important physiological effects on the 
renal system. Some diseases are more common in preg­
nancy, the manifestations of others are modified during 
pregnancy, and a few diseases, such as pre-eclampsia, 
are unique to pregnancy.
Physiological adaptations begin in the first few 
weeks. Peripheral vascular resistance declines, blood 
volume, cardiac output and GFR increase, and there is 
usually a reduction in blood pressure and plasma creati­
nine and urea values in the first trimester. Baseline blood 
pressure and urine testing from the first antenatal clinic 
visit are valuable if problems arise later.
Infections
Pyelonephritis is more common during pregnancy, 
perhaps because of dilatation of the urinary collecting 
system and ureters. It is important to treat asymptomatic 
bacteriuria during pregnancy, since this can progress to 
pyelonephritis, which, in turn, can trigger premature 
labour (Box 17.62 and p. 513).
Glomerular diseases
Proteinuria caused by glomerular disease is usually 
exacerbated, and nephrotic syndrome may develop 
rapidly deteriorating renal function and crescentic 
nephritis.
The most important cause is antineutrophil cytoplas­
mic antibody (ANCA)-positive vasculitis (p. 1118). Two 
subtypes are recognised. Microscopic polyangiitis 
(MPA) typically presents with glomerulonephritis and 
pulmonary haemorrhage, along with gastrointestinal 
involvement and neuropathy, whereas polyangiitis with 
granulomatosis (also known as Wegener’s granulomato­
sis) typically presents with glomerulonephritis and 
granulomatous lesions affecting the nasal passages and 
lungs. Serological testing for myeloperoxidase (MPO) 
and proteinase 3 (PR3) is usually positive but these anti­
bodies are not specific and a biopsy of affected tissue 
should be obtained if possible to confirm the diagnosis.
The standard treatment of glomerulonephritis associ­
ated with systemic vasculitis is high-dose glucocorti­
coids combined with pulse cyclophosphamide, or 
mycophenolate mofetil (p. 1118). Recent studies indicate 
that rituximab (p. 1103), when combined with high-dose 
steroids, is as effective as oral cyclophosphamide and 
high-dose steroids in the treatment of ANCA-associated 
vasculitis (Box 17.61). Plasma exchange can offer addi­
tional benefit in patients with progressive renal damage 
who are not responding adequately to immunosuppres­
sive therapy.
Glomerulonephritis secondary to vasculitis may 
rarely also be seen in rheumatoid arthritis, SLE and 
cryoglobulinaemia, although SLE usually involves the 
kidney in different ways (see below).
Medium- to large-vessel vasculitis, such as poly­
arteritis nodosa, p. 1117), does not cause glomerulo­
nephritis but can cause hypertension, renal infarction or 
haematuria if the renal vessels are involved.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Subclinical renal involvement, with low-level haemat­
uria and proteinuria but minimally impaired or normal 
renal function, is common in systemic lupus erythema­
tosus (SLE). Usually, this is due to glomerular disease, 
although interstitial nephritis may also occur, particu­
larly in patients with overlap syndromes such as mixed 
connective tissue disease and Sjögren’s syndrome (p. 499 
and Figure 17.21 (p. 497)).
Almost any histological pattern of glomerular disease 
can be observed in SLE and the clinical presentation 
ranges from florid, rapidly progressive glomerulo­
nephritis to nephrotic syndrome. The most common 
‘Antibiotic therapy for asymptomatic bacteriuria reduces the 
incidence of pyelonephritis (risk ratio (RR) 0.23, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 0.13–0.41) and is also associated with a reduction 
in the incidence of low-birthweight babies (RR 0.66, 95% CI 
0.49–0.89), but does not affect the incidence of preterm 
delivery.’
• Smaill F, Vazquez JC. Antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2007, issue 2. Art. no. CD000490.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
17.62  Treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria 
in pregnancy
‘The RAVE study compared the effectiveness of rituximab and 
oral cyclophosphamide for inducing remission in 197 patients 
with ANCA-associated vasculitis with renal and/or pulmonary 
involvement. Both groups received high-dose glucocorticoids. 
The rituximab-based regimen was non-inferior to the 
cyclophosphamide-based regimen at inducing remission and 
was superior in patients with a history of relapsing disease. 
Rituximab was equally effective as cyclophosphamide in the 
treatment of major renal disease and alveolar haemorrhage. 
There were no significant differences between the treatment 
groups with respect to glucocorticoid dose or adverse events.’
• Stone JH. N Engl J Med 2010; 363(3):221–232.
17.61  Role of rituximab in ANCA-associated 
vasculitis
Kidney disease in adolescence
17
521
these features occur in pre-existing renal disease exacer­
bated by pregnancy.
It is important to distinguish pre-eclampsia from pre-
existing renal disease, since this affects management. 
Pre-eclampsia presents progressively, increasing risks to 
mother and fetus, which can be reversed almost imme­
diately by early delivery. In contrast, continuing the 
pregnancy for as long as possible in patients with pre-
existing renal disease, may permit delivery of a health­
ier, more mature baby. Proteinuria and hypertension in 
the first trimester of pregnancy suggest pre-existing 
renal disease.
Management
The only effective management for pre-eclampsia is 
delivery. The role of antiplatelet therapy (low-dose 
aspirin) remains controversial. Hypertension is a conse­
quence and not the cause of the disorder, and treatment 
is only justified to lower it from severe and immediately 
dangerous levels (> 150–160/100–110 mmHg). Treat­
ing lower levels has been shown to confer no benefit 
and exposes the fetus to additional drugs. If life-
threatening complications are not present and the baby 
is immature, corticosteroids may be given to induce 
maturation of fetal lungs, and delivery postponed 
while mother and baby are closely observed. Mag­
nesium sulphate reduces the incidence of eclamptic 
convulsions.
Acute kidney injury
Maternal AKI may occur in almost any of the pre-
eclamptic syndromes. Worldwide, a more important 
cause of AKI is septic abortion, when the uterus becomes 
infected because of retained products of conception or 
poor sterility in an often illegally induced abortion. 
Renal function is usually recoverable, but AKI in preg­
nancy is particularly prone to progress to cortical necro­
sis, with incomplete or total failure to recover renal 
function.
KIDNEY DISEASE IN ADOLESCENCE
Many causes of renal failure present during infancy or 
childhood, such as congenital urological malformations 
and inherited disorders like cystinosis and autosomal 
recessive polycystic kidney disease. The consequences 
continue throughout the patient’s life and the situation 
often arises whereby patients transition from paediatric 
to adult nephrology services. Some of the issues and 
challenges surrounding this transition are summarised 
in Box 17.64.
without any alteration in the underlying disease activity 
in individuals who had only slight proteinuria before 
pregnancy. This further increases the risk of venous 
thromboembolism, the leading cause of maternal deaths 
in developed countries.
Autoimmune diseases
Systemic autoimmune diseases typically are relatively 
quiescent during pregnancy but tend to relapse in the 
first few weeks and months following delivery. Pre-
existing renal disease increases the fetal and maternal 
risk involved in pregnancy, to a degree dependent on 
the level of renal function, proteinuria and hypertension. 
Patients with such diseases who may become pregnant 
should be aware of the associated risks. During preg­
nancy, therapy should not usually be stopped, but blood 
pressure targets may be modified and agents altered to 
those of proven safety.
Pre-eclampsia
Pre-eclampsia is a systemic disorder that occurs in 
or near the third trimester of pregnancy (triplets > twins 
> singleton). The cause is unknown, although a number 
of risk factors have been identified (Box 17.63).
Clinical features
Pre-eclampsia is traditionally defined by the triad of 
oedema, proteinuria and hypertension. However, 
oedema is common in late pregnancy, proteinuria is a 
late sign and, while hypertension is usually present, it 
may be relative, mild or even absent. Furthermore, all 
Clinical syndromes
• Eclampsia: severe hypertension, encephalopathy and fits
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation
• Thrombotic microangiopathy: may also occur post-partum 
(post-partum haemolytic uraemic syndrome)
• Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
• ‘HELLP’ syndrome: haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low 
platelets (thrombotic microangiopathy with abnormal liver 
function)
Risk factors
• First pregnancy
• First pregnancy with a new partner or long inter-pregnancy 
interval
• Pre-eclampsia in previous pregnancies
• Age < 20 yrs or > 35 yrs
• Multiple pregnancy (triplets > twins > singleton)
• Pre-existing hypertension
• Pre-existing renal disease
Clinical signs
• Hypertension
• Proteinuria
• Oedema
• Evidence of the clinical 
syndromes listed above
Investigations
• Uric acid levels increased 
(before renal impairment 
apparent)
• Platelets decreased
• Reduced GFR (late)
• Fetus small for dates and 
growing slowly
• Fetal distress (late)
17.63  Pre-eclampsia and related diseases 
in pregnancy
• Adherence: young adults moving from parental supervision 
may become disengaged. There may also be reduced 
adherence to prophylactic and therapeutic treatment.
• Adverse events: there is an increased risk of transplant loss 
and other adverse events in young adults on RRT.
• Management: joint clinics should be established with the 
paediatric team to facilitate transfer to regional specialist 
clinics.
17.64  Kidney disease in adolescence
Kidney and urinary tract disease 
17
522
NSAIDs
Impairment of renal function may develop in patients 
on NSAID, since prostaglandins play an important 
role in regulating renal blood flow. This is particularly 
likely in patients with other disorders, such as heart 
failure, cirrhosis, sepsis and pre-existing renal impair­
ment. In addition, idiosyncratic immune reactions may 
occur, causing minimal change nephrotic syndrome 
(p. 498) and acute interstitial nephritis (p. 502). Analgesic 
nephropathy (p. 504) is now a rare complication of 
long-term use.
ACE inhibitors
These abolish the compensatory angiotensin II-mediated 
vasoconstriction of the glomerular efferent arteriole that 
takes place in order to maintain glomerular perfusion 
pressure distal to a renal artery stenosis and in renal 
hypoperfusion (see Fig. 17.1, p. 465). Monitoring of renal 
function before and after initiation of therapy is 
essential.
DRUGS AND THE KIDNEY
Drug-induced renal disease
The kidney is susceptible to damage by drugs because 
it is the route of excretion of many water-soluble com­
pounds, including drugs and their metabolites. Some 
may reach high concentrations in the renal cortex as a 
result of proximal tubular transport mechanisms. Others 
are concentrated in the medulla by the operation of the 
countercurrent system. The same applies to certain 
toxins.
Toxic renal damage may occur by a variety of mecha­
nisms (Box 17.65). Very commonly, drugs contribute to 
the development of acute tubular necrosis as one of mul­
tiple insults. Numerically, reactions to NSAIDs and ACE 
inhibitors are the most important. Haemodynamic renal 
impairment, acute tubular necrosis and allergic reac­
tions are usually reversible if recognised early enough. 
Other types, however, especially those associated with 
extensive fibrosis, are less likely to be reversible.
Mechanism
Drug or toxin
Comments
Haemodynamic
NSAIDs
Reduced renal blood flow due to inhibition of prostaglandin 
synthesis
ACE inhibitors
Reduce efferent glomerular arteriolar tone. Toxic in the 
presence of renal artery stenosis and other conditions of 
renal hypoperfusion
Radiographic contrast media
Multifactorial aetiology may include intense vasoconstriction
Acute tubular necrosis
Aminoglycosides, amphotericin
In most examples, there is evidence of direct tubular toxicity 
but haemodynamic and other factors probably contribute
Paracetamol overdose
May occur with or without serious hepatotoxicity
Radiographic contrast media
May be secondary to precipitation in tubules. Furosemide is 
a co-factor
Loss of tubular/collecting 
duct function
Lithium
Cisplatin
Aminoglycosides, amphotericin
Dose-related, partially reversible loss of concentrating ability. 
Occurs at lower exposures than cause acute tubular necrosis
Glomerulonephritis 
(immune-mediated)
Penicillamine, gold
Membranous nephropathy
Penicillamine
Crescentic or focal necrotising glomerulonephritis in 
association with ANCA and systemic small-vessel vasculitis
NSAIDs
Minimal change nephropathy
Interstitial nephritis 
(immune-mediated)
NSAIDs, penicillins, proton pump 
inhibitors, many others
Acute interstitial nephritis
Interstitial nephritis 
(toxicity)
Lithium
As a consequence of acute toxicity. Otherwise controversial
Ciclosporin, tacrolimus
The major problem with these drugs
Interstitial nephritis (with 
papillary necrosis)
Various NSAIDs (p. 505)
Ischaemic damage secondary to NSAID effects on renal 
blood flow
Tubular obstruction (crystal 
formation)
Aciclovir
Crystals of the drug form in tubules. Aciclovir is now more 
common than the original example of sulphonamides
Chemotherapy
Uric acid crystals form as a consequence of tumour lysis 
(typically, a first-dose effect in haematological malignancy)
Nephrocalcinosis
Oral sodium phosphate-containing 
bowel cleansing agents
Precipitation of calcium phosphate occurring in 1–4% and 
exacerbated by volume depletion. Usually mild but damage 
can be irreversible
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Ergolinic dopamine agonists 
(cabergoline), methysergide*, 
practolol*
Idiopathic is more common (p. 511)
*These drugs are no longer in use in the UK.
17.65  Mechanisms and examples of drug-induced renal disease/dysfunction
Further information and acknowledgements
17
523
Prescribing in renal disease
Many drugs and drug metabolites are excreted by the 
kidney and so the presence of renal impairment alters 
the required dose and frequency (p. 36).
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.edren.org Renal Unit, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh; 
information about individual diseases, protocols for immediate 
in-hospital management and more.
www.edrep.org/resources Educational resources.
www.nephron.com The links under ‘Physicians’ include useful 
urology pages, eGFR and other calculators, and other resources.
www.renal.org/ckd UK Renal Association; current UK 
guidelines on the detection, referral and management of chronic 
kidney disease.
www.uroweb.org/guidelines European Association of Urology 
guidelines. Current European guidelines on the management of 
all common urological conditions.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 463 inset (Dipstick): Pitkin J, Peattie AB, Magowan BA. 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology: An Illustrated Colour Text. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2003.
Fig. 17.19 Beutler JJ, Koomans HA. Malignant hypertension: 
still a challenge. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1977; 12:2019–
2023; photograph courtesy of Prof PJ Slootweg, University 
Hospital, Utrecht. By permission of Oxford University 
Press.
This page intentionally left blank
525
18 
Clinical examination of the cardiovascular 
system 526
Functional anatomy and physiology 528
Anatomy 528
Physiology 530
Investigation of cardiovascular disease 532
Electrocardiogram 532
Cardiac biomarkers 535
Chest X-ray 535
Echocardiography (echo) 536
Computed tomographic imaging 537
Magnetic resonance imaging 537
Cardiac catheterisation 538
Electrophysiology study 539
Radionuclide imaging 539
Presenting problems in cardiovascular 
disease 539
Chest pain 539
Breathlessness (dyspnoea) 543
Acute circulatory failure (cardiogenic  
shock) 544
Heart failure 546
Syncope and presyncope 554
Palpitation 556
Cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death 557
Abnormal heart sounds and murmurs 560
Cardiovascular 
disease
Diseases of the heart valves 613
Rheumatic heart disease 614
Mitral valve disease 616
Aortic valve disease 620
Tricuspid valve disease 624
Pulmonary valve disease 625
Infective endocarditis 625
Valve replacement surgery 629
Congenital heart disease 629
Diseases of the myocardium 636
Myocarditis 636
Cardiomyopathy 636
Specific diseases of heart muscle 638
Cardiac tumours 639
Diseases of the pericardium 639
D.E. Newby
N.R. Grubb
A. Bradbury
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and 
conduction 562
Sinoatrial nodal rhythms 563
Atrial tachyarrhythmias 564
‘Supraventricular’ tachycardias 567
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias 569
Atrioventricular and bundle branch  
block 571
Anti-arrhythmic drug therapy 573
Therapeutic procedures 577
Atherosclerosis 579
Coronary artery disease 583
Stable angina 583
Acute coronary syndrome 589
Cardiac risk of non-cardiac surgery 600
Vascular disease 600
Peripheral arterial disease 600
Diseases of the aorta 603
Hypertension 607
Cardiovascular disease
526
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Insets (Splinter haemorrhage, jugular venous pulse, malar flush, tendon xanthomas) From Newby and Grubb 2005 – see p. 641.
Observation
Hands
Clubbing
Splinter haemorrhages
and other stigmata of
infective endocarditis
Radial pulse
Rate
Rhythm
Blood pressure
Carotid pulses
Volume
Character
Bruits
(see opposite)
Jugular venous pulse
(see opposite)
Height
Waveform
Face, mouth and eyes
Pallor
Central cyanosis
Malar flush
Dental caries
Fundi (retinopathy) 
Stigmata of
hyperlipidaemia
and thyroid disease
Precordium
Inspect
Palpate
(see opposite)
Auscultation
(see opposite)
Back
Lung crepitations
Sacral oedema
Femoral pulses
Radio-femoral delay
Bruits
Abdomen
Hepatomegaly
Ascites      
Aortic aneurysm
Bruits
12
10
9
8
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
Symptoms and well-being
• Breathlessness
• Distress etc.
Body habitus
• Body mass (obesity, cachexia)
• Marfan’s and other syndromes
Tissue perfusion
• Skin temperature
• Sweating
• Urine output
Legs
Peripheral pulses
Oedema
13
Poor oral hygiene in a patient
with infective endocarditis
Xanthelasma
Vasculitis in a
patient with
infective
endocarditis
Cyanosis and clubbing in a
patient with complex cyanotic
congenital heart disease
Peripheral
oedema in a
patient with
congestive
cardiac failure
Splinter haemorrhage
Jugular venous pulse
Malar flush
Tendon xanthomas
(hyperlipidaemia)
11
Clinical examination of the cardiovascular system
527
Palpation of the precordium. 
2
3
1
4  Examination of the 
arterial pulse
• The character of the pulse is 
determined by stroke volume and 
arterial compliance, and is best 
assessed by palpating a major artery, 
such as the carotid or brachial artery.
• Aortic regurgitation, anaemia, sepsis 
and other causes of a large stroke 
volume typically produce a bounding 
pulse with a high amplitude and wide 
pulse pressure (panel A).
• Aortic stenosis impedes ventricular 
emptying and may cause a 
slow-rising, weak and delayed pulse 
(panel A).
• Normal sinus rhythm produces a 
pulse that is regular in time and 
force. Arrhythmias may cause 
irregularity. Atrial fibrillation produces 
a pulse that is irregular in time and 
volume (panel B).
Waveform of the arterial pulse.
 A Aortic regurgitation (red line) and 
stenosis (blue line).  B Atrial fibrillation. 
Normal pulse
Aortic regurgitation
Aortic stenosis
A
B
Waveform of the jugular venous pulse. 
Ventricular
Systole Diastole
a
c
x
v
y
a
c
x
5  Examination of the jugular 
venous pulse
The internal jugular vein, superior vena 
cava and right atrium are in continuity, 
so the height of the jugular venous 
pulsation reflects right atrial pressure. 
When the patient is placed at 45°, with 
the head supported and turned a few 
degrees to the left, the jugular venous 
pulse is visible along the line of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle (see 
opposite).
• The height of the jugular venous 
pulse is determined by right atrial 
pressure and is therefore elevated in 
right heart failure and reduced in 
hypovolaemia.
• If the jugular venous pulse is not 
easily seen, it may be highlighted  
by gentle pressure on the  
abdomen.
• In normal sinus rhythm, the two 
venous peaks, the a and v waves, 
approximate to atrial and ventricular 
systole respectively.
• The x descent reflects atrial 
relaxation and apical displacement  
of the tricuspid valve ring. The  
y descent reflects atrial emptying 
early in diastole. These signs are 
subtle.
• Tricuspid regurgitation produces giant 
v waves that coincide with ventricular 
systole.
8  Auscultation of the heart
• Use the diaphragm to examine at the apex, lower left sternal edge (tricuspid area) 
and upper left (pulmonary area) and right (aortic area) sternal edges.
• Use the bell to examine low-pitched noises, particularly at the apex for mid-diastolic 
murmurs.
• Time the sounds and murmurs by feeling the carotid pulse; systolic murmurs are 
synchronous with the pulse.
• Listen for radiation of systolic murmurs, over the base of the neck (aortic stenosis) 
and in the axilla (mitral incompetence).
• Listen over the left sternal border with the patient sitting forward (aortic 
incompetence), then at the apex with the patient rolled on to the left side (mitral 
stenosis).
See page 560 for analysis and interpretation of heart sounds and murmurs.
The haemodynamic effects of respiration are discussed on page 532.
• Venous pulse has two peaks in each 
cardiac cycle; the arterial pulse has 
one peak.
• The height of the venous pulse varies 
with respiration (falls on inspiration) 
and position.
• Abdominal compression causes the 
venous pulse to rise.
• Venous pulse is not palpable  
and can be occluded by light 
pressure.
Distinguishing venous/
arterial pulsation in the neck
7  Palpation of the precordium
Technique
• Place fingertips over apex (1)  
to assess for position and  
character. Place heel of hand  
over left sternal edge (2) for a 
parasternal heave or ‘lift’. Assess  
for the presence of thrills in all areas, 
including the aortic and pulmonary 
areas (3).
Common abnormalities of the apex beat
• Volume overload, such as mitral or 
aortic regurgitation: displaced, 
forceful
• Pressure overload, such as aortic 
stenosis, hypertension: discrete, 
thrusting
• Dyskinetic, such as left ventricular 
aneurysm: displaced, incoordinate
Other abnormalities
• Palpable S1 (tapping apex beat: mitral 
stenosis)
• Palpable P2 (severe pulmonary 
hypertension)
• Left parasternal heave or ‘lift’ felt by 
heel of hand (right ventricular 
hypertrophy)
• Palpable thrill (aortic stenosis)
Cardiovascular disease
18
528
Cardiovascular disease is the most frequent cause of 
adult death in the Western world; in the UK, one-third 
of men and one-quarter of women will die as a result of 
ischaemic heart disease. In many developed countries, 
the incidence of ischaemic heart disease has been falling 
for the last two or three decades, but it is rising in Eastern 
Europe and Asia. Cardiovascular disease may thus soon 
become the leading cause of death on all continents. 
Strategies for the treatment and prevention of heart 
disease can be highly effective and have been subjected 
to rigorous evaluation. The evidence base for the treat-
ment of cardiovascular disease is stronger than for 
almost any other disease group.
Valvular heart disease is common, but the aetiology 
varies in different parts of the world. On the Indian 
subcontinent and in Africa, it is predominantly due to 
rheumatic fever, whereas calcific aortic valve disease is 
the most common problem in developed countries.
Prompt recognition of the development of heart 
disease is limited by two key factors. Firstly, it is often 
latent; coronary artery disease can proceed to an 
advanced stage before the patient notices any symp-
toms. Secondly, the diversity of symptoms attributable 
to heart disease is limited, so different pathologies may 
frequently present with the same symptoms.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
Anatomy
The heart acts as two serial pumps that share several 
electrical and mechanical components. The right heart 
circulates blood to the lungs where it is oxygenated, and 
the left heart receives this and circulates it to the rest of 
the body (Fig. 18.1). The atria are thin-walled structures 
that act as priming pumps for the ventricles, which 
Fig. 18.1  Direction of blood flow through the heart. The blue arrows show deoxygenated blood moving through the right heart to the lungs. The red 
arrows show oxygenated blood moving from the lungs to the systemic circulation. The normal pressures are shown for each chamber in mmHg. 
Pulmonary artery
Systolic 15–30
Diastolic     5–15
Mean 
10–20
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Systolic 90–140
Diastolic 60–90
Mean 
70–105
Aorta
Left atrium
4–12
Left ventricle
Systolic
End-diastolic
90–140
  4–12
Right atrium
0–5
Right ventricle
Systolic 
End-diastolic 
15–30
  0–5
provide most of the energy to the circulation. Within the 
mediastinum, the atria are situated posteriorly and the 
left atrium (LA) sits anterior to the oesophagus and 
descending aorta. The interatrial septum separates the 
two atria. In 20% of adults, a patent foramen ovale is 
found; this communication in the fetal circulation 
between the right and left atria normally closes at birth 
(p. 629). The right atrium (RA) receives blood from the 
superior and inferior venae cavae and the coronary 
sinus. The LA receives blood from four pulmonary 
veins, two from each of the left and right lungs. The 
ventricles are thick-walled structures, adapted to circu-
lating blood through large vascular beds under pres-
sure. The atria and ventricles are separated by the 
annulus fibrosus, which forms the skeleton for the atrio-
ventricular (AV) valves and which electrically insulates 
the atria from the ventricles. The right ventricle (RV) is 
roughly triangular in shape and extends from the 
annulus fibrosus to near the cardiac apex, which is situ-
ated to the left of the midline. Its anterosuperior surface 
is rounded and convex, and its posterior extent is 
bounded by the interventricular septum, which bulges 
into the chamber. Its upper extent is conical, forming the 
conus arteriosus or outflow tract, from which the pul-
monary artery arises. The RV sits anterior to, and to 
the right of, the left ventricle (LV). The LV is more 
conical in shape and in cross-section is nearly circular. 
It extends from the LA to the apex of the heart. The LV 
myocardium is normally around 10 mm thick (c.f. RV 
thickness of 2–3 mm) because it pumps blood at a 
higher pressure.
The normal heart occupies less than 50% of the trans­
thoracic diameter in the frontal plane, as seen on a chest 
X-ray. On the patient’s left, the cardiac silhouette is 
formed by the aortic arch, the pulmonary trunk, the left 
atrial appendage and the LV. On the right, the RA is 
joined by superior and inferior venae cavae, and the 
lower right border is made up by the RV (Fig. 18.2). In 
disease states or congenital cardiac abnormalities, the 
Functional anatomy and physiology 
18
529
posterior descending artery runs in the posterior inter-
ventricular groove and supplies the inferior part of the 
interventricular septum. This vessel is a branch of the 
RCA in approximately 90% of people (dominant right 
system) and is supplied by the CX in the remainder 
(dominant left system). The coronary anatomy varies 
greatly from person to person and there are many 
‘normal variants’.
The RCA supplies the sinoatrial (SA) node in about 
60% of individuals and the AV node in about 90%. Proxi-
mal occlusion of the RCA therefore often results in 
sinus bradycardia and may also cause AV nodal block. 
Abrupt occlusions in the RCA, due to coronary throm-
bosis, result in infarction of the inferior part of the LV 
and often the RV. Abrupt occlusion of the LAD or CX 
causes infarction in the corresponding territory of the 
LV, and occlusion of the left main coronary artery is 
usually fatal.
The venous system follows the coronary arteries but 
drains into the coronary sinus in the atrioventricular 
groove, and then to the RA. An extensive lymphatic 
system drains into vessels that travel with the coronary 
vessels and then into the thoracic duct.
Conducting system of the heart
The SA node is situated at the junction of the superior 
vena cava and RA (Fig. 18.4). It comprises specialised 
atrial cells that depolarise at a rate influenced by the 
autonomic nervous system and by circulating catechol­
amines. During normal (sinus) rhythm, this depolarisa-
tion wave propagates through both atria via sheets of 
atrial myocytes. The annulus fibrosus forms a conduc-
tion barrier between atria and ventricles, and the only 
pathway through it is the AV node. This is a midline 
structure, extending from the right side of the interatrial 
septum, penetrating the annulus fibrosus anteriorly. The 
AV node conducts relatively slowly, producing a neces-
sary time delay between atrial and ventricular contrac-
tion. The His–Purkinje system is comprised of the bundle 
of His extending from the AV node into the interven-
tricular septum, the right and left bundle branches 
passing along the ventricular septum and into the 
respective ventricles, the anterior and posterior fascicles 
Fig. 18.2  Surface anatomy of the heart. The positions of the major 
cardiac chambers and heart valves are shown. 
RA
RV
LV
Superior
vena cava
Aortic valve
Tricuspid
valve
Pulmonary artery
Pulmonary
valve
Left atrial
appendage
Aorta
Base of
the heart
Apex of
the heart
Inferior
vena cava
Mitral valve
Fig. 18.3  The coronary arteries. Diagram of the anterior view. 
Aorta
Circumflex
artery (CX)
Right coronary
artery (RCA)
Sinoatrial node
Left main coronary artery
Left coronary artery
Pulmonary artery
and valve
Left anterior
descending
artery (LAD)
Apex
Obtuse
marginal
Inferior
vena cava
Superior
vena cava
Atrioventricular
node
Posterior
descending
Diagonal
branches
Septal
perforator
branches
silhouette may change as a result of hypertrophy or 
dilatation.
The coronary circulation
The left main and right coronary arteries arise from the 
left and right sinuses of the aortic root, distal to the aortic 
valve (Fig. 18.3). Within 2.5 cm of its origin, the left main 
coronary artery divides into the left anterior descending 
artery (LAD), which runs in the anterior interventricular 
groove, and the left circumflex artery (CX), which runs 
posteriorly in the atrioventricular groove. The LAD 
gives branches to supply the anterior part of the septum 
(septal perforators) and the anterior, lateral and apical 
walls of the LV. The CX gives marginal branches that 
supply the lateral, posterior and inferior segments of the 
LV. The right coronary artery (RCA) runs in the right 
atrioventricular groove, giving branches that supply 
the RA, RV and inferoposterior aspects of the LV. The 
Fig. 18.4  The cardiac conduction system. Depolarisation starts in the 
sinoatrial node and spreads through the atria (blue arrows), and then 
through the atrioventricular node (black arrows). Depolarisation then 
spreads through the bundle of His and the bundle branches to reach the 
ventricular muscle (red arrows). Repolarisation spreads from epicardium to 
endocardium (green arrows). 
Sinoatrial node
Bundle of His
Atrioventricular
(AV) node
Right bundle
branch
Right
ventricle
Left atrium
Left bundle
branch
Left anterior
fascicle
Left posterior
fascicle
Purkinje fibres
Left ventricle
Cardiovascular disease
18
530
and a further molecule complex, troponin, attached to 
every seventh actin molecule (Fig. 18.5D).
During the plateau phase of the action potential, 
calcium ions enter the cell and are mobilised from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum. They bind to troponin and 
thereby precipitate contraction by shortening of the sar-
comere through the interdigitation of the actin and 
myosin molecules. The force of cardiac muscle contrac-
tion, or inotropic state, is regulated by the influx of 
calcium ions through ‘slow calcium channels’. The 
extent to which the sarcomere can shorten determines 
stroke volume of the ventricle. It is maximally shortened 
in response to powerful inotropic drugs or marked exer-
cise. However, the enlargement of the heart seen in heart 
failure is due to slippage of the myofibrils and adjacent 
cells rather than lengthening of the sarcomere.
Cardiac output
Cardiac output is the product of stroke volume and 
heart rate. Stroke volume is the volume of blood ejected 
in each cardiac cycle (see Fig. 18.36, p. 561), and is 
dependent upon end-diastolic volume and pressure 
(preload), myocardial contractility and systolic aortic 
pressure (afterload). Stretch of cardiac muscle (from 
increased end-diastolic volume) causes an increase in 
the force of contraction, producing a greater stroke 
volume: Starling’s Law of the heart (see Fig. 18.22, 
p. 547).
The contractile state of the myocardium is controlled 
by neuro-endocrine factors, such as adrenaline (epi­
nephrine), and can be influenced by inotropic drugs 
and their antagonists. The response to a physiological 
change or to a drug can be predicted on the basis of its 
combined influence on preload, afterload and contractil-
ity (see Fig. 18.26, p. 551).
Blood flow
Blood passes from the heart through the large central 
elastic arteries into muscular arteries before encounter-
ing the resistance vessels, and ultimately the capillary 
bed, where there is exchange of nutrients, oxygen and 
waste products of metabolism. The central arteries, such 
as the aorta, are predominantly composed of elastic 
tissue with little or no vascular smooth muscle cells. 
When blood is ejected from the heart, the compliant 
aorta expands to accommodate the volume of blood 
before the elastic recoil sustains blood pressure (BP) and 
flow following cessation of cardiac contraction. This 
‘Windkessel effect’ prevents excessive rises in systolic 
BP whilst sustaining diastolic BP, thereby reducing 
cardiac afterload and maintaining coronary perfusion. 
These benefits are lost with progressive arterial stiffen-
ing: a feature of ageing and advanced renal disease.
Passing down the arterial tree, vascular smooth 
muscle cells progressively play a greater role until the 
resistance arterioles are encountered. Although all 
vessels contribute, the resistance vessels (diameter 
50–200 µm) provide the greatest contribution to sys-
temic vascular resistance, with small changes in radius 
having a marked influence on blood flow; resistance 
is proportional to the fourth power of the radius 
(Poiseuille’s Law). The tone of these resistance vessels 
is tightly regulated by humoral, neuronal and mechani-
cal factors. Neurogenic constriction operates via α-
adrenoceptors on vascular smooth muscle, and dilatation 
of the left bundle branch, and the smaller Purkinje fibres 
that ramify through the ventricular myocardium. The 
tissues of the His–Purkinje system conduct very rapidly 
and allow near-simultaneous depolarisation of the entire 
ventricular myocardium.
Nerve supply of the heart
The heart is innervated by both sympathetic and para-
sympathetic fibres. Adrenergic nerves from the cervical 
sympathetic chain supply muscle fibres in the atria and 
ventricles and the electrical conducting system. Positive 
inotropic and chronotropic effects are mediated by β1-
adrenoceptors, whereas β2-adrenoceptors predominate 
in vascular smooth muscle and mediate vasodilatation. 
Parasympathetic pre-ganglionic fibres and sensory 
fibres reach the heart through the vagus nerves. Cholin-
ergic nerves supply the AV and SA nodes via muscarinic 
(M2) receptors. Under resting conditions, vagal inhibi-
tory activity predominates and the heart rate is slow. 
Adrenergic stimulation, associated with exercise, emo-
tional stress, fever and so on, causes the heart rate to 
increase. In disease states, the nerve supply to the heart 
may be affected. For example, in heart failure the sym-
pathetic system may be up-regulated, and in diabetes 
mellitus the nerves themselves may be damaged (auto-
nomic neuropathy, p. 831) so that there is little variation 
in heart rate.
Physiology
The circulation
The RA receives deoxygenated blood from the superior 
and inferior venae cavae and discharges blood to the RV, 
which in turn pumps it into the pulmonary artery. Blood 
passes through the pulmonary arterial and alveolar cap-
illary bed, where it is oxygenated, then drains via four 
pulmonary veins into the LA. This, in turn, fills the LV, 
which delivers blood into the aorta (see Fig. 18.1). During 
ventricular contraction (systole), the tricuspid valve in 
the right heart and the mitral valve in the left heart close, 
and the pulmonary and aortic valves open. In diastole, 
the pulmonary and aortic valves close, and the two AV 
valves open. Collectively, these atrial and ventricular 
events constitute the cardiac cycle of filling and ejection 
of blood from one heartbeat to the next.
Myocardial contraction
Myocardial cells (myocytes) are about 50–100 µm long; 
each cell branches and interdigitates with adjacent cells. 
An intercalated disc permits electrical conduction via 
gap junctions, and mechanical conduction via the fascia 
adherens, to adjacent cells (Fig. 18.5A). The basic unit of 
contraction is the sarcomere (2 µm long), which is 
aligned to those of adjacent myofibrils, giving a striated 
appearance due to the Z-lines (Fig. 18.5B and C). Actin 
filaments are attached at right angles to the Z-lines and 
interdigitate with thicker parallel myosin filaments. The 
cross-links between actin and myosin molecules contain 
myofibrillar adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), which 
breaks down adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to provide 
the energy for contraction (Fig. 18.5E). Two chains of 
actin molecules form a helical structure, with a second 
molecule, tropomyosin, in the grooves of the actin helix, 
Functional anatomy and physiology 
18
531
vasoactive mediators that cause vasodilatation, includ-
ing nitric oxide, prostacyclin and endothelium-derived 
hyperpolarising factor, and vasoconstriction, including 
endothelin-1 and angiotensin II. A balance exists 
whereby the release of such factors contributes to the 
maintenance and regulation of vascular tone and BP. 
Damage to the endothelium may disrupt this balance 
and lead to vascular dysfunction, tissue ischaemia and 
hypertension.
The endothelium also has a major influence on key 
regulatory steps in the recruitment of inflammatory cells 
and on the formation and dissolution of thrombus. Once 
activated, the endothelium expresses surface receptors 
such as E-selectin, intercellular adhesion molecule type 
1 (ICAM-1) and platelet endothelial cell adhesion mol-
ecule type 1 (PECAM-1), which mediate rolling, adhe-
sion and migration of inflammatory leucocytes into the 
subintima. The endothelium also stores and releases the 
multimeric glycoprotein, von Willebrand factor, which 
promotes thrombus formation by linking platelet adhe-
sion to denuded surfaces, especially in the arterial vas-
culature. In contrast, once intravascular thrombus forms, 
tissue plasminogen activator is rapidly released from a 
dynamic storage pool within the endothelium to induce 
via muscarinic and β2-adrenoceptors. In addition, sys-
temic and locally released vasoactive substances 
influence tone; vasoconstrictors include noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine), angiotensin II and endothelin-1, 
whereas adenosine, bradykinin, prostaglandins and 
nitric oxide are vasodilators. Resistance to blood flow 
rises with viscosity and is mainly influenced by red cell 
concentration (haematocrit).
Coronary blood vessels receive sympathetic and 
parasympathetic 
innervation. 
Stimulation 
of 
α-
adrenoceptors causes vasoconstriction; stimulation of 
β2-adrenoceptors causes vasodilatation; the predomi-
nant effect of sympathetic stimulation in coronary arter-
ies is vasodilatation. Parasympathetic stimulation also 
causes modest dilatation of normal coronary arteries. As 
a result of vascular regulation, an atheromatous narrow-
ing (stenosis) in a coronary artery does not limit flow, 
even during exercise, until the cross-sectional area of the 
vessel is reduced by at least 70%.
Endothelial function
The endothelium plays a vital role in the control of vas-
cular homeostasis. It synthesises and releases many 
Fig. 18.5  Schematic of myocytes and the contraction process within a muscle fibre.  A Myocytes are joined together through intercalated 
discs.  B Within the myocytes, myofibrils are composed of longitudinal and transverse tubules extending from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.  C The 
expanded section shows a schematic of an individual sarcomere with thick filaments composed of myosin and thin filaments composed primarily of actin. 
 D Actin filaments are composed of troponin, tropomyosin and actin subunits.  E The three stages of contraction, resulting in shortening of the 
sarcomere. (1) The actin-binding site is blocked by tropomyosin. (2) ATP-dependent release of calcium ions, which bind to troponin, displacing 
tropomyosin. The binding site is exposed. (3) Tilting of the angle of attachment of the myosin head, resulting in fibre shortening. (ADP = adenosine 
diphosphate; ATP = adenosine triphosphate) 
Myofibril-like unit
(1.0 µm diameter)
Intercalated disk
Myocyte
10 µm
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Transverse tubules
Mitochondrion
Muscle
fibre
Mitochondrion
T-tubule
Z-line
Sarcolemma
Actin
subunit
Tropomyosin
Troponin
1
2
3
Tropomyosin
Actin
Myosin body
Z-line
Troponin complex
Myosin head
ATP
ADP
Ca2+
E
C
A
B
D
Cardiovascular disease
18
532
chamber size and is the main test used to assess for 
myocardial ischaemia and infarction.
The basis of an ECG recording is that the electrical 
depolarisation of myocardial tissue produces a small 
dipole current which can be detected by electrode pairs 
on the body surface. These signals are amplified and 
either printed or displayed on a monitor (Fig. 18.6). 
During sinus rhythm, the SA node triggers atrial depo-
larisation, producing a P wave. Depolarisation proceeds 
slowly through the AV node, which is too small to 
produce a depolarisation wave detectable from the body 
surface. The bundle of His, bundle branches and Purkinje 
system are then activated, initiating ventricular myocar-
dial depolarisation, which produces the QRS complex. 
The muscle mass of the ventricles is much larger than 
that of the atria, so the QRS complex is larger than the 
P wave. The interval between the onset of the P wave 
and the onset of the QRS complex is termed the ‘PR 
interval’ and largely reflects the duration of AV nodal 
conduction. Injury to the left or right bundle branch 
delays ventricular depolarisation, widening the QRS 
complex. Selective injury of one of the left fascicles 
(hemiblock, p. 573) affects the electrical axis. Repolarisa-
tion is slower and spreads from the epicardium to the 
endocardium. Atrial repolarisation does not cause a 
detectable signal but ventricular repolarisation produces 
the T wave. The QT interval represents the total duration 
of ventricular depolarisation and repolarisation.
The standard 12–lead ECG
The 12-lead ECG (Box 18.2) is generated from ten physi-
cal electrodes that are attached to the skin. One electrode 
is attached to each limb and six electrodes are attached 
to the chest. In addition, the left arm, right arm and left 
leg electrodes are attached to a central terminal acting 
as an additional virtual electrode in the centre of the 
chest (the right leg electrode acts as an earthing elec-
trode). The twelve ‘leads’ of the ECG refer to recordings 
made from pairs or sets of these electrodes. They com-
prise three groups: three dipole limb leads, three aug-
mented voltage limb leads and six unipole chest leads.
Leads I, II and III are the dipole limb leads and refer 
to recordings obtained from pairs of limb electrodes. 
fibrinolysis and thrombus dissolution. These processes 
are critically involved in the development and progres-
sion of atherosclerosis, and endothelial function and 
injury are seen as central to the pathogenesis of many 
cardiovascular disease states.
Effects of respiration
There is a fall in intrathoracic pressure during inspira-
tion that tends to promote venous flow into the chest, 
producing an increase in the flow of blood through the 
right heart. However, a substantial volume of blood is 
sequestered in the chest as the lungs expand; the increase 
in the capacitance of the pulmonary vascular bed usually 
exceeds any increase in the output of the right heart and 
therefore there is a reduction in the flow of blood into 
the left heart during inspiration. In contrast, expiration 
is accompanied by a fall in venous return to the right 
heart, a reduction in the output of the right heart, a rise 
in the venous return to the left heart (as blood is squeezed 
out of the lungs) and an increase in the output of the left 
heart (Box 18.1).
Fig. 18.6  The electrocardiograph. The components correspond to 
depolarisation and repolarisation, as depicted in Figure 18.4. The upper 
limit of the normal range for each interval is given in brackets. 
QRS width
(0.10 s)
P wave
(0.12 s)
PR interval
(0.20 s)
QT interval 
(0.42 s at rate of 60/min)
P
Q
S
T wave: ventricular
repolarisation
P wave: 
atrial depolarisation 
 T
R
QRS complex: ventricular 
depolarisation
Inspiration
Expiration
Jugular venous pressure
Falls
Rises
Blood pressure
Falls (up to 
10 mmHg)
Rises
Heart rate
Accelerates
Slows
Second heart sound
Splits*
Fuses*
*Inspiration prolongs RV ejection, delaying P2, and shortens LV ejection, 
bringing forward A2; expiration produces the opposite effects.
18.1  Haemodynamic effects of respiration
Pulsus paradoxus
This term is used to describe the exaggerated fall in BP 
during inspiration that is characteristic of cardiac tam-
ponade (pp. 545 and 640) and severe airways obstruc-
tion. In airways obstruction, it is due to accentuation of 
the change in intrathoracic pressure with respiration. In 
cardiac tamponade, compression of the right heart pre-
vents the normal increase in flow through the right heart 
on inspiration, which exaggerates the usual drop in 
venous return to the left heart and produces a marked 
fall in BP (> 10 mmHg fall during inspiration).
INVESTIGATION OF CARDIOVASCULAR 
DISEASE
Specific investigations may be required to confirm a 
diagnosis of cardiac disease. Basic tests, such as electro-
cardiography, chest X-ray and echocardiography, can be 
performed in an outpatient clinic or at the bedside. 
Procedures such as cardiac catheterisation, radionuclide 
imaging, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) require specialised facilities.
Electrocardiogram
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is used to assess cardiac 
rhythm and conduction. It provides information about 
Investigation of cardiovascular disease
18
533
depolarisation in the opposite direction produces a neg-
ative deflection. The average vector of ventricular depo-
larisation is known as the frontal cardiac axis. When the 
vector is at right angles to a lead, the depolarisation in 
that lead is equally negative and positive (isoelectric). In 
Figure 18.7A, the QRS complex is isoelectric in aVL, 
negative in aVR and most strongly positive in lead II; 
the main vector or axis of depolarisation is therefore 60°. 
The normal cardiac axis lies between −30° and +90°. 
Examples of left and right axis deviation are shown in 
Figures 18.7B and C.
There are six chest leads, V1–V6, derived from elec-
trodes placed on the anterior and lateral left side of the 
chest, over the heart. Each lead records the signal 
between the corresponding chest electrode (positive) 
and the central terminal (negative). Leads V1 and V2 
lie approximately over the RV, V3 and V4 over the 
Rhythm strip 
(lead II)
To determine heart rate and rhythm
Cardiac axis
Normal if QRS complexes +ve in leads I/II
P-wave shape
Tall P waves denote right atrial 
enlargement (P pulmonale) and notched  
P waves denote left atrial enlargement  
(P mitrale)
PR interval
Normal = 0.12–0.20 secs. Prolongation 
denotes impaired AV nodal conduction.  
A short PR interval occurs in Wolff–
Parkinson–White syndrome (p. 568)
QRS duration
If > 0.12 secs, ventricular conduction is 
abnormal (left or right bundle branch block)
QRS amplitude
Large QRS complexes occur in slim young 
patients and in patients with left ventricular 
hypertrophy
Q waves
May signify previous myocardial infarction
ST segment
ST elevation may signify myocardial 
infarction, pericarditis or left ventricular 
aneurysm; ST depression may signify 
ischaemia or infarction)
T waves
T-wave inversion has many causes, 
including myocardial ischaemia or 
infarction, and electrolyte disturbances
QT interval
Normal < 0.42 secs. QT prolongation may 
occur with congenital long QT syndrome, 
low K+, Mg2+ or Ca2+, and some drugs (see 
Box 18.34, p. 571)
ECG conventions
Depolarisation towards electrode: positive 
deflection
Depolarisation away from electrode: 
negative deflection
Sensitivity: 10 mm = 1 mV
Paper speed: 25 mm per second
Each large (5 mm) square = 0.2 s
Each small (1 mm) square = 0.04 s
Heart rate = 1500/RR interval (mm) (i.e. 300 
÷ number of large squares between beats)
18.2  How to read a 12–lead ECG: 
examination sequence
Lead I records the signal between the right (negative) 
and left (positive) arms. Lead II records the signal 
between the right arm (negative) and left leg (positive). 
Lead III records the signal between the left arm (nega-
tive) and left leg (positive). These three leads thus record 
electrical activity along three different axes in the frontal 
plane. Leads aVR, aVL and aVF are the augmented 
voltage limb leads. These record electrical activity 
between a limb electrode and a modified central termi-
nal. For example, lead aVL records the signal between 
the left arm (positive) and a central (negative) terminal, 
formed by connecting the right arm and left leg elec-
trodes (Fig. 18.7). Similarly augmented signals are 
obtained from the right arm (aVR) and left leg (aVF). 
These leads also record electrical activity in the frontal 
plane, with each lead 120° apart. Lead aVF thus exam-
ines activity along the axis +90°, and lead aVL along the 
axis −30°, and so on.
When depolarisation moves towards a positive elec-
trode, it produces a positive deflection in the ECG; 
Fig. 18.7  The appearance of the ECG from different leads in 
the frontal plane.  A Normal.  B Left axis deviation, with negative 
deflection in lead II and positive in lead I.  C Right axis deviation, with 
negative deflection in lead I and positive in lead II. 
III (120°)
aVF (90°)
II (60°)
I (0°)
120°
I (0°)
I (0°)
A
B
C
II (60°)
II (60°)
aVR (210°)
aVL (−30°)
Cardiovascular disease
18
534
interventricular septum, and V5 and V6 over the LV (Fig. 
18.8). The LV has the greater muscle mass and contrib-
utes the major component of the QRS complex.
The shape of the QRS complex varies across the 
chest leads. Depolarisation of the interventricular 
septum occurs first and moves from left to right; this 
generates a small initial negative deflection in lead V6 (Q 
wave) and an initial positive deflection in lead V1 (R 
wave). The second phase of depolarisation is activation 
of the body of the LV, which creates a large positive 
deflection or R wave in V6 (with reciprocal changes in 
V1). The third and final phase involves the RV and pro-
duces a small negative deflection or S wave in V6.
The ECG in ischaemia  
and infarction
When an area of the myocardium is ischaemic or under-
going infarction, repolarisation and depolarisation 
become abnormal relative to the surrounding myocar-
dium. In transmural infarction, there is initial ST segment 
elevation (the current of injury) in the leads facing or 
overlying the infarct; Q waves (negative deflections) 
will then appear as the entire thickness of the myocar-
dial wall becomes electrically neutral relative to the 
adjacent myocardium. The changes occurring in infarc-
tion are described in more detail on page 589, and 
shown in Figures 18.71–18.74 (pp. 592–593). In myocar-
dial ischaemia, the ECG typically shows ST segment 
depression and/or T-wave inversion; it is usually the 
subendocardium that most readily becomes ischaemic. 
Other conditions, such as left ventricular hypertrophy 
and electrolyte disturbances, can cause similar ST and 
T-wave changes.
Exercise (stress) ECG
Exercise electrocardiography is used to detect myocar-
dial ischaemia during physical stress and is helpful in 
the diagnosis of coronary artery disease. A 12-lead ECG 
is recorded during exercise on a treadmill or bicycle 
ergometer. The limb electrodes are placed on the shoul-
ders and hips rather than the wrists and ankles. The 
Fig. 18.8  The sequence of activation of the ventricles.  A Activation 
of the septum occurs first (red arrows), followed by spreading of the impulse 
through the LV (blue arrows) and then the RV (green arrows).  B Normal 
electrocardiographic complexes from leads V1 and V6. 
Right
bundle
AV node
Left
bundle
V6
V5
V4
V3
V2
V1
Bundle of His
RV
LV
V1
V6
1 3
2
1
1
2
3
3
2
A
B
Indications
• To confirm the diagnosis of angina
• To evaluate stable angina
• To assess prognosis following myocardial infarction
• To assess outcome after coronary revascularisation, e.g. 
coronary angioplasty
• To diagnose and evaluate the treatment of exercise-induced 
arrhythmias
High-risk findings
• Low threshold for ischaemia (i.e. within stage 1 or 2 of the 
Bruce Protocol)
• Fall in BP on exercise
• Widespread, marked or prolonged ischaemic ECG changes
• Exercise-induced arrhythmia
18.3  Exercise testing
Bruce Protocol is the most commonly used for testing. 
BP is recorded and symptoms assessed throughout the 
test. Common indications for exercise testing are shown 
in Box 18.3. A test is ‘positive’ if anginal pain occurs, BP 
falls or fails to increase, or if there are ST segment shifts 
of more than 1 mm (see Fig. 18.64, p. 584). Exercise 
testing is useful in confirming the diagnosis in patients 
with suspected angina, and in such patients has good 
sensitivity and specificity (see Box 18.3). False-negative 
results can occur in patients with coronary artery disease, 
and some patients with a positive test will not have 
coronary disease (false-positive). It is an unreliable pop-
ulation screening tool because, in low-risk individuals 
(e.g. asymptomatic young or middle-aged women), an 
abnormal response is more likely to represent a false-
positive than a true positive test.
Stress testing is contraindicated in the presence of 
acute coronary syndrome, decompensated heart failure 
and severe hypertension.
Ambulatory ECG
Continuous (ambulatory) ECG recordings can be 
obtained using a portable digital recorder. These devices 
usually provide limb lead ECG recordings only, and can 
record for between 1 and 7 days. Ambulatory ECG 
recording is principally used in the investigation of 
patients with suspected arrhythmia, such as those with 
intermittent palpitation, dizziness or syncope. For these 
patients, a 12-lead ECG provides only a snapshot of the 
cardiac rhythm and is unlikely to detect an intermittent 
arrhythmia, so a longer period of recording is useful (see 
Fig. 18.39, p. 563). These devices can also be used to 
assess rate control in patients with atrial fibrillation, and 
are sometimes used to detect transient myocardial 
ischaemia using ST segment analysis. For patients with 
more infrequent symptoms, small, patient-activated 
ECG recorders can be issued for several weeks until a 
symptom episode occurs. The patient places the device 
on the chest to record the rhythm during the episode. 
With some devices, the recording can be transmitted 
to hospital via telephone. Implantable ‘loop recorders’ 
resemble a leadless pacemaker and are implanted sub-
cutaneously. They have a lifespan of 1–3 years and are 
used to investigate patients with infrequent but poten-
tially serious symptoms, such as syncope.
Investigation of cardiovascular disease
18
535
•	 Right atrial enlargement projects from the right 
heart border towards the right lower lung field.
•	 Left ventricular dilatation causes prominence of the 
left heart border and enlargement of the cardiac 
silhouette. Left ventricular hypertrophy produces 
rounding of the left heart border (Fig. 18.10).
•	 Right ventricular dilatation increases heart size, 
displaces the apex upwards and straightens the left 
heart border.
Lateral or oblique projections may be useful for 
detecting pericardial calcification in patients with con-
strictive pericarditis (p. 641) or a calcified thoracic aortic 
aneurysm, as these abnormalities may be obscured by 
the spine on the PA view.
The lung fields on the chest X-ray may show conges-
tion and oedema in patients with heart failure (see Fig. 
18.25, p. 550), and an increase in pulmonary blood flow 
Cardiac biomarkers
Plasma or serum biomarkers can be measured to assess 
myocardial dysfunction and ischaemia.
Brain natriuretic peptide
This is a 32-amino acid peptide and is secreted by the 
LV along with an inactive 76-amino acid N-terminal 
fragment (NT-proBNP). The latter is diagnostically more 
useful, as it has a longer half-life. It is elevated princi-
pally in conditions associated with left ventricular systo-
lic dysfunction, and may aid the diagnosis and assess 
prognosis and response to therapy in patients with heart 
failure (p. 546).
Cardiac troponins
Troponin I and troponin T are structural cardiac muscle 
proteins (see Fig. 18.5, p. 531) that are released during 
myocyte damage and necrosis, and represent the corner-
stone of the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction 
(MI, p. 593). However, modern assays are extremely sen-
sitive and some have a normal reference range and can 
detect very low levels of myocardial damage, so that 
elevated plasma troponin concentrations are seen in 
other acute conditions, such as pulmonary embolus, 
septic shock and acute pulmonary oedema. The diagno-
sis of MI therefore relies on the patient’s clinical presen-
tation (see Box 18.61, p. 590).
Chest X-ray
This is useful for determining the size and shape of the 
heart, and the state of the pulmonary blood vessels and 
lung fields. Most information is given by a postero-
anterior (PA) projection taken in full inspiration. Antero-
posterior (AP) projections are convenient when patient 
movement is restricted but result in magnification of the 
cardiac shadow.
An estimate of overall heart size can be made by 
comparing the maximum width of the cardiac outline 
with the maximum internal transverse diameter of the 
thoracic cavity. ‘Cardiomegaly’ is the term used to 
describe an enlarged cardiac silhouette where the ‘car-
diothoracic ratio’ is greater than 0.5. It can be caused by 
chamber dilatation, especially left ventricular dilatation, 
or by a pericardial effusion. Artefactual cardiomegaly 
may be due to a mediastinal mass or pectus excavatum 
(p. 731), and cannot be reliably assessed from an AP 
film. Cardiomegaly is not a sensitive indicator of left 
ventricular systolic dysfunction since the cardiothoracic 
ratio is normal in many affected patients (false-negative) 
and also lacks specificity with many patients with 
apparent cardiomegaly having normal echocardiograms 
(false-positive).
Dilatation of individual cardiac chambers can be rec-
ognised by the characteristic alterations to the cardiac 
silhouette:
•	 Left atrial dilatation results in prominence of the 
left atrial appendage, creating the appearance of a 
straight left heart border, a double cardiac shadow 
to the right of the sternum, and widening of the 
angle of the carina (bifurcation of the trachea) as the 
left main bronchus is pushed upwards (Fig. 18.9).
Fig. 18.9  Chest X-ray of a patient with mitral stenosis and 
regurgitation indicating enlargement of the LA and prominence of 
the pulmonary artery trunk. 
Splaying
of carina
Distended
pulmonary veins
Enlarged
left atrium
‘Double shadow’ of left
atrial enlargement
Enlarged
pulmonary
trunk
Fig. 18.10  Chest X-ray of a patient with aortic regurgitation, left 
ventricular enlargement and dilatation of the ascending aorta. 
Normal-sized
aortic arch
Large left
ventricle
Dilated
ascending
aorta
Cardiovascular disease
18
536
(‘pulmonary plethora’) in those with left-to-right shunt. 
Pleural effusions may also occur in heart failure.
Echocardiography (echo)
Two-dimensional echocardiography
Echocardiography, or cardiac ultrasound, is obtained 
by placing an ultrasound transducer on the chest wall 
to image the heart structures as a real-time, two-
dimensional ‘slice’. This permits the rapid assessment of 
cardiac structure and function. Left ventricular wall 
thickness and ejection fraction can be estimated. 
Common indications for echocardiography are shown 
in Box 18.4.
Doppler echocardiography
This depends on the Doppler principle that sound waves 
reflected from moving objects, such as intracardiac red 
blood cells, undergo a frequency shift. The speed and 
direction of the red cells, and thus of blood, can be 
detected in the heart chambers and great vessels. The 
greater the frequency shift, the faster the blood is moving. 
The derived information can be presented either as a plot 
of blood velocity against time for a particular point in 
the heart (Fig. 18.11) or as a colour overlay on a two-
dimensional real-time echo picture (colour-flow Doppler, 
Fig. 18.12). Doppler echocardio­graphy can be used to 
detect valvular regurgitation, where the direction of 
Fig. 18.11  Doppler echocardiography in aortic stenosis.
 A The aortic valve is imaged and a Doppler beam passed directly 
through the left ventricular outflow tract and the aorta into  
the turbulent flow beyond the stenosed valve.  B The velocity of 
the blood cells is recorded to determine the maximum velocity  
and hence the pressure gradient across the valve. In this  
example, the peak velocity is approximately 450 cm/sec  
(4.5 m/sec), indicating severe aortic stenosis (peak gradient  
of 81 mmHg). 
Transducer
Chest wall
LV
LA
Turbulent
flow
Stenosed
aortic
valve
A
B
• Assessment of left ventricular function
• Diagnosis and quantification of severity of valve disease
• Identification of vegetations in endocarditis
• Identification of structural heart disease in atrial fibrillation, 
cardiomyopathies or congenital heart disease
• Detection of pericardial effusion
• Identification of structural heart disease or intracardiac 
thrombus in systemic embolism
18.4  Common indications for echocardiography
Fig. 18.12  Echocardiographic illustration of the principal cardiac structures in the ‘four-chamber’ view.  A The major 
chambers and valves.  B Colour-flow Doppler has been used to demonstrate mitral regurgitation: a flame-shaped (yellow/blue) turbulent 
jet into the left atrium. 
Tricuspid
valve
Right
ventricle
Left ventricle
(dilated)
Mitral valve
Right atrium
Left atrium
A
B
Investigation of cardiovascular disease
18
537
perfusion become ischaemic and contract poorly under 
stress, showing as a wall motion abnormality on the 
scan. Stress echocardiography is sometimes used to 
examine myocardial viability in patients with impaired 
left ventricular function. Low-dose dobutamine can 
induce contraction in ‘hibernating’ myocardium; such 
patients may benefit from bypass surgery or percuta­
neous coronary intervention.
Computed tomographic imaging
Computed tomography (CT) is useful for imaging the 
cardiac chambers, great vessels, pericardium, and medi-
astinal structures and masses. Multidetector scanners 
can acquire up to 320 slices per rotation, allowing very 
high-resolution imaging. CT is often performed using a 
timed injection of X-ray contrast to produce clear images 
of blood vessels and associated pathologies. Contrast 
scans are very useful for imaging the aorta in suspected 
aortic dissection (see Fig. 18.82, p. 607), and the pulmo-
nary arteries and branches in suspected pulmonary 
embolism (p. 721).
Some centres use cardiac CT scans for quantification 
of coronary artery calcification, which may serve as an 
index of cardiovascular risk. However, modern multi­
detector scanning allows non-invasive coronary angio­
graphy (Fig. 18.13) with a spatial resolution approaching 
that of conventional coronary arteriography and at a 
lower radiation dose. CT coronary angiography is par-
ticularly useful in the initial elective assessment of 
patients with chest pain and a low or intermediate likeli-
hood of disease, since its negative predictive value is 
very high: that is, excluding the presence of coronary 
artery disease. Modern volume scanners are also able to 
assess myocardial perfusion, often at the same sitting.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) requires no ionising 
radiation and can be used to generate cross-sectional 
images of the heart, lungs and mediastinal structures. It 
provides better differentiation of soft tissue structures 
than CT but is poor at demonstrating calcification. MRI 
scans need to be ‘gated’ to the ECG, allowing the scanner 
to produce moving images of the heart and mediastinal 
structures throughout the cardiac cycle. MRI is very 
blood flow is reversed and turbulence is seen, and is also 
used to detect high pressure gradients associated with 
stenosed valves. For example, the normal resting systolic 
flow velocity across the aortic valve is approximately 
1 m/sec; in the presence of aortic stenosis, this is 
increased as blood accelerates through the narrow 
orifice. In severe aortic stenosis, the peak aortic velocity 
may be increased to 5 m/sec (see Fig. 18.11). An estimate 
of the pressure gradient across a valve or lesion is given 
by the modified Bernoulli equation:
Pressure gradient mmHg
peak velocity in m sec
(
)
(
/
)
=
×
4
2
Advanced techniques include three-dimensional 
echocardiography, intravascular ultrasound (defines 
vessel wall abnormalities and guides coronary interven-
tion), intracardiac ultrasound (provides high-resolution 
images) and tissue Doppler imag­ing (quantifies myo-
cardial contractility and diastolic function).
Transoesophageal 
echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography sometimes produces 
poor images, especially if the patient is overweight or 
has obstructive airways disease. Some structures are dif-
ficult to visualise in transthoracic views, such as the left 
atrial appendage, pulmonary veins, thoracic aorta and 
interatrial septum. Transoesophageal echocardiography 
(TOE) uses an endoscope-like ultrasound probe which 
is passed into the oesophagus under light sedation and 
positioned behind the LA. This produces high-resolution 
images, which makes the technique particularly valua-
ble for investigating patients with prosthetic (especially 
mitral) valve dysfunction, congenital abnormalities (e.g. 
atrial septal defect), aortic dissection, infective endocar-
ditis (vegetations that are too small to be detected by 
transthoracic echocardiography) and systemic embo-
lism (intracardiac thrombus or masses).
Stress echocardiography
Stress echocardiography is used to investigate patients 
with suspected coronary artery disease who are unsuit-
able for exercise stress testing, such as those with mobil-
ity problems or pre-existing bundle branch block. A 
two-dimensional echo is performed before and after 
infusion of a moderate to high dose of an inotrope, 
such as dobutamine. Myocardial segments with poor 
Fig. 18.13  Computed tomography coronary angiography demonstrating normal coronary arteries (arrows). 
A
B
C
Cardiovascular disease
18
538
revascularisation procedures, or in identifying those 
with myocardial infiltration such as that seen with 
sarcoid heart disease and right ventricular dysplasia.
Cardiac catheterisation
This involves passage of a preshaped catheter via a vein 
or artery into the heart under X-ray guidance, which 
allows the measurement of pressure and oxygen satura-
tion in the cardiac chambers and great vessels, and the 
performance of angiograms by injecting contrast media 
into a chamber or blood vessel.
Left heart catheterisation involves accessing the arte-
rial circulation, usually via the radial artery, to allow 
catheterisation of the aorta, LV and coronary arteries. 
Coronary angiography is the most widely performed 
procedure, in which the left and right coronary arteries 
are selectively cannulated and imaged, providing infor-
mation about the extent and severity of coronary sten-
oses, thrombus and calcification (Fig. 18.15). This permits 
useful for imaging the aorta, including suspected dissec-
tion (see Fig. 18.81, p. 606), and can define the anatomy 
of the heart and great vessels in patients with congenital 
heart disease. It is also useful for detecting infiltrative 
conditions affecting the heart.
Physiological data can be obtained from the signal 
returned from moving blood, which allows quantifica-
tion of blood flow across regurgitant or stenotic valves. 
It is also possible to analyse regional wall motion in 
patients with suspected coronary disease or cardio­
myopathy. The RV is difficult to assess using echo­
cardiography because of its retrosternal position but is 
readily visualised with MRI.
MRI can also be employed to assess myocardial per-
fusion and viability. When a contrast agent, such as 
gadolinium, is injected, areas of myocardial hypo­
perfusion can be identified with better spatial resolution 
than nuclear medicine techniques. Later redistribution 
of this contrast, so-called delayed enhancement, can 
be used to identify myocardial scarring and fibrosis 
(Fig. 18.14). This can help in selecting patients for 
Fig. 18.14  Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging.  A Recent inferior myocardial infarction with black area of microvascular obstruction (arrow).
 B Old anterior myocardial infarction with large area of subendocardial delayed gadolinium enhancement (white area, arrows). 
B
A
Fig. 18.15  The left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries with a stenosis in the left anterior descending vessel.
 A Coronary artery angiogram.  B Schematic of the vessels and branches. 
Diagnostic 
catheter
Left main
stem artery
Circumflex
artery
Left anterior
descending
artery
Stenosis
A
B
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
539
used to assess myocardial metabolism, but this is only 
available in a few centres.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN 
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
Cardiovascular disease gives rise to a relatively limited 
range of symptoms. Differential diagnosis depends on 
careful analysis of the factors that provoke symptoms, 
the subtle differences in how they are described by the 
patient, the clinical findings and appropriate investiga-
tions. A close relationship between symptoms and exer-
cise is the hallmark of heart disease. The New York 
Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification is 
used to grade disability (Box 18.5).
Chest pain
Chest pain is a common presentation of cardiac disease 
but can also be a manifestation of anxiety or disease 
of the respiratory, musculoskeletal or gastrointestinal 
systems (see Box 18.6 below). Some patients deny 
‘pain’ in favour of ‘discomfort’ but the significance 
remains the same.
Characteristics of cardiac pain
Several key characteristics help to distinguish cardiac 
pain from that of other causes (Fig. 18.16). Diagnosis 
may be difficult and it is helpful to classify pain as 
typical, atypical or non-cardiac chest pain, based on the 
balance of evidence (Fig. 18.17).
•	 Site. Cardiac pain is typically located in the centre 
of the chest because of the derivation of the nerve 
supply to the heart and mediastinum.
planning of percutaneous coronary intervention and 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Left ventriculo­
graphy can be performed during the procedure to deter-
mine the size and function of the LV and to demonstrate 
mitral regurgitation. Aortography defines the size of the 
aortic root and thoracic aorta, and can help quantify 
aortic regurgitation. Left heart catheterisation is a day-
case procedure and is relatively safe, with serious com-
plications occurring in fewer than 1 in 1000 cases.
Right heart catheterisation is used to assess right 
heart and pulmonary artery pressures, and to detect 
intracardiac shunts by measuring oxygen saturations in 
different chambers. For example, a step up in oxygen 
saturation from 65% in the RA to 80% in the pulmonary 
artery is indicative of a large left-to-right shunt that 
might be due to a ventricular septal defect. Cardiac 
output can also be measured using thermodilution tech-
niques. Left atrial pressure can be measured directly by 
puncturing the interatrial septum from the RA with a 
special catheter. For most purposes, however, a satisfac-
tory approximation to left atrial pressure can be obtained 
by ‘wedging’ an end-hole or balloon catheter in a branch 
of the pulmonary artery. Swan–Ganz balloon catheters 
are often used to monitor pulmonary ‘wedge’ pressure 
as a guide to left heart filling pressure in critically ill 
patients (p. 186).
Electrophysiology study
Patients with known or suspected arrhythmia are inves-
tigated by percutaneous placement of electrode cathe-
ters into the heart via the femoral and neck veins. 
Electrophysiology study (EPS) is most commonly per-
formed to evaluate patients for catheter ablation, nor-
mally done during the same procedure. It is occasionally 
used for risk stratification of patients suspected of being 
at risk of ventricular arrhythmias.
Radionuclide imaging
The availability of gamma-emitting radionuclides with 
a short half-life has made it possible to study cardiac 
function non-invasively. Two techniques are available, 
although their use is declining due to the availability of 
equivalent or superior imaging techniques that have 
lower or no exposure to ionising radiation.
Blood pool imaging
The isotope is injected intravenously and mixes with 
the circulating blood. A gamma camera detects the 
amount of radiation-emitting blood in the heart at dif-
ferent phases of the cardiac cycle, thereby permitting 
the calculation of ventricular ejection fractions. It also 
allows the assessment of the size and ‘shape’ of the 
cardiac chambers.
Myocardial perfusion imaging
This technique involves obtaining scintiscans of the 
myocardium at rest and during stress after the adminis-
tration of an intravenous radioactive isotope, such as 
99technetium tetrofosmin (see Fig. 18.65, p. 585). More 
sophisticated quantitative information is obtained with 
positron emission tomography (PET), which can also be 
• Class I
No limitation during ordinary activity
• Class II
Slight limitation during ordinary activity
• Class III
Marked limitation of normal activities without 
symptoms at rest
• Class IV
Unable to undertake physical activity without 
symptoms; symptoms may be present at rest
18.5  New York Heart Association (NYHA) 
functional classification
Fig. 18.16  Typical ischaemic cardiac pain. Characteristic hand 
gestures used to describe cardiac pain. Typical radiation of pain is shown 
in the schematic. 
Cardiovascular disease
18
540
exertion. Pain that occurs after rather than during 
exertion is usually musculoskeletal or psychological 
in origin. The pain of aortic dissection, massive 
pulmonary embolism or pneumothorax is usually 
very sudden or instantaneous in onset.
•	 Associated features. The pain of MI, massive 
pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection is often 
accompanied by autonomic disturbance, including 
sweating, nausea and vomiting. Breathlessness, due 
to pulmonary congestion arising from transient 
ischaemic left ventricular dysfunction, is often a 
prominent and occasionally the dominant feature of 
MI or angina (angina equivalent). Breathlessness 
may also accompany any of the respiratory causes 
of chest pain and can be associated with cough, 
wheeze or other respiratory symptoms. 
Gastrointestinal disorders, such as gastro-
oesophageal reflux, peptic ulceration or biliary colic, 
may present with chest pain but effort-related 
‘indigestion’ is usually due to heart disease.
Differential diagnosis of chest pain
Common causes of chest pain are listed in Box 18.6.
Psychological aspects of chest pain
Emotional distress is a common cause of atypical or non-
cardiac chest pain. This diagnosis should be considered 
if there are features of anxiety and the pain lacks a 
predictable relationship with exercise. However, the 
prospect of heart disease is a frightening experience, 
particularly when it has been responsible for the death 
of a close friend or relative; psychological and organic 
features therefore often coexist. Anxiety may amplify 
the effects of organic disease and can create a very con-
fusing picture. Patients who believe they are suffering 
from heart disease are sometimes afraid to take exercise 
and this may make it difficult to establish their true 
effort tolerance; assessment may also be complicated by 
the impact of physical deconditioning.
•	 Radiation. Ischaemic cardiac pain may radiate to 
the neck, jaw, and upper or even lower arms. 
Occasionally, cardiac pain may be experienced  
only at the sites of radiation or in the back. Pain 
situated over the left anterior chest and radiating 
laterally is unlikely to be due to cardiac ischaemia 
and may have many causes, including pleural or 
lung disorders, musculoskeletal problems and 
anxiety.
•	 Character. Cardiac pain is typically dull, constricting, 
choking or ‘heavy’, and is usually described as 
squeezing, crushing, burning or aching but not 
sharp, stabbing, pricking or knife-like. The sensation 
can be described as breathlessness. Patients often 
emphasise that it is a discomfort rather than a pain. 
They typically use characteristic hand gestures (e.g. 
open hand or clenched fist) when describing 
ischaemic pain (see Fig. 18.16).
•	 Provocation. Anginal pain occurs during (not 
after) exertion and is promptly relieved (in less  
than 5 minutes) by rest. The pain may also be 
precipitated or exacerbated by emotion but tends  
to occur more readily during exertion, after a large 
meal or in a cold wind. In crescendo or unstable 
angina, similar pain may be precipitated by 
minimal exertion or at rest. The increase in venous 
return or preload induced by lying down may also 
be sufficient to provoke pain in vulnerable patients 
(decubitus angina). The pain of MI may be 
preceded by a period of stable or unstable angina 
but often occurs de novo. In contrast, pleural or 
pericardial pain is usually described as a ‘sharp’ or 
‘catching’ sensation that is exacerbated by 
breathing, coughing or movement. Pain associated 
with a specific movement (bending, stretching, 
turning) is likely to be musculoskeletal in origin.
•	 Onset. The pain of MI typically takes several 
minutes or even longer to develop; similarly, angina 
builds up gradually in proportion to the intensity of 
Ischaemic
cardiac chest pain
Non-cardiac chest pain
Relieving factors
Respiratory, gastrointestinal,
locomotor or psychological
Rest
Quick response to nitrates
Precipitation
Spontaneous, not related to exertion,
provoked by posture, respiration or palpation
Precipitated by exertion
and/or emotion
Character
Sharp, stabbing, catching
Tight, squeezing, choking
Radiation
Other or no radiation
Jaw/neck/shoulder/arm
(occasionally back)
Location
Peripheral, localised
Central, diffuse
Associated
features
Not relieved by rest
Slow or no response to nitrates
Breathlessness
Fig. 18.17  Identifying ischaemic cardiac pain: the ‘balance’ of evidence. 
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
541
abrupt in onset (p. 605). The pain follows the path of the 
dissection.
Oesophageal pain
This can mimic the pain of angina very closely, is some-
times precipitated by exercise and may be relieved by 
nitrates. However, it is usually possible to elicit a history 
relating chest pain to supine posture or eating, drinking 
or oesophageal reflux. It often radiates to the interscapu-
lar region and dysphagia may be present.
Bronchospasm
Patients with reversible airways obstruction, such as 
asthma, may describe exertional chest tightness that is 
relieved by rest. This may be difficult to distinguish from 
ischaemic chest tightness. Bronchospasm may be associ-
ated with wheeze, atopy and cough (p. 654).
Musculoskeletal chest pain
This is a common problem that is very variable in site 
and intensity but does not usually fall into any of the 
patterns described above. The pain may vary with 
posture or movement of the upper body and is some-
times accompanied by local tenderness over a rib or 
costal cartilage. There are numerous causes, including 
arthritis, costochondritis, intercostal muscle injury and 
Coxsackie viral infection (epidemic myalgia or Born-
holm disease). Many minor soft tissue injuries are related 
to everyday activities, such as driving, manual work and 
sport. The differential diagnosis of peripheral or pleural 
chest pain is discussed on page 658.
Initial evaluation of suspected cardiac pain
A careful history is crucial in determining whether pain 
is cardiac or not. Although the physical findings and 
subsequent investigations may help to confirm the 
diagnosis, they are of more value in determining the 
nature and extent of any underlying heart disease, 
the risk of a serious adverse event, and the best course 
of management.
Stable angina
Effort-related chest pain is the hallmark of angina pec-
toris or ‘choking in the chest’ (Fig. 18.18). The repro­
ducibility, predictability and relationship to physical 
exertion (and occasionally emotion) of the chest pain are 
Anxiety/emotion
Cardiac
• Myocardial ischaemia 
(angina)
• MI
• Pericarditis
• Mitral valve prolapse
Aortic
• Aortic dissection
• Aortic aneurysm
Oesophageal
• Oesophagitis
• Oesophageal spasm
• Mallory–Weiss syndrome
Lungs/pleura
• Bronchospasm
• Pulmonary infarct
• Pneumonia
• Tracheitis
• Pneumothorax
• Pulmonary embolism
• Malignancy
• Tuberculosis
• Connective tissue disorders 
(rare)
Musculoskeletal
• Osteoarthritis
• Rib fracture/injury
• Costochondritis (Tietze’s 
syndrome)
• Intercostal muscle injury
• Epidemic myalgia 
(Bornholm disease)
Neurological
• Prolapsed intervertebral 
disc
• Herpes zoster
• Thoracic outlet syndrome
18.6  Common causes of chest pain
Myocarditis and pericarditis
Pain is characteristically felt retrosternally, to the left of 
the sternum, or in the left or right shoulder, and typically 
varies in intensity with movement and the phase of res-
piration. The pain is described as ‘sharp’ and may ‘catch’ 
the patient during inspiration, coughing or lying flat; 
there may be a history of a prodromal viral illness.
Mitral valve prolapse
Sharp left-sided chest pain that is suggestive of a 
musculo­skeletal problem may be a feature of mitral 
valve prolapse (p. 618).
Aortic dissection
This pain is severe, sharp and tearing, is often felt in or 
penetrating through to the back, and is typically very 
Fig. 18.18  Pathophysiology, clinical features and risk assessment of patients with stable or unstable coronary heart disease. 
Stable angina
Acute coronary syndrome
• Fixed stenosis
• Stable fibrous plaque
• Dynamic stenosis
• Ruptured or inflamed plaque
Pathophysiology
• Demand-led ischaemia
• Related to effort
• Predictable
• Symptoms over long term
Clinical features
• Symptoms on minimal exertion
• Exercise testing
 
Duration of exercise
 
Degree of ECG changes
 
Abnormal BP response
• CT coronary angiogram
Risk assessment
• Supply-led ischaemia
• Symptoms at rest
• Unpredictable
• Symptoms over short term
• Frequent or nocturnal symptoms
• ECG changes at rest
• ECG changes with symptoms
• Elevation of troponin
Cardiovascular disease
18
542
angina (e.g. anaemia, thyroid disease). Stable angina is 
usually a symptom of coronary artery disease but may 
be a manifestation of other forms of heart disease, par-
ticularly aortic valve disease and hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. In patients with angina in whom a murmur 
is found, echocardiography should be performed.
A full blood count, fasting blood glucose, lipids, 
thyroid function tests and a 12-lead ECG are the most 
important baseline investigations. Exercise testing may 
confirm the diagnosis and also identify high-risk patients 
the most important features. The duration of symptoms 
should be noted because patients with recent-onset 
angina are at greater risk than those with long-standing 
and unchanged symptoms.
Physical examination is often normal but may reveal 
evidence of risk factors (e.g. xanthoma indicating hyper-
lipidaemia), left ventricular dysfunction (e.g. dyskinetic 
apex beat, gallop rhythm), other manifestations of arte-
rial disease (e.g. bruits, signs of peripheral vascular 
disease) and unrelated conditions that may exacerbate 
Fig. 18.19  Summary of treatment for acute coronary syndrome (ACS). *Not required following PCI. Amended from SIGN 93. For details of the 
GRACE score, see Figure 18.70, p. 591 (ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; GP = glycoprotein; LMW = low molecular weight; PCI = percutaneous 
coronary intervention). From SIGN 93 – see p. 641.
Immediate clinical assessment
ECG
Troponin
ST segment
elevation ACS?
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Presenting
< 12 hrs from
symptom onset?
Yes
Thrombolysis IV +
fondaparinux or
LMW heparin IV
Primary PCI
available?
Yes
No
Medium-
to high-risk
ACS?
No
Recurrent
symptoms?
No
Yes
Failed
reperfusion?
Calculate GRACE score:
In-hospital death
Low risk < 1%
Medium risk 1–9%
High risk > 9%
Early in-hospital
coronary angiography
+ consider
GP IIb/IIIa receptor
antagonist IV infusion
Maintenance in-hospital medication:
aspirin, ticagrelor, fondaparinux/LMW heparin,*
statin, β-blocker and ACE inhibitor therapy
Eligible for
thrombolysis?
GP IIb/IIIa receptor
antagonist IV +
emergency PCI
Primary PCI
< 120 min?
Yes
Fondaparinux or
LMW heparin SC
Consider nitrate
IV infusion
Reperfusion
therapy
Oxygen + cardiac rhythm monitoring
Aspirin 300 mg PO
Ticagrelor 180 mg PO
Metoprolol 5–15 mg IV/50–100 mg PO
Transfer to a specialist cardiology unit
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
543
fibrillation, in a diseased heart. An increase in the left 
ventricular diastolic pressure causes the pressure in the 
LA, pulmonary veins and pulmonary capillaries to rise. 
When the hydrostatic pressure of the pulmonary capil-
laries exceeds the oncotic pressure of plasma (about 
25–30 mmHg), fluid moves from the capillaries into 
alveoli. This stimulates respiration through a series of 
autonomic reflexes, producing rapid shallow respira-
tion. Congestion of the bronchial mucosa may cause 
wheeze (cardiac asthma).
Acute pulmonary oedema is a terrifying experience 
because of the sensation of ‘fighting for breath’. Sitting 
upright or standing may provide some relief by helping 
to reduce congestion at the apices of the lungs. The 
patient may be unable to speak and is typically dis-
tressed, agitated, sweaty and pale. Respiration is rapid, 
with recruitment of accessory muscles, coughing and 
wheezing. Sputum may be profuse, frothy and blood-
streaked or pink. Extensive crepitations and rhonchi are 
usually audible in the chest and there may also be signs 
of right heart failure.
Chronic heart failure
Chronic heart failure is the most common cardiac cause 
of chronic dyspnoea. Symptoms may first present on 
moderate exertion, such as walking up a steep hill, and 
may be described as a difficulty in ‘catching my breath’. 
As heart failure progresses, the dyspnoea is provoked 
by less exertion and, ultimately, the patient may be 
breathless walking from room to room, washing, dress-
ing or trying to hold a conversation. Other symptoms 
may include:
•	 Orthopnoea. Lying down increases the venous return 
to the heart and provokes breathlessness. Patients 
may prop themselves up with pillows to prevent this.
who require further investigation and treatment (p. 534). 
CT coronary angiography is very useful to exclude the 
presence of coronary artery disease where doubt exists.
Acute coronary syndromes
Prolonged, severe cardiac chest pain may be due to 
unstable angina (which comprises recent-onset limiting 
angina, rapidly worsening or crescendo angina, and 
angina at rest) or acute MI; these are known collectively 
as the acute coronary syndromes. Although there may 
be a history of antecedent chronic stable angina, an 
episode of chest pain at rest is often the first presentation 
of coronary artery disease. Diagnosis depends on analy-
sis of the character of the pain and its associated features. 
Physical examination may reveal signs of important 
comorbidity, such as peripheral or cerebrovascular 
disease, autonomic disturbance (pallor or sweating) and 
complications (arrhythmia or heart failure).
Patients presenting with symptoms consistent with 
an acute coronary syndrome require urgent evaluation 
because there is a high risk of avoidable complications, 
such as sudden death and MI. Signs of haemodynamic 
compromise (hypotension, pulmonary oedema), ECG 
changes (ST segment elevation or depression) and bio-
chemical markers of cardiac damage, such as elevated 
troponin I or T, are powerful indicators of short-term 
risk. A 12-lead ECG is mandatory and is the most useful 
method of initial triage (Fig. 18.19). The release of 
markers such as creatine kinase, troponin and myoglobin 
is relatively slow (p. 593) but can help guide immediate 
management and treatment.
If the diagnosis is unclear, patients with a suspected 
acute coronary syndrome should be observed in hospi-
tal. Repeated ECG recordings are valuable, particularly 
if obtained during an episode of pain. Plasma troponin 
concentrations should be measured at presentation 
and, if normal, repeated 6–12 hours after the onset of 
symptoms or hospital admission. New ECG changes or 
an elevated plasma troponin concentration confirm the 
diagnosis of an acute coronary syndrome. The subse-
quent management is described on page 593.
If the pain has not recurred, troponin concentrations 
are not elevated and there are no new ECG changes, the 
patient may be discharged from hospital. At this stage, 
an exercise test or CT coronary angiogram may help 
diagnose underlying coronary artery disease.
Breathlessness (dyspnoea)
Dyspnoea of cardiac origin may vary in severity from an 
uncomfortable awareness of breathing to a frightening 
sensation of ‘fighting for breath’. The sensation of dys­
pnoea originates in the cerebral cortex and is described 
in detail on page 655.
There are several causes of cardiac dyspnoea: acute 
left heart failure, chronic heart failure, arrhythmia and 
angina equivalent (Box 18.7). The assessment and treat-
ment of heart failure is described on pages 548–553, and 
arrhythmias on pages 562–571.
Acute left heart failure
Acute left heart failure may be triggered by a major 
event, such as MI, in a previously healthy heart, or by a 
relatively minor event, such as the onset of atrial 
Acute dyspnoea
Chronic exertional dyspnoea
Cardiovascular system
*Acute pulmonary oedema
*Congestive cardiac failure
Myocardial ischaemia
Respiratory system
*Acute severe asthma
*Acute exacerbation of COPD
*Pneumothorax
*Pneumonia
*Pulmonary embolus
ARDS
Inhaled foreign body (especially 
in a child)
Lobar collapse
Laryngeal oedema (e.g. 
anaphylaxis)
*COPD
*Chronic asthma
Chronic pulmonary 
thromboembolism
Bronchial carcinoma
Interstitial lung diseases: 
sarcoidosis, fibrosing 
alveolitis, extrinsic allergic 
alveolitis, pneumoconiosis
Lymphatic carcinomatosis
Large pleural effusion(s)
Others
Metabolic acidosis (e.g. diabetic 
ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis, 
uraemia, overdose of 
salicylates, ethylene glycol 
poisoning)
Hyperventilation
Severe anaemia
Obesity
*Common cause. (ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; 
COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
18.7  Some causes of dyspnoea
Cardiovascular disease
18
544
Angina equivalent
Breathlessness is a common feature of angina. Patients 
will sometimes describe chest tightness as ‘breath­
lessness’. However, myocardial ischaemia may also 
induce true breathlessness by provoking transient left 
ventricular dysfunction or heart failure. When breath-
lessness is the dominant or sole feature of myocardial 
ischaemia, it is known as ‘angina equivalent’. A 
history of chest tightness, the close correlation with 
exercise, and objective evidence of myocardial ischae-
mia from stress testing may all help to establish the 
diagnosis.
Acute circulatory failure  
(cardiogenic shock)
‘Shock’ is used to describe the clinical syndrome that 
develops when there is critical impairment of tissue per-
fusion due to some form of acute circulatory failure. 
There are numerous causes of shock, described in detail 
on page 190. The important features and causes (Fig. 
18.20) of acute heart failure or cardiogenic shock are 
described here.
•	 Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. In patients with 
severe heart failure, fluid shifts from the interstitial 
tissues of the peripheries into the circulation within 
1–2 hours of lying down. Pulmonary oedema 
supervenes, causing the patient to wake and sit 
upright, profoundly breathless.
•	 Cheyne–Stokes respiration. This cyclical pattern of 
respiration is due to impaired responsiveness of the 
respiratory centre to carbon dioxide and occurs in 
severe left ventricular failure. The pattern of slowly 
diminishing respiration, leading to apnoea, 
followed by progressively increasing respiration 
and hyperventilation, may be accompanied by a 
sensation of breathlessness and panic during the 
period of hyperventilation. The Cheyne–Stokes 
cycle length is a function of the circulation time. 
The condition can also occur in diffuse cerebral 
atherosclerosis, stroke or head injury, and may be 
exaggerated by sleep, barbiturates and opiates.
Arrhythmia
Any arrhythmia may cause breathlessness but usually 
only does so if the heart is structurally abnormal, such 
as with the onset of atrial fibrillation in a patient with 
mitral stenosis.
Fig. 18.20  Some common causes of cardiogenic shock. 
Aorta
Cardiac
tamponade
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Endocarditis
of mitral valve
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Right ventricular
infarct
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Pulmonary
embolism
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Left ventricular damage
Myocardial infarction
Myocarditis
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Ventricular
tachycardia
Aorta
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Left ventricular
infarct
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
545
Fig. 18.21  The downward spiral of cardiogenic shock. 
Ventricular
dysfunction
Systolic Diastolic
↓ Cardiac
output
↓ Blood
pressure
↓ Coronary
perfusion
Further
ischaemia
↑ Left ventricular
diastolic pressure
↑ Pulmonary
congestion
Hypoxaemia
Cardiac 
output
Pulmonary oedema
No
Yes
Normal
Good prognosis and 
requires no treatment 
for heart failure
Due to moderate left 
ventricular dysfunction. 
Treat with vasodilators 
and diuretics
Low
Due to right ventricular 
dysfunction or 
concomitant 
hypovolaemia. Give fluid 
challenge and consider 
pulmonary artery 
catheter to guide 
therapy
Extensive MI and poor 
prognosis. Consider 
intra-aortic balloon 
pump, vasodilators, 
diuretics and inotropes
18.8  Acute myocardial infarction: 
haemodynamic subsets
Myocardial infarction
Shock in acute MI is due to left ventricular dysfunction 
in more than 70% of cases. However, it may also be due 
to infarction of the RV and a variety of mechanical com-
plications, including tamponade (due to infarction and 
rupture of the free wall), an acquired ventricular septal 
defect (due to infarction and rupture of the septum) and 
acute mitral regurgitation (due to infarction or rupture 
of the papillary muscles).
Severe myocardial systolic dysfunction causes a fall 
in cardiac output, BP and coronary perfusion pressure. 
Diastolic dysfunction causes a rise in left ventricular 
end-diastolic pressure, pulmonary congestion and 
oedema, leading to hypoxaemia that worsens myocar-
dial ischaemia. This is further exacerbated by peripheral 
vasoconstriction. These factors combine to create the 
‘downward spiral’ of cardiogenic shock (Fig. 18.21).
Hypotension, oliguria, confusion and cold, clammy 
peripheries are the manifestations of a low cardiac 
output, whereas breathlessness, hypoxaemia, cyanosis 
and inspiratory crackles at the lung bases are typical 
features of pulmonary oedema. A chest X-ray (see 
Fig. 18.25, p. 550) may reveal signs of pulmonary conges-
tion when clinical examination is normal. If necessary, a 
Swan–Ganz catheter can be used to measure the pulmo-
nary artery wedge pressure and to guide fluid replace-
ment. The findings can be used to categorise patients 
with acute MI into four haemodynamic subsets (Box 
18.8). Those with cardiogenic shock should be consid-
ered for immediate coronary revascularisation.
The viable myocardium surrounding a fresh infarct 
may contract poorly for a few days and then recover. 
This phenomenon is known as myocardial stunning 
and means that acute heart failure should be treated 
intensively because overall cardiac function may 
subsequently improve.
Acute massive pulmonary 
embolism
This may complicate leg or pelvic vein thrombosis and 
usually presents with sudden collapse. The clinical fea-
tures and treatment are discussed on page 721. Bedside 
echocardiography may demonstrate a small, under-
filled, vigorous LV with a dilated RV; it is sometimes 
possible to see thrombus in the right ventricular outflow 
tract or main pulmonary artery. CT pulmonary angio­
graphy usually provides a definitive diagnosis.
Cardiac tamponade
This is due to a collection of fluid or blood in the peri-
cardial sac, compressing the heart; the effusion may be 
small and is very occasionally less than 100 mL. Sudden 
deterioration (Box 18.9) may be due to bleeding into the 
pericardial space. Tamponade may complicate any form 
of pericarditis but can be caused by malignant disease. 
Other causes include trauma and rupture of the free wall 
of the myocardium following MI.
An ECG may show features of the underlying disease, 
such as pericarditis or acute MI. When there is a large 
pericardial effusion, the ECG complexes are small and 
there may be electrical alternans: a changing axis with 
alternate beats caused by the heart swinging from side 
to side in the pericardial fluid. A chest X-ray shows 
an enlarged globular heart but can look normal. Echocar-
diography is the best way of confirming the diagnosis 
• Dyspnoea
• Collapse
• Tachycardia
• Hypotension
• Gross elevation of the JVP
• Soft heart sounds with an early third heart sound
• Pulsus paradoxus (a large fall in BP during inspiration, when 
the pulse may be impalpable)
• Kussmaul’s sign (a paradoxical rise in the JVP during 
inspiration)
(JVP = jugular venous pressure)
18.9  Clinical features of pericardial tamponade
Cardiovascular disease
18
546
and helps to identify the optimum site for aspiration 
of the fluid. Prompt recognition of tamponade is 
important because the patient usually responds dramat-
ically to percutaneous pericardiocentesis (p. 640) or 
surgical drainage.
Valvular heart disease
Acute left ventricular failure and shock may be due to 
the sudden onset of aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgi-
tation or prosthetic valve dysfunction (Box 18.10).
The clinical diagnosis of acute valvular dysfunction 
is sometimes difficult. Murmurs are often unimpressive 
because there is usually a tachycardia and a low cardiac 
Aortic regurgitation
• Aortic dissection
• Infective endocarditis
Mitral regurgitation
• Papillary muscle rupture due to acute MI
• Infective endocarditis
• Rupture of chordae due to myxomatous degeneration
Prosthetic valve failure
• Mechanical valves: fracture, jamming, thrombosis, 
dehiscence
• Biological valves: degeneration with cusp tear
18.10  Causes of acute valve failure
Cause
Examples
Features
Reduced ventricular 
contractility
MI (segmental dysfunction)
In coronary artery disease, ‘akinetic’ or ‘dyskinetic’ segments 
contract poorly and may impede the function of normal segments 
by distorting their contraction and relaxation patterns
Myocarditis/cardiomyopathy (global 
dysfunction)
Progressive ventricular dilatation
Ventricular outflow 
obstruction 
(pressure overload)
Hypertension, aortic stenosis (left heart 
failure)
Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary valve 
stenosis (right heart failure)
Initially, concentric ventricular hypertrophy allows the ventricle to 
maintain a normal output by generating a high systolic pressure. 
Later, secondary changes in the myocardium and increasing 
obstruction lead to failure with ventricular dilatation and rapid 
clinical deterioration
Ventricular inflow 
obstruction
Mitral stenosis, tricuspid stenosis
Small, vigorous ventricle, dilated hypertrophied atrium. Atrial 
fibrillation is common and often causes marked deterioration 
because ventricular filling depends heavily on atrial contraction
Ventricular volume 
overload
Ventricular septal defect
Right ventricular volume overload (e.g. 
atrial septal defect)
Increased metabolic demand (high output)
Dilatation and hypertrophy allow the ventricle to generate a high 
stroke volume and help to maintain a normal cardiac output. 
However, secondary changes in the myocardium lead to impaired 
contractility and worsening heart failure
Arrhythmia
Atrial fibrillation
Tachycardia does not allow for adequate filling of the heart, 
resulting in reduced cardiac output and back pressure
Tachycardia cardiomyopathy
Incessant tachycardia causes myocardial fatigue
Complete heart block
Bradycardia limits cardiac output, even if stroke volume is normal
Diastolic 
dysfunction
Constrictive pericarditis
Marked fluid retention and peripheral oedema, ascites, pleural 
effusions and elevated jugular veins
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Bi-atrial enlargement (restrictive filling pattern and high atrial 
pressures). Atrial fibrillation may cause deterioration
Left ventricular hypertrophy and fibrosis
Cardiac tamponade
Good systolic function but poor diastolic filling
Hypotension, elevated jugular veins, pulsus paradoxus, poor urine 
output
18.11  Mechanisms of heart failure
output. Transthoracic echocardiography will establish 
the diagnosis in most cases; however, transoesophageal 
echocardiography is sometimes required, especially in 
patients with prosthetic mitral valves.
Patients with acute valve failure usually require 
cardiac surgery and should be referred for urgent assess-
ment in a cardiac centre.
Aortic dissection may lead to shock by causing aortic 
regurgitation, coronary dissection, tamponade or blood 
loss (p. 605).
Management of shock
This is discussed in detail on page 190.
Heart failure
Heart failure describes the clinical syndrome that devel-
ops when the heart cannot maintain adequate output, or 
can do so only at the expense of elevated ventricular 
filling pressure. In mild to moderate forms of heart 
failure, cardiac output is normal at rest and only becomes 
impaired when the metabolic demand increases during 
exercise or some other form of stress. In practice, heart 
failure may be diagnosed when a patient with significant 
heart disease develops the signs or symptoms of a 
low cardiac output, pulmonary congestion or systemic 
venous congestion.
Almost all forms of heart disease can lead to heart 
failure. An accurate aetiological diagnosis (Box 18.11) is 
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
547
important because treatment of the underlying cause 
may reverse heart failure or prevent its progression.
Heart failure is most common in the elderly. The 
prevalence of heart failure rises from 1% in those aged 
50–59 years to over 10% in those aged 80–89 years. In 
the UK, most patients admitted to hospital with heart 
failure are more than 70 years old; they remain hospital-
ised for a week or more and may be left with chronic 
disability. The most common aetiology is coronary 
artery disease and myocardial infarction.
Although the outlook depends, to some extent, on the 
underlying cause of the problem, untreated heart failure 
carries a poor prognosis; approximately 50% of patients 
with severe heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunc-
tion will die within 2 years, because of either pump 
failure or malignant ventricular arrhythmias.
Pathophysiology
Cardiac output is determined by preload (the volume 
and pressure of blood in the ventricles at the end of 
diastole), afterload (the volume and pressure of blood in 
the ventricles during systole) and myocardial contractil-
ity; this is the basis of Starling’s Law (Fig. 18.22).
In patients without valvular disease, the primary 
abnormality is impairment of ventricular myocardial 
function, leading to a fall in cardiac output. This can 
occur because of impaired systolic contraction, impaired 
diastolic relaxation, or both. This activates counter-
regulatory neurohumoral mechanisms that, in normal 
physiological circumstances, would support cardiac 
function but, in the setting of impaired ventricular func-
tion, can lead to a deleterious increase in both afterload 
and preload (Fig. 18.23). A vicious circle may be estab-
lished because any additional fall in cardiac output will 
cause further neurohumoral activation and increasing 
peripheral vascular resistance.
Stimulation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 
system leads to vasoconstriction, sodium and water 
retention, and sympathetic nervous system activation. 
This is mediated by angiotensin II, a potent constrictor 
of arterioles, in both the kidney and the systemic circula-
tion (see Fig. 18.23). Activation of the sympathetic 
nervous system may initially sustain cardiac output 
through increased myocardial contractility (inotropy) 
and heart rate (chronotropy). Prolonged sympathetic 
stimulation also causes negative effects, including 
cardiac myocyte apoptosis, hypertrophy and focal myo-
cardial necrosis. Sympathetic stimulation also causes 
peripheral vasoconstriction and arrhythmias. Sodium 
and water retention is promoted by the release of aldos-
terone, endothelin-1 (a potent vasoconstrictor peptide 
with marked effects on the renal vasculature) and, in 
severe heart failure, antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Natri-
uretic peptides are released from the atria in response to 
atrial stretch, and act as physiological ant­agonists to the 
fluid-conserving effect of aldosterone.
After MI, cardiac contractility is impaired and neuro-
humoral activation causes hypertrophy of non-infarcted 
segments, with thinning, dilatation and expansion of the 
Fig. 18.22  Starling’s Law. Normal (A), mild (B), moderate (C) and 
severe (D) heart failure. Ventricular performance is related to the degree of 
myocardial stretching. An increase in preload (end-diastolic volume, 
end-diastolic pressure, filling pressure or atrial pressure) will therefore 
enhance function; however, overstretching causes marked deterioration. In 
heart failure, the curve moves to the right and becomes flatter. An increase 
in myocardial contractility or a reduction in afterload will shift the curve 
upwards and to the left (green arrow). 
Cardiac output or
ventricular performance
Contractility
Afterload
A
B
C
D
Preload
Fig. 18.23  Neurohumoral activation and compensatory mechanisms in heart failure. There is a vicious circle in progressive heart failure. 
Myocyte loss
Heart failure
Reduced cardiac output
Myocardial fibrosis
Neurohumoral activation
Sympathetic nervous system
Renin – angiotensin system
Vasopressin system
Endothelin system
Increased
blood pressure
and cardiac work
Increased
intravascular
volume
Sodium and
water retention
Increased
blood pressure
and cardiac work
Increased
afterload
Vasoconstriction
Cardiovascular disease
18
548
event, such as an intercurrent infection or development 
of atrial fibrillation, may precipitate overt or acute heart 
failure (Box 18.12). Acute left heart failure occurs, either 
de novo or as an acute decompensated episode, on a 
background of chronic heart failure: so-called acute-on-
chronic heart failure.
Clinical assessment
Acute left heart failure
Acute de novo left ventricular failure presents with 
a sudden onset of dyspnoea at rest that rapidly 
progresses to acute respiratory distress, orthopnoea and 
prostration. The precipitant, such as acute MI, is often 
apparent from the history.
The patient appears agitated, pale and clammy. The 
peripheries are cool to the touch and the pulse is rapid. 
Inappropriate bradycardia or excessive tachycardia 
should be identified promptly, as this may be the pre-
cipitant for the acute episode of heart failure. The BP is 
usually high because of sympathetic nervous system 
activation, but may be normal or low if the patient is in 
cardiogenic shock.
The jugular venous pressure (JVP) is usually elevated, 
particularly with associated fluid overload or right heart 
failure. In acute de novo heart failure, there has been no 
time for ventricular dilatation and the apex is not dis-
placed. A ‘gallop’ rhythm, with a third heart sound, 
is heard quite early in the development of acute left-
sided heart failure. A new systolic murmur may 
signify acute mitral regurgitation or ventricular septal 
rupture. Auscultatory findings in pulmonary oedema 
are crepitations at the lung bases, or throughout the 
lungs if pulmonary oedema is severe. Expiratory wheeze 
often accompanies this.
Acute-on-chronic heart failure will have additional 
features of long-standing heart failure (see below). 
Potential precipitants, such as an upper respiratory tract 
infection or inappropriate cessation of diuretic medica-
tion, should be identified.
Chronic heart failure
Patients with chronic heart failure commonly follow a 
relapsing and remitting course, with periods of stability 
and episodes of decompensation, leading to worsening 
symptoms that may necessitate hospitalisation. The 
clinical picture depends on the nature of the underlying 
heart disease, the type of heart failure that it has evoked, 
and the neurohumoral changes that have developed (see 
Box 18.11 and Fig. 18.24).
infarcted segment (remodelling; see Fig. 18.77, p. 597). 
This leads to further deterioration in ventricular func-
tion and worsening heart failure.
Pulmonary and peripheral oedema occurs because of 
high left and right atrial pressures, respectively; this 
is compounded by sodium and water retention, caused 
by impairment of renal perfusion and by secondary 
hyperaldosteronism.
Types of heart failure
Left, right and biventricular heart failure
The left side of the heart comprises the functional unit 
of the LA and LV, together with the mitral and aortic 
valves; the right heart comprises the RA, RV, and tricus-
pid and pulmonary valves.
•	 Left-sided heart failure. There is a reduction in left 
ventricular output and an increase in left atrial and 
pulmonary venous pressure. An acute increase in 
left atrial pressure causes pulmonary congestion or 
pulmonary oedema; a more gradual increase in left 
atrial pressure, as occurs with mitral stenosis, leads 
to reflex pulmonary vasoconstriction, which 
protects the patient from pulmonary oedema. This 
increases pulmonary vascular resistance and causes 
pulmonary hypertension, which can, in turn, impair 
right ventricular function.
•	 Right-sided heart failure. There is a reduction in right 
ventricular output and an increase in right atrial 
and systemic venous pressure. Causes of isolated 
right heart failure include chronic lung disease (cor 
pulmonale), pulmonary embolism and pulmonary 
valvular stenosis.
•	 Biventricular heart failure. Failure of the left and right 
heart may develop because the disease process, 
such as dilated cardiomyopathy or ischaemic heart 
disease, affects both ventricles or because disease of 
the left heart leads to chronic elevation of the left 
atrial pressure, pulmonary hypertension and right 
heart failure.
Diastolic and systolic dysfunction
Heart failure may develop as a result of impaired myo-
cardial contraction (systolic dysfunction) but can also be 
due to poor ventricular filling and high filling pressures 
stemming from abnormal ventricular relaxation (diasto-
lic dysfunction). The latter is caused by a stiff, non-
compliant ventricle and is commonly found in patients 
with left ventricular hypertrophy. Systolic and diastolic 
dysfunction often coexist, particularly in patients with 
coronary artery disease.
High-output failure
A large arteriovenous shunt, beri-beri (p. 128), severe 
anaemia or thyrotoxicosis can occasionally cause heart 
failure due to an excessively high cardiac output.
Acute and chronic heart failure
Heart failure may develop suddenly, as in MI, or gradu-
ally, as in progressive valvular heart disease. When 
there is gradual impairment of cardiac function, several 
compensatory changes may take place.
The term ‘compensated heart failure’ is sometimes 
used to describe the condition of those with impaired 
cardiac function, in whom adaptive changes have pre-
vented the development of overt heart failure. A minor 
• Myocardial ischaemia or infarction
• Intercurrent illness, e.g. infection
• Arrhythmia, e.g. atrial fibrillation
• Inappropriate reduction of therapy
• Administration of a drug with negative inotropic (β-blocker) 
or fluid-retaining properties (NSAIDs, corticosteroids)
• Pulmonary embolism
• Conditions associated with increased metabolic demand, e.g. 
pregnancy, thyrotoxicosis, anaemia
• IV fluid overload, e.g. post-operative IV infusion
(NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
18.12  Factors that may precipitate or aggravate 
heart failure in pre-existing heart disease
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
549
•	 Hypokalaemia may be the result of treatment with 
potassium-losing diuretics or hyperaldosteronism 
caused by activation of the renin–angiotensin 
system and impaired aldosterone metabolism  
due to hepatic congestion. Most of the body’s 
potassium is intracellular and there may be 
substantial depletion of potassium stores, even 
when the plasma concentration is in the reference 
range.
•	 Hyperkalaemia may be due to the effects of drugs 
which promote renal resorption of potassium,  
in particular the combination of ACE inhibitors  
(or angiotensin receptor blockers) and 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. These effects 
are amplified if there is renal dysfunction due to 
low cardiac output or atherosclerotic renal vascular 
disease.
•	 Hyponatraemia is a feature of severe heart failure 
and is a poor prognostic sign. It may be caused by 
diuretic therapy, inappropriate water retention due 
to high ADH secretion, or failure of the cell 
membrane ion pump.
•	 Impaired liver function is caused by hepatic venous 
congestion and poor arterial perfusion, which 
frequently cause mild jaundice and abnormal liver 
function tests; reduced synthesis of clotting factors 
can make anticoagulant control difficult.
•	 Thromboembolism. Deep vein thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism may occur due to the effects 
of a low cardiac output and enforced immobility. 
Systemic emboli occur in patients with atrial 
fibrillation or flutter, or with intracardiac thrombus 
complicating conditions such as mitral stenosis, MI 
or left ventricular aneurysm.
•	 Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are very common 
and may be related to electrolyte changes (e.g. 
hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia), the underlying 
cardiac disease, and the pro-arrhythmic effects of 
sympathetic activation. Atrial fibrillation occurs in 
approximately 20% of patients with heart failure 
and causes further impairment of cardiac function. 
Sudden death occurs in up to 50% of patients with 
heart failure and is often due to a ventricular 
arrhythmia. Frequent ventricular ectopic beats and 
runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia are 
common findings in patients with heart failure and 
are associated with an adverse prognosis.
Investigations
Serum urea, creatinine and electrolytes, haemoglobin, 
thyroid function, ECG and chest X-ray may help to 
establish the nature and severity of the underlying heart 
disease and detect any complications. Brain natriuretic 
peptide (BNP) is elevated in heart failure and is a marker 
of risk; it is useful in the investigation of patients with 
breathlessness or peripheral oedema.
Echocardiography is very useful and should be con-
sidered in all patients with heart failure in order to:
•	 determine the aetiology
•	 detect hitherto unsuspected valvular heart  
disease, such as occult mitral stenosis, and other 
conditions that may be amenable to specific 
remedies
•	 identify patients who will benefit from long-term 
drug therapy, e.g. ACE inhibitors (see below).
Low cardiac output causes fatigue, listlessness and a 
poor effort tolerance; the peripheries are cold and the BP 
is low. To maintain perfusion of vital organs, blood flow 
is diverted away from skeletal muscle and this may con-
tribute to fatigue and weakness. Poor renal perfusion 
leads to oliguria and uraemia.
Pulmonary oedema due to left heart failure presents 
as above and with inspiratory crepitations over the lung 
bases. In contrast, right heart failure produces a high JVP 
with hepatic congestion and dependent peripheral 
oedema. In ambulant patients, the oedema affects the 
ankles, whereas, in bed-bound patients, it collects 
around the thighs and sacrum. Ascites or pleural effu-
sion may occur (see Fig. 18.24). Heart failure is not the 
only cause of oedema (Box 18.13).
Chronic heart failure is sometimes associated with 
marked weight loss (cardiac cachexia), caused by a com-
bination of anorexia and impaired absorption due to 
gastrointestinal congestion, poor tissue perfusion due to 
a low cardiac output, and skeletal muscle atrophy due 
to immobility.
Complications
In advanced heart failure, the following may occur:
•	 Renal failure is caused by poor renal perfusion due 
to low cardiac output and may be exacerbated by 
diuretic therapy, angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers.
Fig. 18.24  Clinical features of left and right heart failure. 
(JVP = jugular venous pressure) 
Left
heart failure
Raised
JVP +/++
Pleural
effusions
Pulmonary
oedema
Cardiomegaly
Pitting
oedema +/++
Right
heart failure
Raised JVP +++
Hepatomegaly
Ascites
Peripheral
pitting
oedema +++
• Cardiac failure: right or combined left and right heart failure, 
pericardial constriction, cardiomyopathy
• Chronic venous insufficiency: varicose veins
• Hypoalbuminaemia: nephrotic syndrome, liver disease, 
protein-losing enteropathy; often widespread, can affect 
arms and face
• Drugs:
Sodium retention: fludrocortisone, NSAIDs
Increasing capillary permeability: nifedipine, amlodipine
• Idiopathic: women > men
• Chronic lymphatic obstruction
18.13  Differential diagnosis of peripheral oedema
Cardiovascular disease
18
550
(continuous positive airways pressure (CPAP) of 
5–10 mmHg) by a tight-fitting facemask results in a 
more rapid clinical improvement.
•	 Administer nitrates, such as IV glyceryl trinitrate 
(10–200 µg/min or buccal glyceryl trinitrate 2–5 mg, 
titrated upwards every 10 minutes), until clinical 
improvement occurs or systolic BP falls to less than 
110 mmHg.
•	 Administer a loop diuretic, such as furosemide 
(50–100 mg IV).
The patient should initially be kept rested, with con-
tinuous monitoring of cardiac rhythm, BP and pulse 
oximetry. Intravenous opiates must be used sparingly in 
distressed patients, as they may cause respiratory 
depression and exacerbation of hypoxaemia and 
hypercapnia.
If these measures prove ineffective, inotropic agents 
may be required to augment cardiac output, particularly 
in hypotensive patients. Insertion of an intra-aortic 
balloon pump may be beneficial in patients with acute 
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema and shock.
Management of chronic  
heart failure
General measures
Education of patients and their relatives about the causes 
and treatment of heart failure can help adherence to a 
management plan (Box 18.14). Some patients may need 
to weigh themselves daily, as a measure of fluid load, 
and adjust their diuretic therapy accordingly. Treatment 
of the underlying cause of heart failure (e.g. coronary 
artery disease) is important to prevent its progression.
Drug therapy
Cardiac function can be improved by increasing contrac-
tility, optimising preload or decreasing afterload (see 
Fig. 18.23). Drugs that reduce preload are appropriate 
in patients with high end-diastolic filling pressures 
and evidence of pulmonary or systemic venous conges-
tion. Those that reduce afterload or increase myocardial 
Chest X-ray
High pulmonary venous pressure in left-sided heart 
failure first shows on the chest X-ray (Fig. 18.25) as an 
abnormal distension of the upper lobe pulmonary veins 
(with the patient in the erect position). The vascularity 
of the lung fields becomes more prominent, and the 
right and left pulmonary arteries dilate. Subsequently, 
interstitial oedema causes thickened interlobular septa 
and dilated lymphatics. These are evident as horizontal 
lines in the costophrenic angles (septal or ‘Kerley B’ 
lines). More advanced changes due to alveolar oedema 
cause a hazy opacification spreading from the hilar 
regions, and pleural effusions.
Management of acute  
pulmonary oedema
This is an acute medical emergency:
•	 Sit the patient up to reduce pulmonary  
congestion.
•	 Give oxygen (high-flow, high-concentration). 
Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation 
Fig. 18.25  Radiological features of heart failure.  A Chest X-ray of 
a patient with pulmonary oedema.  B Enlargement of lung base showing 
septal or ‘Kerley B’ lines (arrow). 
A
B
Prominence
of upper lobe
blood vessels
Enlarged hilar
vessels
Septal or
‘Kerley B’ lines
Reticular shadowing
of alveolar oedema
Enlarged cardiac
silhouette; usually with
coexisting chronic
heart failure
Education
• Explanation of nature of disease, treatment and self-help 
strategies
Diet
• Good general nutrition and weight reduction for the obese
• Avoidance of high-salt foods and added salt, especially for 
patients with severe congestive heart failure
Alcohol
• Moderation or elimination of alcohol consumption. Alcohol-
induced cardiomyopathy requires abstinence
Smoking
• Cessation
Exercise
• Regular moderate aerobic exercise within limits of symptoms
Vaccination
• Consider influenza and pneumococcal vaccination
18.14  General measures for the management of 
heart failure
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
551
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, such as 
spironolactone and eplerenone, are potassium-sparing 
diuretics that are of particular benefit in patients with 
heart failure with severe left ventricular systolic dys-
function. They may cause hyperkalaemia, particularly 
when used with an ACE inhibitor. They improve long-
term clinical outcome in patients with severe heart 
failure or heart failure following acute MI.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition therapy
Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme 
(ACE) 
inhibition 
therapy interrupts the vicious circle of neurohumoral 
activation that is characteristic of moderate and severe 
heart failure by preventing the conversion of angiotensin 
I to angiotensin II, thereby preventing peripheral vaso-
constriction, activation of the sympathetic nervous 
system (Fig. 18.27), and salt and water retention due to 
aldosterone release. These drugs also prevent the unde-
sirable activation of the renin–angiotensin system caused 
by diuretic therapy.
In moderate and severe heart failure, ACE inhibitors 
can produce a substantial improvement in effort toler-
ance and in mortality. They can also improve outcome 
and prevent the onset of overt heart failure in patients 
with poor residual left ventricular function following MI 
(Box 18.16).
ACE inhibitors can cause symptomatic hypotension 
and impairment of renal function, especially in patients 
with bilateral renal artery stenosis or those with pre-
existing renal disease. An increase in serum potassium 
concentration may occur that can offset hypokalaemia 
associated with loop diuretic therapy. Short-acting ACE 
inhibitors can cause marked falls in BP, particularly in 
the elderly or when started in the presence of hypoten-
sion, hypovolaemia or hyponatraemia. In stable patients 
without hypotension (systolic BP over 100 mmHg), ACE 
inhibitors can usually be safely started in the commu-
nity. However, in other patients, it is usually advisable 
to withhold diuretics for 24 hours before starting treat-
ment with a small dose of a long-acting agent, preferably 
given at night (Box 18.17). Renal function and serum 
potassium must be monitored and should be checked 
1–2 weeks after starting therapy.
contractility are more useful in patients with signs and 
symptoms of a low cardiac output.
Diuretic therapy
In heart failure, diuretics produce an increase in urinary 
sodium and water excretion, leading to reduction in 
blood and plasma volume (p. 434). Diuretic therapy 
reduces preload and improves pulmonary and systemic 
venous congestion. It may also reduce afterload and 
ventricular volume, leading to a fall in ventricular wall 
tension and increased cardiac efficiency.
Although a fall in preload (ventricular filling pres-
sure) tends to reduce cardiac output, the ‘Starling curve’ 
in heart failure is flat, so there may be a substantial and 
beneficial fall in filling pressure with little change in 
cardiac output (see Figs 18.22 and 18.26). Nevertheless, 
excessive diuretic therapy may cause an undesirable fall 
in cardiac output, especially in patients with a marked 
diastolic component to their heart failure. This leads to 
hypotension, lethargy and renal failure.
In some patients with severe chronic heart failure, 
particularly if there is associated renal impairment, 
oedema may persist, despite oral loop diuretic therapy. 
In such patients, an intravenous infusion of furosemide 
(5–10 mg/hr) may initiate a diuresis. Combining a loop 
diuretic with a thiazide diuretic (e.g. bendroflumethia­
zide 5 mg daily) may prove effective, but this can cause 
an excessive diuresis.
• Incidence: rises with age and affects 5–10% of those in 
their eighties.
• Common causes: coronary artery disease, hypertension and 
calcific degenerative valvular disease.
• Diastolic dysfunction: often prominent, particularly in those 
with a history of hypertension.
• ACE inhibitors: improve symptoms and mortality but are 
more frequently associated with postural hypotension and 
renal impairment than in younger patients.
• Loop diuretics: usually required but may be poorly tolerated 
in those with urinary incontinence and men with prostate 
enlargement.
18.15  Congestive cardiac failure in old age
Fig. 18.26  The effect of treatment on ventricular performance 
curves in heart failure. Diuretics and venodilators (A), angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and mixed vasodilators (B), and positive 
inotropic agents (C). 
Normal
Heart
failure
C
A
B
Cardiac output
or ventricular
performance
Preload
Forward
failure
Fatigue
Backward failure
Dyspnoea/oedema
‘ACE inhibitors in chronic heart failure due to ventricular 
dysfunction reduce mortality and re-admission rates; average 
NNTB for 3 years to prevent 1 death = 26 and for the combined 
endpoint of death or re-admission = 19.’
• Flather M, et al. Lancet 2000; 355:1575–1581.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/95/contents.html
18.16  ACE inhibitors and treatment of 
chronic heart failure
Angiotensin receptor blocker therapy
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs; see Box 18.17) act 
by blocking the action of angiotensin II on the heart, 
peripheral vasculature and kidney. In heart failure, they 
produce beneficial haemodynamic changes that are 
similar to the effects of ACE inhibitors (see Fig. 18.27) 
but are generally better tolerated. They have comparable 
effects on mortality and are a useful alternative for 
patients who cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors (Box 18.18). 
Cardiovascular disease
18
552
Fig. 18.27  Neurohumoral activation 
and sites of action of drugs used in 
the treatment of heart failure. 
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
Vasoconstriction
Renin (kidney)
Angiotensin-
converting
enzyme (ACE)
Non-ACE
pathways
Bradykinin
Inactive peptides
Vasodilatation
ACE inhibitors
Aldosterone
Enhanced
sympathetic
activity
Salt and water
retention
β-blockers
Mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists
Diuretics
Angiotensin
receptor blockers
Starting dose
Target dose
ACE inhibitors
Enalapril
2.5 mg twice daily
10 mg twice daily
Lisinopril
2.5 mg daily
20 mg daily
Ramipril
1.25 mg daily
10 mg daily
Angiotensin receptor blockers
Losartan
25 mg daily
100 mg daily
Candesartan
4 mg daily
32 mg daily
Valsartan
40 mg daily
160 mg daily
18.17  ACE inhibitor and angiotensin receptor 
blocker (ARB) dosages in heart failure
‘Adding oral β-blockers gradually in small incremental doses to 
standard therapy, including ACE inhibitors, in people with heart 
failure reduces the rate of death or hospital admission. NNTB for 
1 year to prevent 1 death = 21.’
• Lechat P, et al. Circulation 1998; 98:1184–1191.
• Shibata MC, et al. Eur J Heart Fail 2001; 34:351–357.
For further information: 
 www.escardio.org
18.19  Beta-blockers and treatment of chronic 
heart failure
‘Compared with ACE inhibitors, ARBs are better tolerated and 
have similar efficacy in reducing cardiovascular events. ARBs 
reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients with 
symptomatic heart failure who are intolerant of ACE inhibitors. 
NNTB for 5 years to prevent 1 death or hospitalisation for heart 
failure = 8. The addition of an ARB to an ACE inhibitor produces 
further additional benefit. NNTB for 5 years to prevent 1 death or 
hospitalisation for heart failure = 16.’
• Granger CB, et al. Lancet 2003; 362:772–776.
• McMurray JJV, et al. Lancet 2003; 362:767–771.
18.18  Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) and 
chronic heart failure
Unfortunately, they share all the more serious adverse 
effects of ACE inhibitors, including renal dysfunction 
and hyperkalaemia. ARBs are normally used as an alter-
native to ACE inhibitors, but the two can be combined 
in patients with resistant or recurrent heart failure.
Vasodilator therapy
These drugs are valuable in chronic heart failure, when 
ACE inhibitor or ARB drugs are contraindicated (e.g. in 
severe renal failure). Venodilators, such as nitrates, 
reduce preload, and arterial dilators, such as hydrala-
zine, reduce afterload (see Fig. 18.26). Their use is limited 
by pharmacological tolerance and hypotension.
Beta-adrenoceptor blocker therapy
Beta-blockade helps to counteract the deleterious effects 
of enhanced sympathetic stimulation and reduces the 
risk of arrhythmias and sudden death. When initiated in 
standard doses, they may precipitate acute-on-chronic 
heart failure, but when given in small incremental doses 
(e.g. bisoprolol started at a dose of 1.25 mg daily, and 
increased gradually over a 12-week period to a target 
maintenance dose of 10 mg daily), they can increase 
ejection fraction, improve symptoms, reduce the fre-
quency of hospitalisation and reduce mortality in 
patients with chronic heart failure (Box 18.19). Beta-
blockers are more effective at reducing mortality than 
ACE inhibitors: relative risk reduction of 33% versus 
20%, respectively.
Ivabradine
Ivabradine acts on the If inward current in the SA node, 
resulting in reduction of heart rate. It reduces hospital 
admission and mortality rates in patients with heart 
failure due to moderate or severe left ventricular systolic 
impairment. In trials, its effects were most marked in 
patients with a relatively high heart rate (over 77/min), 
so ivabradine is best suited to patients who cannot take 
β-blockers or in whom the heart rate remains high 
despite β-blockade. It is ineffective in patients in atrial 
fibrillation.
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
553
Fig. 18.28  Chest X-ray of a biventricular pacemaker and 
defibrillator (cardiac resynchronisation therapy). The right 
ventricular lead (RV) is in position in the ventricular apex and is used for 
both pacing and defibrillation. The left ventricular lead (LV) is placed via the 
coronary sinus, and the right atrial lead (RA) is placed in the right atrial 
appendage; both are used for pacing only. 
RA
RV
LV
Digoxin
Digoxin (p. 576) can be used to provide rate control in 
patients with heart failure and atrial fibrillation. In 
patients with severe heart failure (NYHA class III–IV, 
see Box 18.5, p. 539), digoxin reduces the likelihood of 
hospitalisation for heart failure, although it has no effect 
on long-term survival.
Amiodarone
This is a potent anti-arrhythmic drug (p. 576) that has 
little negative inotropic effect and may be valuable in 
patients with poor left ventricular function. It is only 
effective in the treatment of symptomatic arrhythmias, 
and should not be used as a preventative agent in 
asymptomatic patients.
Implantable cardiac defibrillators and 
resynchronisation therapy
Patients with symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias and 
heart failure have a very poor prognosis. Irrespective of 
their response to anti-arrhythmic drug therapy, all 
should be considered for implantation of a cardiac defib­
rillator because it improves survival (p. 579). In patients 
with marked intraventricular conduction delay, pro-
longed depolarisation may lead to uncoordinated left 
ventricular contraction. When this is associated with 
severe symptomatic heart failure, cardiac resynchronisa-
tion therapy should be considered. Here, both the LV 
and RV are paced simultaneously (Fig. 18.28) to generate 
a more coordinated left ventricular contraction and 
improve cardiac output. This is associated with improved 
symptoms and survival.
Coronary revascularisation
Coronary artery bypass surgery or percutaneous coro-
nary intervention may improve function in areas of the 
myocardium that are ‘hibernating’ because of inade-
quate blood supply, and can be used to treat carefully 
selected patients with heart failure and coronary artery 
disease. If necessary, ‘hibernating’ myocardium can be 
identified by stress echocardiography and specialised 
nuclear or MR imaging.
Heart transplantation
Cardiac transplantation is an established and successful 
treatment for patients with intractable heart failure. 
Coronary artery disease and dilated cardiomyopathy 
are the most common indications. The introduction of 
ciclosporin for immunosuppression (p. 96) has improved 
survival, which is around 80% at 1 year. The use of 
transplantation is limited by the efficacy of modern drug 
and device therapies, as well as the availability of donor 
hearts, so it is generally reserved for young patients with 
severe symptoms despite optimal therapy.
Conventional heart transplantation is contraindi-
cated in patients with pulmonary vascular disease due 
to long-standing left heart failure, complex congenital 
heart disease (e.g. Eisenmenger’s syndrome) or primary 
pulmonary hypertension because the RV of the donor 
heart may fail in the face of high pulmonary vascular 
resistance. However, heart–lung transplantation can be 
successful in patients with Eisenmenger’s syndrome. 
Lung transplantation has been used for primary pulmo-
nary hypertension.
Although cardiac transplantation usually produces a 
dramatic improvement in the recipient’s quality of life, 
serious complications may occur:
•	 Rejection. In spite of routine therapy with 
ciclosporin A, azathioprine and corticosteroids, 
episodes of rejection are common and may present 
with heart failure, arrhythmias or subtle ECG 
changes; cardiac biopsy is often used to confirm the 
diagnosis before starting treatment with high-dose 
corticosteroids.
•	 Accelerated atherosclerosis. Recurrent heart failure is 
often due to progressive atherosclerosis in the 
coronary arteries of the donor heart. This is not 
confined to patients who underwent transplantation 
for coronary artery disease and is probably a 
manifestation of chronic rejection. Angina is rare 
because the heart has been denervated.
•	 Infection. Opportunistic infection with organisms 
such as cytomegalovirus or Aspergillus remains a 
major cause of death in transplant recipients.
Ventricular assist devices
Because of the limited supply of donor organs, ventricu-
lar assist devices (VADs) have been employed as:
•	 a bridge to cardiac transplantation
•	 potential long-term therapy
•	 short-term restoration therapy following a 
potentially reversible insult, e.g. viral myocarditis.
VADs assist cardiac output by using a roller, centrifu-
gal or pulsatile pump that, in some cases, is implantable 
and portable. They withdraw blood through cannulae 
inserted in the atria or ventricular apex and pump it into 
the pulmonary artery or aorta. They are designed not 
only to unload the ventricles but also to provide support 
to the pulmonary and systemic circulations. Their more 
widespread application is limited by high complication 
rates (haemorrhage, systemic embolism, infection, neu-
rological and renal sequelae), although some improve-
ments in survival and quality of life have been 
demonstrated in patients with severe heart failure.
Cardiovascular disease
18
554
Differential diagnosis
History-taking, from the patient or a witness, is the 
key to establishing a diagnosis. Attention should be 
paid to potential triggers (e.g. medication, exertion, 
posture), the victim’s appearance (e.g. colour, seizure 
activity), the duration of the episode and the speed 
of recovery (Box 18.20). Cardiac syncope is usually 
sudden but can be associated with premonitory light-
headedness, palpitation or chest discomfort. The black-
out is usually brief and recovery rapid. Neurocardiogenic 
syncope will often be associated with a situational 
trigger, and the patient may experience flushing, 
nausea and malaise for several minutes afterwards. 
Patients with seizures do not exhibit pallor, may have 
abnormal movements, usually take more than 5 minutes 
to recover and are often confused. A history of rotational 
vertigo is suggestive of a labyrinthine or vestibular 
disorder (p. 1167). The pattern and description of 
the patient’s symptoms should indicate the probable 
mechanism and help to determine subsequent investiga-
tions (Fig. 18.30). Postural hypotension is normally 
obvious from the history, with presyncope or, less com-
monly, syncope, occurring within a few seconds of 
standing.
Syncope and presyncope
The term ‘syncope’ refers to sudden loss of conscious-
ness due to reduced cerebral perfusion. ‘Presyncope’ 
refers to lightheadedness in which the individual thinks 
he or she may black out. Syncope affects around 20% of 
the population at some time and accounts for more than 
5% of hospital admissions. Dizziness and presyncope 
are very common in old age (p. 173). Symptoms are dis­
abling, undermine confidence and independence, and 
can affect an individual’s ability to work or to drive. 
There are three principal mechanisms that underlie 
recurrent presyncope or syncope:
•	 cardiac syncope due to mechanical cardiac 
dysfunction or arrhythmia
•	 neurocardiogenic syncope, in which an abnormal 
autonomic reflex causes bradycardia and/or 
hypotension
•	 postural hypotension, in which physiological 
peripheral vasoconstriction on standing is impaired, 
lead to hypotension.
Loss of consciousness can also be caused by non-cardiac 
pathology, such as epilepsy, cerebrovascular ischaemia 
or hypoglycaemia (Fig. 18.29).
Fig. 18.29  The differential diagnosis of syncope and presyncope. 
Labyrinthine dysfunction
• Ch. 26
Central vestibular dysfunction
• Ch. 26
• Ataxia
• Weakness
• Loss of joint position sense
• Gait dyspraxia
• Joint disease
• Visual disturbance
• Fear of falling (Chs 25 and 26)
Impaired cerebral perfusion
Cardiac disease
• Arrhythmia
• Left ventricular dysfunction
• Aortic stenosis
• Hypertrophic obstructive
   cardiomyopathy
Other causes
• Vasovagal syncope
• Postural hypotension
• Micturition syncope
• Cough syncope
• Carotid sinus sensitivity
• Hypoglycaemia (Ch. 21)
• Anxiety*
• Hyperventilation
• Post-concussive syndrome
• Panic attack
• Non-epileptic attack
• Epileptic seizure
Presyncope
(reduced cerebral
perfusion)
Syncope
(loss of cerebral
perfusion)
Sensation of
movement?
(vertigo)
Loss of
balance?
Lightheaded?
Other
description
Funny turn
or blackout
* Anxiety is the most
  common cause of
  dizziness in those
  under 65 years
Loss of
consciousness
(‘blackout’)
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
555
Cardiac syncope
Neurocardiogenic syncope
Seizures
Premonitory 
symptoms
Often none
Lightheadedness
Palpitation
Chest pain
Breathlessness
Nausea
Lightheadedness
Sweating
Confusion
Hyperexcitability
Olfactory hallucinations
‘Aura’
Unconscious period
Extreme ‘death-like’ pallor
Pallor
Prolonged (> 1 min) unconsciousness 
Motor seizure activity*
Tongue-biting
Urinary incontinence
Recovery
Rapid recovery (< 1 min)
Flushing
Slow
Nausea
Lightheadedness
Prolonged confusion (> 5 mins)
Headache
Focal neurological signs
*N.B. Cardiac syncope can also cause convulsions by inducing cerebral anoxia.
18.20  Typical features of cardiac syncope, vasovagal syncope and seizures
Cardiac syncope
Arrhythmia
Lightheadedness may occur with many arrhythmias, 
but blackouts (Stokes–Adams attacks, p. 572) are usually 
due to profound bradycardia or malignant ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias. The 12-lead ECG may show evidence 
of conducting system disease (e.g. sinus bradycardia, 
atrioventricular block, bundle branch block or axis devi-
ation), which would predispose a patient to bradycardia, 
but the key to establishing a diagnosis is to obtain an 
ECG recording while symptoms are present. Since minor 
rhythm disturbances are common, especially in old age, 
symptoms must occur at the same time as a recorded 
arrhythmia before a diagnosis can be made. Ambulatory 
ECG recordings are helpful only if symptoms occur 
several times per week. Patient-activated ECG recorders 
are useful for examining the rhythm in patients with 
recurrent dizziness but are not useful in assessing 
sudden blackouts. When these investigations fail to 
establish a cause in patients with presyncope or syncope, 
an implantable ECG recorder can be sited subcutane-
ously over the upper left chest. This device continuously 
records the cardiac rhythm and will activate automati-
cally if extreme bradycardia or tachycardia occurs. The 
ECG memory can also be tagged by the patient, using 
a hand-held activator. Stored ECGs can be accessed by 
the implanting centre, using a telemetry device in a 
clinic, or using a home monitoring system via an 
online link.
Structural heart disease
Severe aortic stenosis and hypertrophic obstructive car-
diomyopathy can lead to lightheadedness or syncope on 
exertion. This is caused by profound hypotension due to 
a fall in cardiac output, or failure to increase output 
during exertion, coupled with exercise-induced periph-
eral vasodilatation. Severe coronary artery disease can 
produce the same symptoms because of ischaemic left 
ventricular dysfunction. Exertional arrhythmias also 
occur in these patients.
Neurocardiogenic syncope
This encompasses a family of syndromes in which 
bradycardia and/or hypotension occur because of a 
series of abnormal autonomic reflexes. The two main 
conditions are hypersensitive carotid sinus syndrome 
and malignant vasovagal syncope.
Situational syncope
This is the collective name given to some variants of 
neurocardiogenic syncope that occur in the presence of 
identifiable triggers (e.g. cough syncope, micturition 
syncope).
Vasovagal syncope
This is normally triggered by a reduction in venous 
return due to prolonged standing, excessive heat or a 
large meal. It is mediated by the Bezold–Jarisch reflex, 
in which a combination of sympathetic activation, and 
Fig. 18.30  A simple guide to the investigation and diagnosis of 
recurrent presyncope and syncope. 
Obtain history from patient and witness
Physical examination
12-lead ECG
ECG with carotid sinus massage
Consider
Holter ECG
Echo
Electrophysiological
study
Implantable ECG
recorder
Do the findings
suggest a
neurological
diagnosis?
Yes
No
Consider
EEG
Carotid Doppler
CT/MRI scan
Do the findings suggest a cardiac diagnosis?
Consider
Tilt test
Yes
No
Cardiovascular disease
18
556
which can expand blood volume through sodium and 
water retention, may be of value.
Palpitation
Palpitation is a very common and sometimes frightening 
symptom. Patients use the term to describe many sensa-
tions, including an unusually erratic, fast, slow or force-
ful heart beat, or even chest pain or breathlessness. 
Initial evaluation should concentrate on determining its 
likely mechanism, and whether or not there is significant 
underlying heart disease.
A detailed description of the sensation is essential 
and patients should be asked to describe their symptoms 
clearly, or to demonstrate the sensation of rhythm by 
tapping with their hand. A provisional diagnosis can 
usually be made on the basis of a thorough history (Box 
18.21 and Fig. 18.31). The diagnosis should be confirmed 
by an ECG recording during an episode using an ambu-
latory ECG monitor or a patient-activated ECG recorder.
reduced venous return due to an impaired vasoconstric-
tor response to standing, leads to vigorous contraction 
of relatively under-filled ventricles. This stimulates ven-
tricular mechanoreceptors, producing parasympathetic 
(vagal) activation and sympathetic withdrawal, causing 
bradycardia, vasodilatation or both. Head-up tilt-table 
testing is a provocation test used to establish the diag-
nosis, and involves positioning the patient supine on a 
padded table that is then tilted to an angle of 60–70° for 
up to 45 minutes, while the ECG and BP responses are 
monitored. A positive test is characterised by brady­
cardia (cardio-inhibitory response) and/or hypotension 
(vasodepressor response) associated with typical symp-
toms. Initial management involves lifestyle modification 
(salt supplementation and avoiding prolonged standing, 
dehydration or missing meals). In resistant cases, drug 
therapy can be tried, although efficacy is inconsistent in 
clinical trials. Fludrocortisone (causes sodium and water 
retention and expands plasma volume), disopyramide 
(a vagolytic agent) or midodrine (a vasoconstrictor 
α-adrenoceptor agonist) may be helpful. Beta-blockers 
(inhibit the initial sympathetic activation) are seldom 
effective and are rarely used. In patients with resistant 
vasovagal syncope in which bradycardia is the predomi-
nant response, a dual-chamber pacemaker can be useful. 
Patients with a urinary sodium excretion of less than 
170 mmol/day may respond to salt loading.
Hypersensitive carotid sinus syndrome
Hypersensitive carotid sinus syndrome (HCSS) causes 
presyncope or syncope because of reflex bradycardia 
and vasodilatation. Carotid baroreceptors are involved 
in BP regulation and are activated by increased BP, 
resulting in a vagal discharge that causes a compensa-
tory drop in BP. In HCSS, the baroreceptor is sensitive 
to external pressure (e.g. during neck movement or if a 
tight collar is worn), so that pressure over the carotid 
artery causes an inappropriate and intense vagal dis-
charge. The diagnosis can be established by monitoring 
the ECG and BP during carotid sinus pressure. This 
manœuvre should not be attempted in patients with a 
carotid bruit or with a history of cerebrovascular disease 
because of the risk of embolic stroke. A positive cardio-
inhibitory response is defined as a sinus pause of 
3 seconds or more; a positive vasodepressor response is 
defined as a fall in systolic BP of more than 50 mmHg. 
Carotid sinus pressure will produce positive findings in 
about 10% of elderly individuals but less than 25% of 
these experience spontaneous syncope. Symptoms 
should not therefore be attributed to HCSS unless they 
are reproduced by carotid sinus pressure. Dual-chamber 
pacemaker implantation usually prevents syncope in 
patients with the more common cardio-inhibitory 
response.
Postural hypotension
This is caused by a failure of normal postural compensa-
tory mechanisms. Relative hypovolaemia (often due to 
excessive diuretic therapy), sympathetic degeneration 
(diabetes mellitus, Parkinson’s disease, ageing) and drug 
therapy (vasodilators, antidepressants) can all cause or 
aggravate the problem. Treatment is often ineffective; 
however, withdrawing unnecessary medication and 
advising the patient to wear graduated elastic stockings 
and to get up slowly may be helpful. Fludrocortisone, 
Fig. 18.31  A simple approach to the diagnosis of palpitation. 
Is the heart
beat regular?
No
Consider
Ectopic beats
Atrial fibrillation
Yes
Are there
discrete attacks
of tachycardia?
(> 120/min)
Yes
No
Consider
Sinus tachycardia
High stroke volume,
e.g. anaemia, anxiety, 
valve disease
Consider
Supraventricular
tachycardia
Ventricular
tachycardia
• Is the palpitation continuous or intermittent?
• Is the heart beat regular or irregular?
• What is the approximate heart rate?
• Do symptoms occur in discrete attacks?
Is the onset abrupt? How do attacks terminate?
• Are there any associated symptoms?
e.g. Chest pain, lightheadedness, polyuria (a feature of 
supraventricular tachycardia, p. 567)
• Are there any precipitating factors, e.g. exercise, alcohol?
• Is there a history of structural heart disease, e.g. coronary 
artery disease, valvular heart disease?
18.21  How to evaluate palpitation
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
557
Sudden cardiac death is usually caused by a cata-
strophic arrhythmia and accounts for 25–30% of deaths 
from cardiovascular disease, claiming an estimated 
70 000–90 000 lives each year in the UK. Many of these 
deaths are potentially preventable. Arrhythmias compli-
cate many types of heart disease and can sometimes 
occur in the absence of recognisable structural abnor-
malities (causes are listed in Box 18.22). Sudden death 
less often occurs because of an acute mechanical catas-
trophe such as cardiac rupture or aortic dissection 
(pp. 597 and 605).
Coronary artery disease is the most common condi-
tion leading to cardiac arrest. Ventricular fibrillation or 
ventricular tachycardia is common in the first few hours 
of MI and many victims die before medical help is 
sought. Up to one-third of people developing MI die 
before reaching hospital, emphasising the importance 
of educating the public to recognise symptoms and to 
seek medical help quickly. Acute myocardial ischaemia 
(in the absence of infarction) can also cause these 
arrhythmias, although less commonly. Patients with 
a history of previous MI may be at risk of sudden 
arrhythmic death, especially if there is extensive left 
ventricular scarring and impairment, or if there is 
ongoing myocardial ischaemia. In these patients, the risk 
is reduced by the treatment of heart failure with 
β-blockers and ACE inhibitors, and by coronary revas-
cularisation. For some patients, the risk of sudden death 
is reduced by the implantation of a cardiac defibrillator 
(p. 579).
Aetiology of cardiac arrest
Cardiac arrest may be caused by ventricular fibrillation, 
pulseless ventricular tachycardia, asystole or pulseless 
electrical activity.
Ventricular fibrillation and pulseless  
ventricular tachycardia
These are the most common and most easily treatable 
cardiac arrest rhythms. Ventricular fibrillation produces 
rapid, ineffective, uncoordinated movement of the ven-
tricles, which therefore produces no pulse. The ECG 
(Fig. 18.32) shows rapid, bizarre and irregular ventricu-
lar complexes. Ventricular tachycardia (p. 569) can cause 
cardiac arrest if the ventricular rate is so rapid that effec-
tive mechanical contraction and relaxation cannot occur, 
especially in the presence of severe left ventricular 
impairment. It may degenerate into ventricular fibrilla-
tion. Defibrillation will restore cardiac output in more 
than 80% of patients, if delivered immediately. However, 
the chances of survival fall by at least 10% with each 
minute’s delay, and by more if basic life support is not 
given (see below); thus provision of these is the key to 
survival.
Recurrent but short-lived bouts of an irregular heart 
beat are usually due to atrial or ventricular extrasystoles 
(ectopic beats). Some patients will describe the experi-
ence as a ‘flip’ or a ‘jolt’ in the chest, while others report 
dropped or missed beats. Extrasystoles are often more 
frequent during periods of stress or debility; they can be 
triggered by alcohol or nicotine.
Episodes of a pounding, forceful and relatively fast 
(90–120 /min) heart beat are a common manifestation of 
anxiety. These may also reflect a hyperdynamic circula-
tion, such as anaemia, pregnancy and thyrotoxicosis, 
and can occur in some forms of valve disease (e.g. aortic 
regurgitation). Discrete bouts of a very rapid (over 
120/min) heart beat are more likely to be due to a par-
oxysmal tachyarrhythmia. Supraventricular and ven-
tricular tachycardias may present in this way. In contrast, 
episodes of atrial fibrillation typically present with irreg-
ular and usually rapid palpitation.
Palpitation is usually benign and, even if the patient’s 
symptoms are due to an arrhythmia, the outlook is good 
if there is no underlying structural heart disease. Most 
cases are due to an awareness of the normal heart beat, 
a sinus tachycardia or benign extrasystoles, in which 
case an explanation and reassurance may be all that is 
required. Palpitation associated with presyncope or 
syncope may reflect more serious structural or electrical 
disease and should be investigated without delay.
The diagnosis and management of individual arrhyth­
mias are considered on pages 562–579.
Cardiac arrest and sudden  
cardiac death
Cardiac arrest describes the sudden and complete 
loss of cardiac output due to asystole, ventricular 
tachycardia or fibrillation, or loss of mechanical cardiac 
contraction (pulseless electrical activity). The clinical 
diagnosis is based on the victim being unconscious and 
pulseless; breathing may take some time to stop com-
pletely after cardiac arrest. Death is virtually inevitable, 
unless effective treatment is given promptly.
Fig. 18.32  Ventricular fibrillation. A bizarre chaotic rhythm, initiated in 
this case by two ventricular ectopic beats in rapid succession. 
Coronary artery disease (85%)
• Myocardial ischaemia
• Acute MI
• Prior MI with myocardial scarring
Structural heart disease (10%)
• Aortic stenosis (p. 620)
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (p. 637)
• Dilated cardiomyopathy (p. 636)
• Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (p. 638)
• Congenital heart disease (p. 629)
No structural heart disease (5%)
• Long QT syndrome (p. 570)
• Brugada syndrome (p. 571)
• Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome (p. 568)
• Adverse drug reactions (torsades de pointes, p. 570)
• Severe electrolyte abnormalities
18.22  Causes of sudden arrhythmic death
Cardiovascular disease
18
558
to assessment of neurological status, and Exposure 
entails removal of clothes to enable defibrillation, aus-
cultation of the chest, and assessment for a rash caused 
by anaphylaxis, injuries or so on (Fig. 18.34). Chest 
compression-only (‘hands-only’) CPR is easier for 
members of the public to learn and administer, and is 
now advocated in public education campaigns.
Advanced life support (ALS)
ALS (Fig. 18.35) aims to restore normal cardiac rhythm 
by defibrillation when the cause of cardiac arrest is due 
to a tachyarrhythmia, or to restore cardiac output by 
correcting other reversible causes of cardiac arrest. ALS 
can also involve administration of intravenous drugs to 
Asystole
This occurs when there is no electrical activity within 
the ventricles and is usually due to failure of the con-
ducting tissue or massive ventricular damage complicat-
ing MI. A precordial thump, external cardiac massage, 
or administration of intravenous atropine or adrenaline 
(epinephrine) may restore cardiac activity. When due to 
conducting tissue failure, permanent pacemaker implan-
tation will be required if the individual survives.
Pulseless electrical activity
This occurs when there is no effective cardiac output 
despite the presence of organised electrical activity. It 
may be caused by reversible conditions, such as hypo-
volaemia, cardiac tamponade or tension pneumothorax 
(see Fig. 18.35 below), but is often due to a catastrophic 
event, such as cardiac rupture or massive pulmonary 
embolism, and therefore carries an extremely poor 
prognosis.
Management of cardiac arrest
The Chain of Survival
This term refers to the sequence of events that is neces-
sary to maximise the chances of a cardiac arrest victim 
surviving (Fig. 18.33). Survival is most likely if all links 
in the chain are strong: that is, if the arrest is witnessed, 
help is called immediately, basic life support is admin-
istered by a trained individual, the emergency medical 
services respond promptly, and defibrillation is achieved 
within a few minutes. Good training in both basic and 
advanced life support is essential and should be main-
tained by regular refresher courses. In recent years, 
public access defibrillation has been introduced in places 
of high population density, particularly where traffic 
congestion may impede the response of emergency serv-
ices, such as railway stations, airports and sports stadia. 
Designated individuals can respond to a cardiac arrest 
using basic life support and an automated external 
defibrillator.
Basic life support
Basic life support (BLS) encompasses manœuvres that 
aim to maintain a low level of circulation until more 
definitive treatment with advanced life support can be 
given. The ABCDE approach to management of the 
collapsed patient should be followed: prompt assess-
ment and restoration of the Airway, maintenance of 
ventilation using rescue Breathing (‘mouth-to-mouth’ 
breathing), maintenance of the Circulation using chest 
compressions; Disability, in resuscitated patients, refers 
Fig. 18.33  The Chain of Survival in cardiac arrest. (ALS = advanced life support; CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation) 
t
o
 
g
e
t 
h
e
l
p
E
a
rl
y
 
A
C
C
E
S
S
t
o
 
g
e
t 
h
e
l
p
E
a
rl
y
 
A
C
C
E
S
S
t
o
 
b
u
y 
ti
m
e
E
a
rl
y 
C
P
R
t
o
 r
e
s
t
a
r
t 
h
e
a
r
t
E
a
r
l
y
 
D
E
F
I
B
R
I
L
L
A
T
I
O
N
t
o
 
s
t
a
b
il
i
s
e
E
a
rl
y
 
A
L
S
Fig. 18.34  Algorithm for adult basic life support. For further 
information see www.resus.org.uk. From Resuscitation Council (UK) 
guidelines – see p. 641.
Unresponsive?
Not breathing normally?
Shout for help
Open airway
Call emergency
services
30 chest
compressions
2 rescue breaths
30 compressions
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
559
or ventricular tachycardia re-initiates after successful 
defibrillation.
Ventricular fibrillation of low amplitude, or ‘fine VF’, 
may mimic asystole. If asystole cannot be confidently 
diagnosed, the patient should be treated for VF and 
defib­rillated. If an electrical rhythm is observed that 
would be expected to produce a cardiac output, ‘pulse-
less electrical activity’ is present. Pulseless electrical 
activity is treated by continuing CPR and adrenaline 
(epinephrine) administration whilst seeking such causes. 
Asystole is treated similarly, with the additional support 
of atropine and sometimes external or transvenous 
pacing in an attempt to generate an electrical rhythm.
There are many potentially reversible causes of 
cardiac arrest and the main causes can be easily remem-
bered as a list of four Hs and four Ts (see Fig. 18.35).
Survivors of cardiac arrest
Patients who survive a cardiac arrest caused by acute MI 
need no specific treatment beyond that given to those 
recovering from an uncomplicated infarct, since their 
prognosis is similar (p. 599). Those with reversible 
causes, such as exercise-induced ischaemia or aortic ste-
nosis, should have the underlying cause treated if pos-
sible. Survivors of ventricular tachycardia or ventricular 
support the circulation, and endotracheal intubation to 
ventilate the lungs.
If cardiac arrest is witnessed, a precordial thump may 
sometimes convert ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia 
to normal rhythm, but this is futile if cardiac arrest 
has lasted longer than a few seconds. The priority is to 
assess the patient’s cardiac rhythm by attaching a defib­
rillator or monitor. Ventricular fibrillation or pulseless 
ventricular tachycardia is treated with immediate defib­
rillation. Defibrillation is more likely to be effective if a 
biphasic shock defibrillator is used, where the polarity 
of the shock is reversed midway through its delivery. 
Defibrillation is usually administered using a 150-Joule 
biphasic shock, and CPR resumed immediately for 
2 minutes without attempting to confirm restoration 
of a pulse, because restoration of mechanical cardiac 
output rarely occurs immediately after successful defib­
rillation. If, after 2 minutes, a pulse is not restored, 
a further biphasic shock of 150–200 joules is given. 
Thereafter, additional biphasic shocks of 150–200 joules 
are given every 2 minutes after each cycle of cardio­
pulmonary resuscitation (CPR). During resuscitation, 
adrenaline (epinephrine, 1 mg IV) should be given every 
3–5 minutes and consideration given to the use of intra-
venous amiodarone, especially if ventricular fibrillation 
Fig. 18.35  Algorithm for adult advanced life support. For further information see www.resus.org.uk (CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation: PEA = 
pulseless electrical activity; VF = ventricular fibrillation; VT = pulseless ventricular tachycardia) From Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines – see p. 641. 
Unresponsive?
Shockable
(VF/pulseless VT)
1 shock
150–360 J biphasic
or monophasic
Immediately resume
CPR 30:2
for 2 mins
Non-shockable
(PEA/asystole)
Immediately resume
CPR 30:2
for 2 mins
Open airway
Look for signs of life
CPR 30:2
Until defibrillator/monitor
attached
Assess
rhythm
During CPR:
• Correct reversible causes*
• Check electrode position and contact
• Attempt/verify:
    IV access
    Airway and oxygen
• Give uninterrupted compressions when airway secure
• Give adrenaline (epinephrine) every 3–5 mins
• Consider: amiodarone, atropine, magnesium
Hypoxia
Hypovolaemia
Hypokalaemia/hyperkalaemia/
metabolic
Hypothermia
Tension pneumothorax
Tamponade, cardiac
Toxins
Thrombosis (coronary
or pulmonary)
*Reversible causes
Call
resuscitation team
Cardiovascular disease
18
560
physiological but may also occur in pathological condi-
tions; for example, a third sound is common in young 
people and in pregnancy but is also a feature of heart 
failure (see Box 18.23). Similarly, a systolic murmur due 
to turbulence across the right ventricular outflow tract 
may occur in hyperdynamic states (e.g. anaemia, preg-
nancy), but may also be due to pulmonary stenosis or 
an intracardiac shunt leading to volume overload of the 
RV (e.g. atrial septal defect).
Benign murmurs do not occur in diastole (Box 18.24), 
and systolic murmurs that radiate or are associated with 
a thrill are almost always pathological.
Auscultatory evaluation of a heart murmur
Timing, intensity, location, radiation and quality are all 
useful clues to the origin and nature of a heart murmur 
(Box 18.25). Radiation of a murmur is determined by the 
direction of turbulent blood flow and is only detectable 
when there is a high-velocity jet, such as in mitral regur-
gitation (radiation from apex to axilla) or aortic stenosis 
(radiation from base to neck). Similarly, the pitch and 
quality of the sound can help to distinguish the murmur, 
fibrillation arrest in whom no reversible cause can be 
identified may be at risk of another episode, and should 
be considered for an implantable cardiac defibrillator 
(p. 579) and anti-arrhythmic drug therapy.
Abnormal heart sounds and murmurs
The first indication of heart disease may be the discovery 
of an abnormal sound on auscultation (Box 18.23). This 
may be incidental – for example, during a routine child-
hood examination – or may be prompted by symptoms 
of heart disease. Clinical evaluation is helpful, and is 
supported by more detailed evaluation of the abnormal 
sound or murmur using echocardiography.
Is the sound cardiac?
Additional heart sounds and murmurs demonstrate a 
consistent relationship to a specific part of the cardiac 
cycle but extracardiac sounds (e.g. pleural rub or 
venous hum) do not. Pericardial friction produces a 
characteristic scratching noise (a pericardial ‘rub’), 
which may have two components corresponding to 
atrial and ventricular systole, and may vary with posture 
and respiration.
Is the sound pathological?
Pathological sounds and murmurs are the product of 
turbulent blood flow or rapid ventricular filling due to 
abnormal loading conditions. Some added sounds are 
Sound
Timing
Characteristics
Mechanisms
Variable features
First heart 
sound (S1)
Onset of systole
Usually single or 
narrowly split
Closure of mitral and tricuspid 
valves
Loud: hyperdynamic circulation 
(anaemia, pregnancy, thyrotoxicosis); 
mitral stenosis
Soft: heart failure; mitral regurgitation
Second heart 
sound (S2)
End of systole
Split on inspiration
Single on expiration 
(p. 532)
Closure of aortic and pulmonary 
valve
A2 first
P2 second
Fixed wide splitting with atrial septal 
defect
Wide but variable splitting with 
delayed right heart emptying (e.g. 
right bundle branch block)
Reversed splitting due to delayed left 
heart emptying (e.g. left bundle 
branch block)
Third heart 
sound (S3)
Early in diastole, 
just after S2
Low pitch, often 
heard as ‘gallop’
From ventricular wall due to 
abrupt cessation of rapid filling
Physiological: young people, 
pregnancy
Pathological: heart failure, mitral 
regurgitation
Fourth heart 
sound (S4)
End of diastole, 
just before S1
Low pitch
Ventricular origin (stiff ventricle 
and augmented atrial 
contraction) related to atrial 
filling
Absent in atrial fibrillation
A feature of severe left ventricular 
hypertrophy (e.g. hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy)
Systolic 
clicks
Early or 
mid-systole
Brief, high-intensity 
sound
Valvular aortic stenosis
Valvular pulmonary stenosis 
Floppy mitral valve
Prosthetic heart sounds from 
opening and closing of normally 
functioning mechanical valves
Click may be lost when stenotic valve 
becomes thickened or calcified
Prosthetic clicks lost when valve 
obstructed by thrombus or 
vegetations
Opening 
snap (OS)
Early in diastole
High pitch, brief 
duration
Opening of stenosed leaflets of 
mitral valve
Prosthetic heart sounds
Moves closer to S2 as mitral stenosis 
becomes more severe. May be absent 
in calcific mitral stenosis
18.23  Normal and abnormal heart sounds
• Soft
• Mid-systolic
• Heard at left sternal edge
• No radiation
• No other cardiac 
abnormalities
18.24  Features of a benign or innocent 
heart murmur
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease
18
561
such as the ‘blowing’ murmur of mitral regurgitation or 
the ‘rasping’ murmur of aortic stenosis.
The position of a murmur in relation to the cardiac 
cycle is crucial and should be assessed by timing 
it with the heart sounds, carotid pulse and apex beat 
(Figs 18.36 and 18.37).
Systolic murmurs
Ejection systolic murmurs are associated with ventricu-
lar outflow tract obstruction and occur in mid-systole 
with a crescendo–decrescendo pattern, reflecting the 
changing velocity of blood flow (Box 18.26). Pansystolic 
murmurs maintain a constant intensity and extend from 
the first heart sound throughout systole to the second 
heart sound, sometimes obscuring it. They occur when 
blood leaks from a ventricle into a low-pressure chamber 
at an even or constant velocity. Mitral regurgitation, tri-
cuspid regurgitation and ventricular septal defect are 
the only causes of a pansystolic murmur. Late systolic 
murmurs are unusual but may occur in mitral valve 
prolapse, if the mitral regurgitation is confined to late 
systole, and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, 
if dynamic obstruction occurs late in systole.
Diastolic murmurs
These are due to accelerated or turbulent flow across the 
mitral or tricuspid valves. They are low-pitched noises 
that are often difficult to hear and should be evaluated 
with the bell of the stethoscope. A mid-diastolic murmur 
may be due to mitral stenosis (located at the apex and 
axilla), tricuspid stenosis (located at the left sternal 
edge), increased flow across the mitral valve (e.g. the 
to-and-fro murmur of severe mitral regurgitation) or 
increased flow across the tricuspid valve (e.g. left-to-
right shunt through a large atrial septal defect). Early 
diastolic murmurs have a soft, blowing quality with a 
When does it occur?
Time the murmur using heart sounds, 
carotid pulse and the apex beat. Is it 
systolic or diastolic?
Does the murmur extend throughout 
systole or diastole or is it confined  
to a shorter part of the cardiac  
cycle?
How loud is it? 
(intensity)
Grade 1: very soft (only audible in 
ideal conditions)
Grade 2: soft
Grade 3: moderate
Grade 4: loud with associated thrill
Grade 5: very loud
Grade 6: heard without stethoscope
N.B. Diastolic murmurs are sometimes 
graded 1–4
Where is it heard 
best? (location)
Listen over the apex and base of the 
heart, including the aortic and 
pulmonary areas
Where does it 
radiate?
Listen at the neck, axilla or back
What does it sound 
like? (pitch and 
quality)
Pitch is determined by flow (high pitch 
indicates high-velocity flow)
Is the intensity constant or variable?
18.25  How to assess a heart murmur
Fig. 18.36  The relationship of the cardiac cycle to the ECG, the 
left ventricular pressure wave and the position of heart sounds. 
Opening snap in
mitral stenosis
or mitral
prosthesis
Ejection click,
or opening
sound of aortic
prosthesis
Aortic
pressure
Left
ventricular
pressure
4th
sound
1st
sound
2nd
sound
3rd
sound
Left atrial pressure
DIASTOLE
SYSTOLE
DIASTOLE
Mid-systolic
click
Clicks
Sounds
ECG
Fig. 18.37  The timing and pattern of cardiac murmurs. 
Pansystolic murmur
(mitral regurgitation,
tricuspid regurgitation,
ventricular septal defect)
Late systolic murmur
(mitral valve prolapse)
S1
S2
Click
Opening
snap
Mid-diastolic murmur
(mitral stenosis, tricuspid
stenosis, mitral or
tricuspid flow murmurs)
Early diastolic murmur
(aortic or pulmonary
regurgitation)
Ejection systolic murmur
(aortic stenosis, pulmonary
stenosis, aortic or
pulmonary flow murmurs)
Cardiovascular disease
18
562
If the sinus rate becomes unduly slow, another, more 
distal part of the conducting system may assume the role 
of pacemaker. This is known as an escape rhythm and 
may arise in the atrioventricular (AV) node or His 
bundle (junctional rhythm) or the ventricles (idioven-
tricular rhythm).
A cardiac arrhythmia is a disturbance of the electrical 
rhythm of the heart. Arrhythmias are often a manifesta-
tion of structural heart disease but may also occur 
because of abnormal conduction or depolarisation in 
an otherwise healthy heart. A heart rate of more than 
100/min is called a tachycardia, and a heart rate of less 
than 60/min is called a bradycardia.
There are three main mechanisms of tachycardia:
•	 Increased automaticity. The tachycardia is produced 
by repeated spontaneous depolarisation of an 
ectopic focus, often in response to catecholamines.
•	 Re-entry. The tachycardia is initiated by an ectopic 
beat and sustained by a re-entry circuit (Fig. 18.38). 
Most tachyarrhythmias are due to re-entry.
•	 Triggered activity. This can cause ventricular 
arrhythmias in patients with coronary artery 
disease. It is a form of secondary depolarisation 
arising from an incompletely repolarised cell 
membrane.
Bradycardia may be due to:
•	 Reduced automaticity, e.g. sinus bradycardia.
•	 Blocked or abnormally slow conduction, e.g. AV block.
decrescendo pattern and should be evaluated with the 
diaphragm of the stethoscope. They are due to regurgi-
tation across the aortic or pulmonary valves and are best 
heard at the left sternal edge, with the patient sitting 
forwards in held expiration.
Continuous murmurs
These result from a combination of systolic and diastolic 
flow (e.g. persistent ductus arteriosus), and must be dis-
tinguished from extracardiac noises such as bruits from 
arterial shunts, venous hums (high rates of venous flow 
in children) and pericardial friction rubs.
The characteristics of specific valve defects and con-
genital anomalies are described on pages 613 and 629.
DISORDERS OF HEART RATE, RHYTHM 
AND CONDUCTION
The heart beat is normally initiated by an electrical dis-
charge from the sinoatrial (sinus) node. The atria and 
ventricles then depolarise sequentially as electrical 
depolarisation passes through specialised conducting 
tissues (see Fig. 18.4, p. 529). The sinus node acts as a 
pacemaker and its intrinsic rate is regulated by the auto-
nomic nervous system; vagal activity decreases the heart 
rate, and sympathetic activity increases it via cardiac 
sympathetic nerves and circulating catecholamines.
Condition
Timing and duration
Quality
Location and radiation
Associated features
Aortic stenosis
Mid-systolic
Loud, rasping
Base and left sternal edge, 
radiating to suprasternal notch 
and carotids
Single second heart sound
Ejection click (in young patients)
Slow rising pulse
Left ventricular hypertrophy 
(pressure overload)
Mitral regurgitation
Pansystolic
Blowing
Apex, radiating to axilla
Soft first heart sound
Third heart sound
Left ventricular hypertrophy 
(volume overload)
Ventricular septal 
defect (VSD)
Pansystolic
Harsh
Lower left sternal edge, radiating 
to whole precordium
Thrill
Biventricular hypertrophy
Benign
Mid-systolic
Soft
Left sternal edge, no radiation
No other signs of heart disease
18.26  Features of some common systolic murmurs
Fig. 18.38  The mechanism of re-entry. Re-entry can occur when there are two alternative pathways with different conducting properties (e.g. the AV 
node and an accessory pathway, or an area of normal and an area of ischaemic tissue). Here, pathway A conducts slowly and recovers quickly, while 
pathway B conducts rapidly and recovers slowly. (1) In sinus rhythm, each impulse passes down both pathways before entering a common distal pathway. 
(2) As the pathways recover at different rates, a premature impulse may find pathway A open and B closed. (3) Pathway B may recover while the 
premature impulse is travelling selectively down pathway A. The impulse can then travel retrogradely up pathway B, setting up a closed loop or re-entry 
circuit. (4) This may initiate a tachycardia that continues until the circuit is interrupted by a change in conduction rates or electrical depolarisation. 
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
1 Sinus rhythm
2 Premature impulse
3 Re-entry
4 Tachycardia 
Refractory
tissue
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
563
An arrhythmia may be ‘supraventricular’ (sinus, 
atrial or junctional) or ventricular in origin. Supraven-
tricular rhythms usually produce narrow QRS com-
plexes because the ventricles are depolarised in their 
normal sequence via the AV node and bundle of His. In 
contrast, ventricular rhythms produce broad, bizarre 
QRS complexes because the ventricles are activated 
in an abnormal sequence. Occasionally, however, a 
supraventricular rhythm can produce broad or wide 
QRS complexes due to coexisting bundle branch block 
or the presence of an additional atrioventricular connec-
tion (accessory pathway, see below).
Bradycardias cause symptoms that reflect low cardiac 
output: fatigue, lightheadedness and syncope. Tachycar-
dias cause rapid palpitation, dizziness, chest discomfort 
or breathlessness. Extreme tachycardias can cause 
syncope because the heart is unable to contract or relax 
properly at extreme rates. Extreme bradycardias or tach-
ycardias can precipitate sudden death or cardiac arrest.
Sinoatrial nodal rhythms
Sinus arrhythmia
Phasic alteration of the heart rate during respiration (the 
sinus rate increases during inspiration and slows during 
expiration) is a consequence of normal parasympathetic 
nervous system activity and can be pronounced in chil-
dren. Absence of this normal variation in heart rate with 
breathing or with changes in posture may be a feature 
of autonomic neuropathy (p. 831).
Sinus bradycardia
A sinus rate of less than 60/min may occur in healthy 
people at rest and is a common finding in athletes. Some 
pathological causes are listed in Box 18.27. Asymptom­
atic sinus bradycardia requires no treatment. Symptom­
atic acute sinus bradycardia usually responds to 
intravenous atropine 0.6–1.2 mg. Patients with recurrent 
or persistent symptomatic sinus bradycardia should be 
considered for pacemaker implantation.
Sinus tachycardia
This is defined as a sinus rate of more than 100/min, and 
is usually due to an increase in sympathetic activity 
associated with exercise, emotion, pregnancy or pathol-
ogy (see Box 18.27). Young adults can produce a rapid 
sinus rate, up to 200/min, during intense exercise.
Sinoatrial disease  
(sick sinus syndrome)
Sinoatrial disease can occur at any age but is most 
common in older people. The underlying pathology 
involves fibrosis, degenerative changes or ischaemia of 
the SA (sinus) node. The condition is characterised by a 
variety of arrhythmias (Box 18.28) and may present with 
palpitation, dizzy spells or syncope, due to intermittent 
tachycardia, bradycardia, or pauses with no atrial or 
ventricular activity (SA block or sinus arrest) (Fig. 18.39).
Sinus bradycardia
• MI
• Sinus node disease (sick 
sinus syndrome)
• Hypothermia
• Hypothyroidism
• Cholestatic jaundice
• Raised intracranial pressure
• Drugs, e.g. β-blockers, 
digoxin, verapamil
Sinus tachycardia
• Anxiety
• Fever
• Anaemia
• Heart failure
• Thyrotoxicosis
• Phaeochromocytoma
• Drugs, e.g. β-agonists 
(bronchodilators)
18.27  Some pathological causes of 
sinus bradycardia and tachycardia
Fig. 18.39  Sinoatrial disease (sick sinus syndrome). A continuous rhythm strip from a 24-hour ECG tape recording illustrating periods of sinus 
rhythm, atrial ectopics, junctional beats, sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. 
Sinus beat
Junctional beat
Sinus bradycardia
Sinus arrest
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial ectopic beat
• Sinus bradycardia
• Sinoatrial block (sinus 
arrest)
• Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation
• Paroxysmal atrial 
tachycardia
• Atrioventricular block
18.28  Common features of sinoatrial disease
Cardiovascular disease
18
564
narrow-complex tachycardia of 150/min. Carotid sinus 
pressure or intravenous adenosine may help to establish 
the diagnosis by temporarily increasing the degree of 
AV block and revealing flutter waves (Fig. 18.42).
Management
Digoxin, β-blockers or verapamil can control the ven-
tricular rate (pp. 574–576). However, in many cases, it 
may be preferable to try to restore sinus rhythm by direct 
current (DC) cardioversion or by using intravenous ami-
odarone. Beta-blockers or amiodarone can also be used 
to prevent recurrent episodes of atrial flutter. Although 
flecainide can also be used for acute treatment or prophy-
laxis, it should be avoided because there is a risk of 
slowing the flutter circuit and facilitating 1 : 1 AV nodal 
conduction. This can cause a paradoxical tachycardia 
and haemodynamic compromise. If used, it should 
always be prescribed along with an AV node-blocking 
drug, such as a β-blocker. Catheter ablation offers a 90% 
chance of complete cure and is the treatment of choice 
for patients with persistent symptoms.
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained 
cardiac arrhythmia, with an overall prevalence of 0.5% 
in the adult population of the UK. The prevalence rises 
with age, affecting 1% of those aged 60–64 years, increas-
ing to 9% of those aged over 80 years. AF is a complex 
arrhythmia characterised by both abnormal automatic 
firing and the presence of multiple interacting re-entry 
A permanent pacemaker may benefit patients with 
troublesome symptoms due to spontaneous brady­
cardias, or those with symptomatic bradycardias 
induced by drugs required to prevent tachyarrhythmias. 
Atrial pacing may prevent episodes of atrial fibrillation. 
Pacing improves symptoms but not prognosis, and is 
not indicated in patients who are asymptomatic.
Atrial tachyarrhythmias
Atrial ectopic beats (extrasystoles, 
premature beats)
These usually cause no symptoms but can give the sen-
sation of a missed beat or an abnormally strong beat. The 
ECG (Fig. 18.40) shows a premature but otherwise 
normal QRS complex; if visible, the preceding P wave 
has a different morphology because the atria activate 
from an abnormal site. In most cases, these are of no 
consequence, although very frequent atrial ectopic beats 
may herald the onset of atrial fibrillation. Treatment is 
rarely necessary but β-blockers can be used if symptoms 
are intrusive.
Fig. 18.40  Atrial ectopic beats. The first, second and fifth complexes 
are normal sinus beats. The third, fourth and sixth complexes are atrial 
ectopic beats with identical QRS complexes and abnormal (sometimes 
barely visible) P waves. 
Fig. 18.41  Atrial flutter. Simultaneous recording showing atrial flutter 
with 3 : 1 AV block; flutter waves are only visible in leads II and III. 
II
III
I
Fig. 18.42  Carotid sinus pressure in atrial flutter: continuous 
trace. The diagnosis of atrial flutter with 2 : 1 block was established when 
carotid sinus pressure produced temporary AV block, revealing the flutter 
waves. 
Carotid sinus pressure
Atrial tachycardia
Atrial tachycardia may be a manifestation of increased 
atrial automaticity, sinoatrial disease or digoxin toxicity. 
It produces a narrow-complex tachycardia with abnor-
mal P-wave morphology, sometimes associated with AV 
block if the atrial rate is rapid. It may respond to 
β-blockers, which reduce automaticity, or class I or III 
anti-arrhythmic drugs (see Box 18.38, p. 575). The ven-
tricular response in rapid atrial tachycardias may be 
controlled by AV node-blocking drugs. Catheter abla-
tion (p. 577) can be used to target the ectopic site and 
should be offered as an alternative to anti-arrhythmic 
drugs in patients with recurrent atrial tachycardia.
Atrial flutter
Atrial flutter is characterised by a large (macro) re-entry 
circuit, usually within the right atrium encircling the 
tricuspid annulus. The atrial rate is approximately 
300/min, and is usually associated with 2 : 1, 3 : 1 or 4 : 1 
AV block (with corresponding heart rates of 150, 100 or 
75/min). Rarely, in young patients, every beat is con-
ducted, producing a rate of 300/min and, potentially, 
haemodynamic compromise. The ECG shows saw-
toothed flutter waves (Fig. 18.41). When there is regular 
2 : 1 AV block, it may be difficult to identify flutter waves 
that are buried in QRS complexes and T waves. Atrial 
flutter should always be suspected when there is a 
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
565
occurs, with atrial fibrosis and dilatation that further 
predispose to AF. Thus early treatment of AF will 
prevent re-initiation of the arrhythmia.
AF may be the first manifestation of many forms of 
heart disease (Box 18.29), particularly those that are 
associated with enlargement or dilatation of the atria. 
Alcohol excess, hyperthyroidism and chronic lung 
disease are also common causes of AF, although multi-
ple aetiological factors often coexist, such as the combi-
nation of alcohol, hypertension and coronary artery 
disease. About 50% of all patients with paroxysmal AF 
and 20% of patients with persistent or permanent AF 
have structurally normal hearts; this is known as ‘lone 
atrial fibrillation’.
AF can cause palpitation, breathlessness and fatigue. 
In patients with poor ventricular function or valve 
disease, it may precipitate or aggravate cardiac failure 
because of loss of atrial function and heart rate control. 
A fall in BP may cause lightheadedness, and chest pain 
may occur with underlying coronary artery disease. In 
older patients, AF may not be associated with a rapid 
ventricular rate and is thus often asymptomatic, in 
which case it is usually discovered as a result of a routine 
examination or ECG.
AF is associated with significant morbidity and a 
twofold increase in mortality (mainly because of its asso-
ciation with other underlying heart disease). By far the 
most disabling consequence is its association with stroke 
and systemic embolism. Careful assessment, risk strati-
fication and therapy can markedly improve prognosis.
Management
Assessment of patients with newly diagnosed AF 
includes a full history, physical examination, 12-lead 
ECG, echocardiogram and thyroid function tests. 
Additional investigations may be needed to deter-
mine the nature and extent of any underlying heart 
disease. Biochemical evidence of hyperthyroidism is 
found in a small minority of patients with otherwise 
unexplained AF.
When AF complicates an acute illness (e.g. chest 
infection, pulmonary embolism), effective treatment of 
the primary disorder will often restore sinus rhythm. 
Otherwise, the main objectives are restoration of sinus 
rhythm (when possible), prevention of recurrent AF, 
optimisation of the heart rate during periods of AF, 
reduction of the risk of thromboembolism, and treat-
ment of underlying cardiac disease.
Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation
Occasional attacks that are well tolerated do not neces-
sarily require treatment. Beta-blockers are normally 
circuits looping around the atria. Episodes of atrial fibril-
lation are initiated by rapid bursts of ectopic beats 
arising from conducting tissue in the pulmonary veins 
or from diseased atrial tissue. AF becomes sustained 
because of re-entrant conduction within the atria or 
sometimes because of continuous ectopic firing (Fig. 
18.43). Re-entry is more likely to occur in atria that are 
enlarged, or in which conduction is slow (as is the case 
in many forms of heart disease). During episodes of AF, 
the atria beat rapidly but in an uncoordinated and inef-
fective manner. The ventricles are activated irregularly 
at a rate determined by conduction through the AV 
node. This produces the characteristic ‘irregularly irreg-
ular’ pulse. The ECG (Fig. 18.44) shows normal but 
irregular QRS complexes; there are no P waves but the 
baseline may show irregular fibrillation waves.
AF can be classified as paroxysmal (intermittent epi-
sodes which self-terminate within 7 days), persistent 
(prolonged episodes that can be terminated by electrical 
or chemical cardioversion) or permanent. In patients 
with AF seen for the first time, it can be difficult to iden-
tify which of these is present. Unfortunately for many 
patients, paroxysmal AF will become permanent as the 
underlying disease process that predisposes to AF 
progresses. Electrophysiological changes occur in the 
atria within a few hours of the onset of AF that tend to 
maintain fibrillation: electrical remodelling. When AF 
persists for a period of months, structural remodelling 
Fig. 18.43  Mechanisms initiating atrial fibrillation. (1) Ectopic 
beats, often arising from the pulmonary veins, trigger atrial fibrillation.  
(2) Re-entry within the atria maintains atrial fibrillation, with multiple 
interacting re-entry circuits operating simultaneously. 
2
2
1
Fig. 18.44  Two examples of atrial fibrillation. The QRS complexes 
are irregular and there are no P waves.  A There is usually a fast 
ventricular rate, e.g. between 120 and 160/min, at the onset of atrial 
fibrillation.  B In chronic atrial fibrillation, the ventricular rate may be 
much slower, due to the effects of medication and AV nodal fatigue. 
A
B
• Coronary artery disease 
(including acute MI)
• Valvular heart disease, 
especially rheumatic mitral 
valve disease
• Hypertension
• Sinoatrial disease
• Hyperthyroidism
• Alcohol
• Cardiomyopathy
• Congenital heart disease
• Chest infection
• Pulmonary embolism
• Pericardial disease
• Idiopathic (lone atrial 
fibrillation)
18.29  Common causes of atrial fibrillation
Cardiovascular disease
18
566
used as first-line therapy if symptoms are troublesome, 
and are particularly useful for treating patients with AF 
associated with coronary artery disease, hypertension 
and cardiac failure. Beta-blockers reduce the ectopic 
firing that normally initiates AF. Class Ic drugs (see Box 
18.38, p. 575), such as propafenone or flecainide, are also 
effective at preventing episodes but should not be given 
to patients with coronary artery disease or left ventricu-
lar dysfunction. Flecainide is usually prescribed along 
with a rate limiting β-blocker because it occasionally 
precipitates atrial flutter. Class III drugs can also be 
used; amiodarone is the most effective agent for pre-
venting AF but its side-effects restrict its use to patients 
in whom other measures fail. Dronedarone is an effec-
tive alternative, but is contraindicated in patients with 
heart failure or significant left ventricular impairment. 
Digoxin and verapamil are not effective drugs for pre-
venting paroxysms of AF, although they do limit the 
heart rate when AF occurs by blocking the AV node. In 
patients with AF in whom anti-arrhythmic drug therapy 
is ineffective or causes side-effects, catheter ablation can 
be considered. Ablation is used to disconnect the pulmo-
nary veins from the LA electrically, preventing ectopic 
triggering of AF. In addition, lines of conduction block 
can be created within the atria to prevent re-entry. Abla-
tion prevents AF in approximately 75% of patients with 
prior drug-resistant episodes, although a repeat proce-
dure is sometimes required before this is achieved. Abla-
tion for AF is an attractive treatment for patients in 
whom drugs are ineffective or poorly tolerated but it is 
associated with a risk of cardiac tamponade, stroke and 
other complications.
Persistent and permanent atrial fibrillation
There are two options for treating persistent AF:
•	 rhythm control: attempting to restore and maintain 
sinus rhythm
•	 rate control: accepting that AF will be permanent 
and using treatments to control the ventricular rate 
and to prevent embolic complications.
Rhythm control.  An attempt to restore sinus rhythm is 
particularly appropriate if the arrhythmia causes trou-
blesome symptoms and if there is a modifiable or treat-
able underlying cause. Electrical cardioversion (p. 577) 
is initially successful in three-quarters of patients but 
relapse is frequent (25–50% at 1 month and 70–90% at 
1 year). Attempts to restore and maintain sinus rhythm 
are most successful if AF has been present for less than 
3 months, the patient is young and there is no important 
structural heart disease.
Immediate cardioversion, after administration of 
intravenous heparin, is appropriate if AF has been 
present for under 48 hours. In stable patients with no 
history of structural heart disease, intravenous flecain-
ide (2 mg/kg over 30 mins, maximum dose 150 mg) can 
be used for pharmacological cardioversion and will 
restore sinus rhythm in 75% of patients within 8 hours. 
In patients with structural or ischaemic heart disease, 
intravenous amiodarone can be given via a central 
venous catheter. Electrical cardioversion, using a DC 
shock, is an alternative and is often effective when drugs 
fail. In other situations, DC cardioversion should be 
deferred until the patient has been established on war-
farin, with an international normalised ratio (INR) of 
more than 2.0 for a minimum of 4 weeks, and any under-
lying problems, such as hypertension or alcohol excess, 
have been eliminated. Anticoagulation should be main-
tained for at least 3 months following successful cardio-
version. If AF recurs, further cardioversion may be 
appropriate but consideration should be given to pre-
treatment with amiodarone to reduce the risk of recur-
rence. Catheter ablation is sometimes used to help 
restore and maintain sinus rhythm in resistant cases, but 
is a less effective treatment than for paroxysmal AF.
Rate control.  If sinus rhythm cannot be restored, treat-
ment should be directed at maintaining an appropriate 
heart rate. Digoxin, β-blockers and rate-limiting calcium 
antagonists, such as verapamil or diltiazem (pp. 574– 
576), reduce the ventricular rate by increasing the degree 
of AV block. This alone may produce a striking improve-
ment in cardiac function, particularly in patients with 
mitral stenosis. Beta-blockers and rate-limiting calcium 
antagonists are more effective than digoxin at control-
ling the heart rate during exercise and have additional 
benefits in patients with hypertension or structural heart 
disease. Combination therapy (e.g. digoxin and atenolol) 
is often advisable but rate-limiting calcium channel 
antagonists should not be used with β-blockers because 
of the risk of bradycardia.
In exceptional cases, poorly controlled and sympto-
matic AF can be treated by deliberately inducing com-
plete AV nodal block with catheter ablation; a permanent 
pacemaker must be implanted beforehand. This is 
known as the ‘pace and ablate’ strategy.
Prevention of thromboembolism
Loss of atrial contraction and left atrial dilatation cause 
stasis of blood in the LA and may lead to thrombus 
• Prevalence: rises with age, reaching 9% in those over 
80 yrs of age.
• Symptoms: sometimes asymptomatic but often accompanied 
by diastolic heart failure.
• Hyperthyroidism: atrial fibrillation may emerge as the 
dominant feature of otherwise silent or occult 
hyperthyroidism.
• Cardioversion: followed by high rates (~70% at 1 yr) of 
recurrent atrial fibrillation.
• Stroke: atrial fibrillation is an important cause of cerebral 
embolism, found in 15% of all stroke patients and 2–8% of 
those with transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs).
• Anticoagulation: although the risk of thromboembolism 
rises, the hazards of anticoagulation also become greater 
with age because of increased comorbidity, particularly 
cognitive impairment and falls.
• Target INR: if anticoagulation is recommended in those 
over 75 yrs, care should be taken to maintain an INR  
below 3.0 because of the increased risk of intracranial 
haemorrhage.
• Direct thrombin (e.g. dabigatran) and factor Xa (e.g. 
rivaroxaban) inhibitors: alternatives to warfarin. No blood 
monitoring is required, there are fewer drug interactions, and 
fixed dosing may aid compliance. Dabigatran dose is reduced 
from 150 mg twice daily to 110 mg twice daily in the 
over-eighties or if creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/
min. Rivaroxaban dose is reduced from 20 mg once daily to 
15 mg once daily if creatinine clearance is 30–49 mL/min, 
and contraindicated if below 30 mL/min.
18.30  Atrial fibrillation in old age
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
567
formation in the left atrial appendage. This predisposes 
patients to stroke and other forms of systemic embolism. 
The annual risk of stroke in patients with AF (Box 18.31) 
is influenced by many factors, and in each patient a deci-
sion has to be made about the risk of stroke versus the 
risk of anticoagulation.
Several large randomised trials have shown that 
treatment with adjusted-dose warfarin (target INR 2.0–
3.0) reduces the risk of stroke by about two-thirds, at the 
cost of an annual risk of bleeding of 1–1.5%, whereas 
treatment with aspirin reduces the risk of stroke by only 
one-fifth, is associated with significant bleeding risk and, 
although still included in European guidelines, has a 
very limited role. Warfarin is thus indicated for patients 
with AF who have specific risk factors for stroke. In 
intermittent AF, the risk of stroke is only loosely related 
to the frequency and duration of AF episodes, so stroke 
prevention guidelines do not distinguish between those 
with paroxysmal, persistent and permanent AF.
An assessment of the risk of embolism helps to define 
the possible benefits of antithrombotic therapy (see Box 
18.31), which must be balanced against its potential 
hazards. Risk stratification is based on clinical factors 
using the CHA2DS2-VASC scoring system. Echocardio-
graphic assessment (e.g. left atrial size) is of limited 
value in predicting stroke risk and is mainly used to 
identify associated structural disease. Oral anticoagula-
tion is indicated in patients at moderate or high risk of 
stroke, unless there is an unacceptable bleeding risk. The 
choice of oral anticoagulant is widening (Box 18.32). 
Until recently, warfarin was the treatment of choice, 
mandating regular blood testing, with a target INR of 
2.0–3.0. The direct thrombin inhibitor, dabigatran, is the 
first novel oral anticoagulant drug shown to be as effec-
tive and safe as warfarin at stroke prevention in AF. No 
blood monitoring is required and there are few drug 
interactions. For all anticoagulant drugs, comorbid con-
ditions that may be complicated by bleeding, such as 
peptic ulcer, uncontrolled hypertension, alcohol misuse, 
frequent falls, poor drug compliance and potential 
drug interactions, are all relative contraindications. 
In warfarin-treated patients, anticoagulation can be 
reversed by administering vitamin K or clotting factors, 
but there are no current antidotes for the direct thrombin 
inhibitors. Young patients (under 65 years) with no evi-
dence of structural heart disease have a very low risk of 
stroke and may not require oral anticoagulation.
‘Supraventricular’ tachycardias
The term ‘supraventricular tachycardia’ (SVT) is com-
monly used to describe regular tachycardias that have a 
similar appearance on ECG. These are usually associated 
with a narrow QRS complex and are characterised by a 
re-entry circuit or automatic focus involving the atria. 
The term SVT is misleading, as, in many cases, the ven-
tricles also form part of the re-entry circuit, such as in 
patients with AV re-entrant tachycardia.
Atrioventricular nodal re-entrant 
tachycardia
Atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) 
is due to re-entry in a circuit involving the AV node and 
its two right atrial input pathways: a superior ‘fast’ 
pathway and an inferior ‘slow’ pathway (see Fig. 18.46A 
below). This produces a regular tachycardia with a rate 
of 120–240/min. It tends to occur in the absence of 
structural heart disease and episodes may last from a 
few seconds to many hours. The patient is usually aware 
of a rapid, very forceful, regular heart beat and may 
experience chest discomfort, lightheadedness or breath-
lessness. Polyuria, mainly due to the release of atrial 
natriuretic peptide, is sometimes a feature. The ECG 
(Fig. 18.45) usually shows a tachycardia with normal 
Parameter
Score
C
Congestive heart failure
1 point
H
Hypertension history
1 point
A2
Age ≥ 75 yrs
2 points
D
Diabetes mellitus
1 point
S2
Previous stroke or TIA
2 points
V
Vascular disease
1 point
A
Age 65–74 yrs
1 point
Sc
Sex category female
1 point
Maximum total score
9 points
Annual stroke risk
0 points = 0% (no prophylaxis required)
1 point = 1.3% (oral anticoagulant or aspirin recommended)
2+ points = > 2.2% (oral anticoagulant recommended)
European Society of Cardiology Clinical Practice Guidelines: Atrial Fibrillation 
(Management of) 2010 and Focused Update (2012). Eur Heart J 2012; 
33:2719–2747.
18.31  CHA2DS2-VASc stroke risk scoring system 
for non-valvular atrial fibrillation
‘Anticoagulation with warfarin reduces the risk of ischaemic 
stroke in non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation by about 62% (absolute 
risk reduction 2.7% for primary prevention and 8.4% for 
secondary prevention).
Newer anticoagulants, such as the direct thrombin inhibitor, 
dabigatran, and the factor Xa inhibitors, apixaban and 
rivaroxaban, appear to have better efficacy and safety profiles 
than warfarin. They are most effective in patients who have 
poorly controlled anticoagulation with warfarin or those who are 
unable to take warfarin.’
• Hart RG, et al. Ann Intern Med 1999; 131:492–501.
• Connolly S, et al. N Engl J Med 2009; 361:1139–1151.
• Granger CB, et al. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:981–992.
For further information: 
 www.nice.org.uk/CG36
 www.clinicaltrials.gov (numbers NCT00262600 and 
NCT00412984)
18.32  Anticoagulation in atrial fibrillation
Fig. 18.45  Supraventricular tachycardia. The rate is 180/min and 
the QRS complexes are normal. 
Cardiovascular disease
18
568
QRS complexes but occasionally there may be rate-
dependent bundle branch block.
Management
Treatment is not always necessary. However, an episode 
may be terminated by carotid sinus pressure or by the 
Valsalva manœuvre. Adenosine (3–12 mg rapidly IV in 
incremental doses until tachycardia stops) or verapamil 
(5 mg IV over 1 min) will restore sinus rhythm in most 
cases. Intravenous β-blocker or flecainide can also be 
used. In rare cases, when there is severe haemodynamic 
compromise, the tachycardia should be terminated by 
DC cardioversion (p. 577).
In patients with recurrent SVT, catheter ablation 
(p. 577) is the most effective therapy and will perma-
nently prevent SVT in more than 90% of cases. Alterna-
tively, prophylaxis with oral β-blocker, verapamil or 
flecainide may be used but commits predominantly 
young patients to long-term drug therapy and can 
create difficulty in female patients, as these drugs are 
normally avoided during pregnancy.
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome 
and atrioventricular re-entrant 
tachycardia
Here, an abnormal band of conducting tissue con-
nects the atria and ventricles. This ‘accessory pathway’ 
comprises rapidly conducting fibres which resemble 
Purkinje tissue, in that they conduct very rapidly and 
are rich in sodium channels. In around half of cases, this 
pathway only conducts in the retrograde direction (from 
ventricles to atria) and thus does not alter the appear-
ance of the ECG in sinus rhythm. This is known as a 
concealed accessory pathway. In the rest, the pathway 
also conducts antegradely (from atria to ventricles) so 
AV conduction in sinus rhythm is mediated via both the 
AV node and the accessory pathway, distorting the QRS 
complex. Premature ventricular activation via the 
pathway shortens the PR interval and produces a 
‘slurred’ initial deflection of the QRS complex, called a 
delta wave (Fig. 18.46B). This is known as a manifest 
accessory pathway. As the AV node and accessory 
pathway have different conduction speeds and refrac-
tory periods, a re-entry circuit can develop, causing 
tachycardia (Fig. 18.46C); when associated with symp-
toms, the condition is known as Wolff–Parkinson–White 
syndrome. The ECG during this tachycardia is almost 
indistinguishable from that of AVNRT (Fig. 18.46A). 
Carotid sinus pressure or intravenous adenosine can 
terminate the tachycardia. If atrial fibrillation occurs, it 
may produce a dangerously rapid ventricular rate 
because the accessory pathway lacks the rate-limiting 
properties of the AV node (Fig. 18.46D). This is known 
as pre-excited atrial fibrillation and may cause collapse, 
syncope and even death. It should be treated as an emer-
gency, usually with DC cardioversion.
Catheter ablation is first-line treatment in sympto-
matic patients and is nearly always curative. Alter­
natively, prophylactic anti-arrhythmic drugs, such as 
Fig. 18.46  AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) and Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome.  A AV node re-entrant tachycardia. 
The mechanism of AVNRT occurs via two right atrial AV nodal input pathways: the slow (S) and fast (F) pathways. Antegrade conduction occurs via  
the slow pathway; the wavefront enters the AV node and passes into the ventricles, at the same time re-entering the atria via the fast pathway.
In WPW syndrome, there is a strip of accessory conducting tissue that allows electricity to bypass the AV node and spread from the atria to the 
ventricles rapidly and without delay. When the ventricles are depolarised through the AV node, the ECG is normal, but when the ventricles are depolarised 
through the accessory conducting tissue, the ECG shows a very short PR interval and a broad QRS complex.  B Sinus rhythm. In sinus rhythm, the 
ventricles are depolarised through (1) the AV node and (2) the accessory pathway, producing an ECG with a short PR interval and broadened QRS 
complexes; the characteristic slurring of the upstroke of the QRS complex is known as a delta wave. The degree of pre-excitation (the proportion  
of activation passing down the accessory pathway) and therefore the ECG appearances may vary a lot, and at times the ECG can look normal. 
 C Orthodromic tachycardia. This is the most common form of tachycardia in WPW. The re-entry circuit passes antegradely through the AV node and 
retrogradely through the accessory pathway. The ventricles are therefore depolarised in the normal way, producing a narrow-complex tachycardia that is 
indistinguishable from other forms of SVT.  D Atrial fibrillation. In this rhythm, the ventricles are largely depolarised through the accessory pathway, 
producing an irregular broad-complex tachycardia which is often more rapid than the example shown. 
AV nodal re-entrant
tachycardia
S
F
2
1
A
Wolff–Parkinson–White
syndrome: orthodromic
tachycardia
C
Wolff–Parkinson–White
syndrome: atrial
fibrillation
D
Wolff–Parkinson–White
syndrome: sinus rhythm
B
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
569
be used. VEBs are sometimes a manifestation of other-
wise subclinical heart disease, such as coronary artery 
disease or cardiomyopathy. There is no evidence that 
anti-arrhythmic therapy improves prognosis but the dis-
covery of very frequent VEBs should prompt investiga-
tions, such as an echocardiogram (looking for structural 
heart disease) and an exercise stress test (to detect 
underlying ischaemic heart disease).
Ventricular ectopic beats associated with 
heart disease
Frequent VEBs often occur during acute MI but need no 
treatment. Persistent, frequent (over 10/hr) VEBs in 
patients who have survived the acute phase of MI indi-
cate a poorer long-term outcome. Other than β-blockers, 
anti-arrhythmic drugs do not improve and may even 
worsen prognosis.
VEBs are common in patients with heart failure of 
any cause, including cardiomyopathy. While they are 
associated with an adverse prognosis, this is not 
improved by anti-arrhythmic drugs. Effective treatment 
of the heart failure may suppress the ectopic beats.
VEBs are also a feature of digoxin toxicity, and may 
occur as ‘escape beats’ in patients with bradycardia. 
Treatment is that of the underlying condition.
Ventricular tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) occurs most commonly in 
the settings of acute MI, chronic coronary artery disease, 
and cardiomyopathy. It occurs when there is extensive 
ventricular disease, such as impaired left ventricular 
function or a left ventricular aneurysm. In these settings, 
VT may cause haemodynamic compromise or degener-
ate into ventricular fibrillation (p. 557). It is caused by 
abnormal automaticity or triggered activity in ischaemic 
tissue, or by re-entry within scarred ventricular tissue. 
Patients may complain of palpitation or symptoms of 
low cardiac output, e.g. dizziness, dyspnoea or syncope. 
The ECG shows tachycardia and broad, abnormal QRS 
complexes with a rate of more than 120/min (Fig. 18.48). 
VT may be difficult to distinguish from SVT with bundle 
branch block or pre-excitation (WPW syndrome). Fea-
tures in favour of a diagnosis of VT are listed in Box 
18.33. A 12-lead ECG (Fig. 18.49) or electrophysiology 
flecainide or propafenone (p. 574), can be used to slow 
conduction in, and prolong the refractory period of, the 
accessory pathway. Long-term drug therapy is not the 
preferred treatment for most patients and amiodarone 
should not be used, as its side-effect profile cannot be 
justified and ablation is safer and more effective. Digoxin 
and verapamil shorten the refractory period of the acces-
sory pathway and should not be used.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias
Ventricular ectopic beats 
(extrasystoles, premature beats)
QRS complexes in sinus rhythm are normally narrow 
because the ventricles are activated rapidly and simul-
taneously via the His–Purkinje system. The complexes 
of ventricular ectopic beats (VEBs) are premature, broad 
and bizarre because the ventricles are activated sequen-
tially rather than simultaneously. The complexes may be 
unifocal (identical beats arising from a single ectopic 
focus) or multifocal (varying morphology with multiple 
foci, Fig. 18.47). ‘Couplet’ and ‘triplet’ are the terms used 
to describe two or three successive ectopic beats. A run 
of alternating sinus and ventricular ectopic beats is 
known as ventricular ‘bigeminy’. Ectopic beats produce 
a low stroke volume because left ventricular contraction 
occurs before filling is complete. The pulse is therefore 
irregular, with weak or missed beats (see Fig. 18.47). 
Patients are usually asymptomatic but may complain of 
an irregular heart beat, missed beats or abnormally 
strong beats (due to the increased output of the post-
ectopic sinus beat). The significance of VEBs depends on 
the presence or absence of underlying heart disease.
Ventricular ectopic beats in otherwise 
healthy subjects
VEBs are frequently found in healthy people and their 
prevalence increases with age. Ectopic beats in patients 
with otherwise normal hearts are more prominent at rest 
and disappear with exercise. Treatment is not necessary, 
unless the patient is highly symptomatic, in which case 
β-blockers or, in some situations, catheter ablation can 
Fig. 18.47  Ventricular ectopic beats.  A There are broad, bizarre QRS complexes (arrows) with no preceding P wave in between normal sinus beats. 
Their configuration varies, so these are multifocal ectopics.  B A simultaneous arterial pressure trace is shown. The ectopic beats result in a weaker pulse 
(arrows), which may be perceived as a ‘dropped beat’. 
A
B
Cardiovascular disease
18
570
arrhythmia). In patients at high risk of arrhythmic death 
(e.g. those with poor left ventricular function, or where 
VT is associated with haemodynamic compromise), the 
use of an implantable cardiac defibrillator is recom-
mended (p. 579). Rarely, surgery (e.g. aneurysm resec-
tion) or catheter ablation can be used to interrupt the 
arrhythmia focus or circuit in patients with VT associ-
ated with a myocardial infarct scar.
Torsades de pointes (ventricular 
tachycardia)
This form of polymorphic VT is a complication of pro-
longed ventricular repolarisation (prolonged QT inter-
val). The ECG shows rapid irregular complexes that 
oscillate from an upright to an inverted position and 
seem to twist around the baseline as the mean QRS axis 
changes (Fig. 18.50). The arrhythmia is usually non-
sustained and repetitive, but may degenerate into ven-
tricular fibrillation. During periods of sinus rhythm, the 
ECG will usually show a prolonged QT interval (> 0.43 s 
in men, > 0.45 s in women when corrected to a heart rate 
of 60/min).
study (p. 539) may help establish the diagnosis. When 
there is doubt, it is safer to manage the problem as VT.
Patients recovering from MI sometimes have periods 
of idioventricular rhythm (‘slow’ VT) at a rate only 
slightly above the preceding sinus rate and below 
120/min. These episodes often reflect reperfusion of the 
infarct territory and may be a good sign. They are 
usually self-limiting and asymptomatic, and do not 
require treatment. Other forms of sustained VT will 
require treatment, often as an emergency.
VT occasionally occurs in patients with otherwise 
healthy hearts (‘normal heart VT’), usually because 
of abnormal automaticity in the right ventricular 
outflow tract or one of the fascicles of the left bundle 
branch. The prognosis is good and catheter ablation can 
be curative.
Management
Prompt action to restore sinus rhythm is required and 
should usually be followed by prophylactic therapy. 
Synchronised DC cardioversion is the treatment of 
choice if systolic BP is less than 90 mmHg. If the arrhyth-
mia is well tolerated, intravenous amiodarone may 
be given as a bolus, followed by a continuous infusion 
(p. 576). Intravenous lidocaine can be used but may 
depress left ventricular function, causing hypotension 
or acute heart failure. Hypokalaemia, hypomagnesae-
mia, acidosis and hypoxaemia should be corrected.
Beta-blockers are effective at preventing VT by reduc-
ing ventricular automaticity. Amiodarone can be added 
if additional control is needed. Class Ic anti-arrhythmic 
drugs should not be used for prevention of VT in patients 
with coronary artery disease or heart failure because 
they depress myocardial function and can be pro-
arrhythmic (increase the likelihood of a dangerous 
Fig. 18.48  Ventricular tachycardia: fusion beat (arrow). In 
ventricular tachycardia, there is independent atrial and ventricular activity. 
Occasionally, a P wave is conducted to the ventricles through the AV node, 
producing a normal sinus beat in the middle of the tachycardia (a capture 
beat); more commonly, however, the conducted impulse fuses with an 
impulse from the tachycardia (a fusion beat). This can only occur when 
there is AV dissociation and is therefore diagnostic of ventricular 
tachycardia. 
• History of MI
• AV dissociation (pathognomonic)
• Capture/fusion beats (pathognomonic; see Fig. 18.48)
• Extreme left axis deviation
• Very broad QRS complexes (> 140 ms)
• No response to carotid sinus massage or IV adenosine
18.33  Features more in keeping with 
ventricular tachycardia
Fig. 18.49  Ventricular tachycardia: 12–lead ECG. There are typically 
very broad QRS complexes and marked left axis deviation. There is also AV 
dissociation; some P waves are visible and others are buried in the QRS 
complexes (arrows). 
I
aVR
V1
II
aVL
III
aVF
Rhythm strip
V4
V2
V5
V3
V6
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
571
The Brugada syndrome is a related genetic disorder 
that may present with polymorphic VT or sudden death. 
It is characterised by a defect in sodium channel function 
and an abnormal ECG (right bundle branch block and 
ST elevation in V1 and V2 but not usually prolongation 
of the QT interval). The only known effective treatment 
is an implantable defibrillator.
Atrioventricular and bundle  
branch block
Atrioventricular block
Atrioventricular conduction is influenced by autonomic 
activity. AV block can therefore be intermittent and 
only evident when the conducting tissue is stressed 
by a rapid atrial rate. Accordingly, atrial tachyarrhyth-
mias are often associated with AV block (see Fig. 18.44, 
p. 565).
First-degree atrioventricular block
In this condition, AV conduction is delayed and so the 
PR interval is prolonged (> 0.20 s; Fig. 18.51). It rarely 
causes symptoms.
Second-degree atrioventricular block
In this, dropped beats occur because some impulses 
from the atria fail to conduct to the ventricles.
In Mobitz type I second-degree AV block (Fig. 18.52), 
there is progressive lengthening of successive PR inter-
vals, culminating in a dropped beat. The cycle then 
repeats itself. This is known as the Wenckebach phe-
nomenon and is usually due to impaired conduction in 
the AV node itself. The phenomenon may be physiologi-
cal and is sometimes observed at rest or during sleep in 
athletic young adults with high vagal tone.
In Mobitz type II second-degree AV block (Fig. 18.53), 
the PR interval of the conducted impulses remains con-
stant but some P waves are not conducted. This is 
usually caused by disease of the His–Purkinje system 
and carries a risk of asystole.
In 2 : 1 AV block (Fig. 18.54), alternate P waves are 
conducted, so it is impossible to distinguish between 
Mobitz type I and type II block.
Some of the common causes are listed in Box 18.34. 
The arrhythmia is more common in women and is often 
triggered by a combination of aetiological factors (e.g. 
QT-prolonging medications and hypokalaemia). The 
congenital long QT syndromes are a family of genetic 
disorders that are characterised by mutations in genes 
that code for cardiac sodium or potassium channels. 
Long QT syndrome subtypes have different triggers, 
which are important when counselling patients. Adren-
ergic stimulation (e.g. exercise) is a common trigger in 
long QT type 1, and a sudden noise (e.g. an alarm clock) 
may trigger arrhythmias in long QT type 2. Arrhythmias 
are more common during sleep in type 3.
Treatment should be directed at the underlying 
cause. Intravenous magnesium (8 mmol over 15 mins, 
then 72 mmol over 24 hrs) should be given in all cases. 
Atrial pacing will usually suppress the arrhythmia 
through rate-dependent shortening of the QT interval. 
Intravenous isoprenaline is a reasonable alternative to 
pacing but should be avoided in patients with the con-
genital long QT syndromes.
Long-term therapy may not be necessary if the under-
lying cause can be removed. Beta-blockers are effective 
at preventing syncope in patients with congenital long 
QT syndrome. Some patients, particularly those with 
extreme QT interval prolongation (> 500 ms) or certain 
high-risk genotypes should be considered for implanta-
tion of a defibrillator. Left stellate ganglion block may 
be of value in patients with resistant arrhythmias.
Fig. 18.50  Torsades de pointes. A bradycardia with a long QT interval is followed by polymorphic ventricular tachycardia that is triggered by an R on T 
ectopic. 
Bradycardia
• Bradycardia compounds other factors that cause torsades de 
pointes
Electrolyte disturbance
• Hypokalaemia
• Hypomagnesaemia
• Hypocalcaemia
Drugs
• Disopyramide, flecainide (and other class Ia, Ic anti-
arrhythmic drugs, p. 574)
• Sotalol, amiodarone (and other class III anti-arrhythmic 
drugs)
• Amitriptyline (and other tricyclic antidepressants)
• Chlorpromazine (and other phenothiazines)
• Erythromycin (and other macrolides) … and many more
Congenital syndromes
• Long QT1: gene affected KCNQI: K+ channel, 30–35%
• Long QT2: gene affected HERG: K+ channel, 25–30%
• Long QT3: gene affected SCNSA: Na+ channel, 5–10%
• Long QT4–12: rare
18.34  Causes of long QT interval and 
torsades de pointes
Fig. 18.51  First-degree AV block. The PR interval is prolonged and 
measures 0.26 s. 
Cardiovascular disease
18
572
Fig. 18.52  Second-degree AV block (Mobitz type I – Wenckebach’s phenomenon). The PR interval progressively increases until a P wave is not 
conducted. The cycle then repeats itself. In this example, conduction is at a ratio of 4 : 3, leading to groupings of three ventricular complexes in a row. 
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fig. 18.53  Second-degree AV block (Mobitz type II). The PR interval of conducted beats is normal but some P waves are not conducted. 
The constant PR interval distinguishes this from Wenckebach’s phenomenon. 
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Congenital
Acquired
• Idiopathic fibrosis
• MI/ischaemia
• Inflammation
Acute (e.g. aortic root abscess in infective endocarditis)
Chronic (e.g. sarcoidosis, p. 709; Chagas’ disease,  
p. 360)
• Trauma (e.g. cardiac surgery)
• Drugs (e.g. digoxin, β-blocker)
18.35  Aetiology of complete AV block
Fig. 18.54  Second-degree AV block with fixed 2 : 1 block. 
Alternate P waves are not conducted. This may be due to Mobitz type I or 
II block. 
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fig. 18.55  Complete (third-degree) AV block. There is complete 
dissociation of atrial and ventricular complexes. The atrial rate is 80/min 
and the ventricular rate is 38/min. 
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Third-degree (complete) atrioventricular block
When AV conduction fails completely, the atria and ven-
tricles beat independently (AV dissociation, Fig. 18.55). 
Ventricular activity is maintained by an escape rhythm 
arising in the AV node or bundle of His (narrow QRS 
complexes) or the distal Purkinje tissues (broad QRS 
complexes). Distal escape rhythms tend to be slower and 
less reliable.
Complete AV block (Box 18.35) produces a slow 
(25–50/min), regular pulse that, except in the case of 
congenital complete AV block, does not vary with exer-
cise. There is usually a compensatory increase in stroke 
volume, producing a large-volume pulse. Cannon waves 
may be visible in the neck and the intensity of the first 
heart sound varies due to the loss of AV synchrony.
Stokes–Adams attacks
Episodes of ventricular asystole may complicate com-
plete heart block or Mobitz type II second-degree AV 
block, or occur in patients with sinoatrial disease (see 
Fig. 18.39, p. 563). This may cause recurrent syncope or 
‘Stokes–Adams’ attacks.
A typical episode is characterised by sudden loss of 
consciousness that occurs without warning and results 
in collapse. A brief anoxic seizure (due to cerebral 
ischaemia) may occur if there is prolonged asystole. 
There is pallor and a death-like appearance during the 
attack, but when the heart starts beating again, there is 
a characteristic flush. Unlike in epilepsy, recovery is 
rapid. Sinoatrial disease and neurocardiogenic syncope 
(p. 555) may cause similar symptoms.
Management
Atrioventricular block complicating acute  
myocardial infarction
Acute inferior MI is often complicated by transient AV 
block because the right coronary artery (RCA) supplies 
the AV node. There is usually a reliable escape rhythm 
and, if the patient remains well, no treatment is required. 
Symptomatic second- or third-degree AV block may 
respond to atropine (0.6 mg IV, repeated as necessary) 
or, if this fails, a temporary pacemaker. In most cases, 
the AV block will resolve within 7–10 days.
Second- or third-degree AV heart block complicat-
ing acute anterior MI indicates extensive ventricular 
damage involving both bundle branches and carries a 
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
573
bundle branch block (LBBB) often signifies important 
underlying heart disease.
The left bundle branch divides into an anterior and a 
posterior fascicle. Damage to the conducting tissue at 
this point (hemiblock) does not broaden the QRS 
complex but alters the mean direction of ventricular 
depolarisation (mean QRS axis), causing left axis devia-
tion in left anterior hemiblock and right axis deviation 
in left posterior hemiblock (see Fig. 18.7, p. 533). The 
combination of right bundle branch block and left ante-
rior or posterior hemiblock is known as bifascicular 
block.
Anti-arrhythmic drug therapy
Classification
Anti-arrhythmic drugs may be classified according to 
their mode or site of action (Box 18.37 and Fig. 18.58). 
poor prognosis. Asystole may ensue and a temporary 
pacemaker should be inserted promptly. If the patient 
presents with asystole, IV atropine (3 mg) or IV isopren­
aline (2 mg in 500 mL 5% dextrose, infused at 10–60 mL/
hr) may help to maintain the circulation until a tempo-
rary pacing electrode can be inserted. External (transcu-
taneous) pacing can provide effective temporary rhythm 
support.
Chronic atrioventricular block
Patients with symptomatic bradyarrhythmias associated 
with AV block should receive a permanent pacemaker 
(see below). Asymptomatic first-degree or Mobitz type 
I second-degree AV block (Wenckebach phenomenon) 
does not require treatment but may be an indication 
of serious underlying heart disease. A permanent 
pacemaker is usually indicated in patients with asymp-
tomatic Mobitz type II second- or third-degree AV heart 
block because of the risk of asystole and sudden death. 
Pacing improves prognosis.
Bundle branch block and 
hemiblock
Conduction block in the right or left bundle branch can 
occur as a result of many pathologies, including ischae-
mic or hypertensive heart disease or cardiomyopathies 
(Box 18.36). Depolarisation proceeds through a slow 
myocardial route in the affected ventricle rather than 
through the rapidly conducting Purkinje tissues that 
constitute the bundle branches. This causes delayed con-
duction into the LV or RV, broadens the QRS complex 
(≥ 0.12 s) and produces the characteristic alterations in 
QRS morphology (Figs 18.56 and 18.57). Right bundle 
branch block (RBBB) can occur in healthy people but left 
Right bundle branch block
• Normal variant
• Right ventricular 
hypertrophy or strain, e.g. 
pulmonary embolism
• Congenital heart disease, 
e.g. atrial septal defect
• Coronary artery disease
Left bundle branch block
• Coronary artery disease
• Hypertension
• Aortic valve disease
• Cardiomyopathy
18.36  Common causes of bundle branch block
Fig. 18.56  Right bundle branch block. Note the wide QRS complexes 
with ‘M’-shaped configuration in leads V, and V2 and a wide S wave in 
lead I. 
V1
aVR
aVL
aVF
V4
V2
V5
V3
V6
III
II
I
Fig. 18.57  Left bundle branch block. Note the wide QRS complexes 
with loss of the Q wave or septal vector in lead I and ‘M’-shaped QRS 
complexes in V5 and V6. 
I
aVR
V1
V4
II
aVL
V2
V5
III
aVF
V3
V6
Cardiovascular disease
18
574
They block sodium channels, of which there are several 
types in cardiac tissue. These drugs should generally be 
avoided in patients with heart failure because they 
depress myocardial function, and class Ia and Ic drugs 
are often pro-arrhythmic.
Class Ia drugs
These prolong cardiac action potential duration and 
increase the tissue refractory period. They are used to 
prevent both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias.
Disopyramide.  An effective drug but causes anticholin-
ergic side-effects, such as urinary retention, and can pre-
cipitate glaucoma. It can depress myocardial function 
and should be avoided in cardiac failure.
Quinidine.  Now rarely used, as it increases mortality 
and causes gastrointestinal upset.
Class Ib drugs
These shorten the action potential and tissue refractory 
period. They act on channels found predominantly 
in ventricular myocardium and so are used to treat 
or prevent ventricular tachycardia and ventricular 
fibrillation.
Lidocaine.  Must be given intravenously and has a very 
short plasma half-life.
Mexiletine.  Can be given intravenously or orally, but 
has many side-effects (see Box 18.38).
Class Ic drugs
These affect the slope of the action potential without 
altering its duration or refractory period. They are 
used mainly for prophylaxis of atrial fibrillation but 
are effective in prophylaxis and treatment of supraven-
tricular or ventricular arrhythmias. They are useful for 
WPW syndrome because they block conduction in 
accessory pathways. They should not be used as oral 
prophylaxis in patients with previous MI because of 
pro-arrhythmia.
Flecainide.  Effective for prevention of atrial fibrillation, 
and an intravenous infusion may be used for pharmaco-
logical cardioversion of atrial fibrillation of less than 
24 hours’ duration. It should be prescribed along with 
an AV node-blocking drug, such as a β-blocker, to 
prevent pro-arrhythmia.
Propafenone.  Also has some β-blocker (class II) proper-
ties. Important interactions with digoxin, warfarin and 
cimetidine have been described.
Class II drugs
This group comprises the β-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(β-blockers). These agents reduce the rate of SA node 
depolarisation and cause relative block in the AV node, 
making them useful for rate control in atrial flutter 
and atrial fibrillation. They can be used to prevent 
supraventricular and ventricular tachycardia. They 
reduce myocardial excitability and the risk of arrhyth-
mic death in patients with coronary artery disease and 
heart failure.
‘Non-selective’ β-blockers.  Act on both β1 and β2 recep-
tors. Beta2 blockade causes side-effects, such as broncho­
spasm and peripheral vasoconstriction. Propranolol is 
non-selective and is subject to extensive first-pass 
metabolism in the liver. The effective oral dose is there-
fore unpredictable and must be titrated after treatment 
is started with a small dose. Other non-selective drugs 
include nadolol and carvedilol.
Identification of ion channel subtypes has led to refine-
ment of drug classifications, according to the specific 
mechanisms targeted. The Vaughan-Williams classifica-
tion is a simple system but is convenient for describing 
the main mode of action of anti-arrhythmic drugs (Box 
18.38) that should be used following guiding principles 
(Box 18.39). Anti-arrhythmic drugs can also be more 
accurately categorised by referring to the cardiac ion 
channels and receptors on which they act.
Class I drugs
Class I drugs act principally by suppressing excitability 
and slowing conduction in atrial or ventricular muscle. 
Class I: membrane-stabilising agents  
(sodium channel blockers)
(a) Block Na+ channel and prolong action potential
• Quinidine, disopyramide
(b) Block Na+ channel and shorten action potential
• Lidocaine, mexiletine
(c) Block Na+ channel with no effect on action potential
• Flecainide, propafenone
Class II: β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers)
• Atenolol, bisoprolol, metoprolol
Class III: drugs whose main effect is to prolong the  
action potential
• Amiodarone, dronedarone, sotalol
Class IV: slow calcium channel blockers
• Verapamil, diltiazem
N.B. Some drugs (e.g. digoxin, ivabradine and adenosine) have no place in 
this classification, while others have properties in more than one class: e.g. 
amiodarone, which has actions in all four classes.
18.37  Classification of anti-arrhythmic drugs by 
effect on the intracellular action potential
Fig. 18.58  Classification of anti-arrhythmic drugs by site of 
action. 
Atria, ventricles
and accessory
conducting tissues
  Disopyramide
  Flecainide
  Propafenone
  Amiodarone
Sinoatrial node
  β-blockers
  Atropine
  Verapamil
  Diltiazem
Ventricles
  Lidocaine
  (lignocaine)
  Mexiletine
  β-blockers
AV node
  Adenosine
  β-blockers
  Digoxin
  Verapamil
  Diltiazem
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
575
18.38  The main uses, dosages and side-effects of the most widely used anti-arrhythmic drugs
Cardiovascular disease
18
576
‘Cardioselective’ β-blockers.  Act mainly on myocar-
dial β1 receptors and are relatively well tolerated. Biso-
prolol and metoprolol are examples of cardioselective 
β-blockers.
Sotalol.  A racemic mixture of two isomers with non-
selective β-blocker (mainly l-sotalol) and class III (mainly 
d-sotalol) activity. It may cause torsades de pointes.
Class III drugs
Class III drugs act by prolonging the plateau phase of 
the action potential, thus lengthening the refractory 
period. These drugs are very effective at preventing 
atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. They cause QT 
interval prolongation and can predispose to torsades de 
pointes and ventricular tachycardia (p. 570), especially 
in patients with other predisposing risk factors (see Box 
18.34, p. 571).
Amiodarone.  The principal drug in this class, although 
both disopyramide and sotalol have class III activity. 
Amiodarone is a complex drug that also has class I, II 
and IV activity. It is probably the most effective drug 
currently available for controlling paroxysmal atrial 
fibrillation. It is also used to prevent episodes of recur-
rent ventricular tachycardia, particularly in patients 
with poor left ventricular function or those with 
implantable defibrillators (to prevent unnecessary DC 
shocks). Amiodarone has a very long tissue half-life 
(25–110 days). An intravenous or oral loading regime is 
often used to achieve therapeutic tissue concentrations 
rapidly. The drug’s effects may last for weeks or months 
after treatment has been stopped. Side-effects are 
common (up to one-third of patients), numerous and 
potentially serious. Drug interactions are also common 
(see Box 18.38).
Dronedarone.  A related drug that has a short tissue 
half-life and fewer side-effects. It has recently been 
shown to be effective at preventing episodes of atrial 
flutter and fibrillation. It is contraindicated in patients 
with permanent atrial fibrillation, or if there is heart 
Anti-arrhythmic drugs are potentially toxic and should be used 
carefully according to the following principles:
• Many arrhythmias are benign and do not require specific 
treatment
• Precipitating or causal factors should be corrected if 
possible, e.g. excess alcohol or caffeine consumption, 
myocardial ischaemia, hyperthyroidism, acidosis, 
hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia
• If drug therapy is required, it is best to use as few drugs as 
possible
• In difficult cases, programmed electrical stimulation 
(electrophysiological study) may help to identify the optimum 
therapy
• When managing life-threatening arrhythmias, it is essential 
to ensure that prophylactic treatment is effective. Ambulatory 
monitoring and exercise testing may be of value
• Patients on long-term anti-arrhythmic drugs should be 
reviewed regularly and attempts made to withdraw therapy if 
the factors which precipitated the arrhythmias are no longer 
operative
• For patients with recurrent SVT, radiofrequency ablation is 
often preferable to long-term drug therapy
18.39  Anti-arrhythmic drugs: principles of use
failure or left ventricular impairment, because it 
increases mortality. Regular liver function test monitor-
ing is required.
Class IV drugs
These block the ‘slow calcium channel’, which is impor-
tant for impulse generation and conduction in atrial 
and nodal tissue, although it is also present in ventricu-
lar muscle. Their main indications are prevention of 
supraventricular tachycardia (by blocking the AV node) 
and rate control in patients with atrial fibrillation.
Verapamil.  The most widely used drug in this class. 
Intravenous verapamil may cause profound bradycar-
dia or hypotension, and should not be used in conjunc-
tion with β-blockers.
Diltiazem.  Has similar properties.
Other anti-arrhythmic drugs
Atropine sulphate (0.6 mg IV, repeated if necessary to a 
maximum of 3 mg).  Increases the sinus rate and SA and 
AV conduction, and is the treatment of choice for severe 
bradycardia or hypotension due to vagal overactivity. It 
is used for initial management of symptomatic brady­
arrhythmias complicating inferior MI, and in cardiac 
arrest due to asystole. Repeat dosing may be necessary 
because the drug disappears rapidly from the circulation 
after parenteral administration. Side-effects are listed in 
Box 18.38.
Adenosine.  Must be given intravenously. It produces 
transient AV block lasting a few seconds. It is used to 
terminate supraventricular tachycardias when the AV 
node is part of the re-entry circuit, or to help establish 
the diagnosis in difficult arrhythmias, such as atrial 
flutter with 2 : 1 AV block (see Fig. 18.41, p. 564) or 
broad-complex tachycardia (Boxes 18.38 and 18.40). 
Adenosine is given as an intravenous bolus, initially 
3 mg over 2 seconds (see Box 18.38). If there is no 
response after 1–2 minutes, 6 mg should be given; if 
necessary, after another 1–2 minutes, the maximum dose 
of 12 mg may be given. Patients should be warned to 
expect short-lived and sometimes distressing flushing, 
breathlessness and chest pain. Adenosine can cause 
bronchospasm and should be avoided in asthmatics; its 
effects are greatly potentiated by dipyridamole and 
inhibited by theophylline and other xanthines.
Arrhythmia
Response
Supraventricular tachycardia
Termination
Atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter
Transient AV block
Ventricular tachycardia
No effect
18.40  Response to intravenous adenosine
Digoxin.  A purified glycoside from the European fox-
glove, Digitalis lanata, which slows conduction and pro-
longs the refractory period in the AV node. This effect 
helps to control the ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation 
and may interrupt supraventricular tachycardias involv-
ing the AV node. Digoxin also shortens refractory 
periods and enhances excitability and conduction in 
other parts of the heart (including accessory conduction 
pathways). It may therefore increase atrial and ventricu-
lar ectopic activity and can lead to more complex atrial 
Disorders of heart rate, rhythm and conduction
18
577
emergencies, the energy of the first and second shocks 
should be 150 joules and thereafter up to 200 joules; 
there is no need for an anaesthetic, as the patient is 
unconscious.
Catheter ablation
Catheter ablation therapy is the treatment of choice for 
patients with supraventricular tachycardia or atrial 
flutter, and is a useful treatment for some patients with 
atrial fibrillation or ventricular arrhythmias (Fig. 18.59). 
A series of catheter electrodes are inserted into the 
heart via the venous system and are used to record the 
activation sequence of the heart in sinus rhythm, during 
tachycardia and after pacing manœuvres. Once the 
arrhythmia focus or circuit is identified (e.g. an acces-
sory pathway in WPW syndrome), a catheter is used to 
ablate the culprit tissue using heat (via radiofrequency 
current) or sometimes by freezing (cryoablation). The 
procedure takes approximately 1–4 hours and does not 
require a general anaesthetic. The patient may experi-
ence some discomfort during the ablation itself. Serious 
complications are rare (< 1%) but include inadvertent 
complete heart block requiring pacemaker implantation, 
and cardiac tamponade. For many arrhythmias, radio­
frequency ablation is very attractive because it offers the 
prospect of a lifetime cure, thereby eliminating the need 
for long-term drug therapy.
The technique has revolutionised the management of 
many arrhythmias and is now the treatment of choice 
for AVNRT and AV re-entrant (accessory pathway) 
tachycardias, when it is curative in over 90% of cases. 
Focal atrial tachycardias and atrial flutter can also be 
eliminated by radiofrequency ablation, although some 
patients subsequently experience episodes of atrial 
fibrillation. The applications of the technique are expand-
ing and it can now be used to treat some forms of ven-
tricular tachycardia. Catheter ablation techniques are 
also used to prevent atrial fibrillation. This involves 
ablation at two sites: the ostia of the pulmonary veins, 
from which ectopic beats may trigger paroxysms of 
arrhythmia, and in the LA itself, where re-entry circuits 
maintain atrial fibrillation, once established. This is 
effective at reducing episodes of atrial fibrillation in 
and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Digoxin is largely 
excreted by the kidneys, and the maintenance dose (see 
Box 18.38) should be reduced in children, older people 
and those with renal impairment. It is widely distributed 
and has a long tissue half-life (36 hours), so that effects 
may persist for several days. Measurement of plasma 
digoxin concentration helps identify digoxin toxicity or 
under-treatment (Box 18.41).
Therapeutic procedures
External defibrillation and 
cardioversion
The heart can be completely depolarised by passing a 
sufficiently large electrical current through it from an 
external source. This will interrupt any arrhythmia and 
produce a brief period of asystole that is usually fol-
lowed by the resumption of sinus rhythm. Defibrillators 
deliver a DC, high-energy, short-duration shock via two 
large electrodes or paddles coated with conducting jelly 
or a gel pad, positioned over the upper right sternal edge 
and the apex. Modern units deliver a biphasic shock, 
during which the shock polarity is reversed mid-shock. 
This reduces the total shock energy required to depolar-
ise the heart.
Electrical cardioversion
This is the termination of an organised rhythm, such as 
atrial fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia, with a syn-
chronised shock, usually under general anaesthesia. The 
shock is delivered immediately after detection of the R 
wave because, if it is applied during ventricular repo-
larisation (on the T wave), it may provoke ventricular 
fibrillation. High-energy shocks may cause chest wall 
pain post-procedure, so, if there is no urgency, it is 
appropriate to begin with a lower-amplitude shock (e.g. 
50 joules), going on to larger shocks if necessary. Patients 
with atrial fibrillation or flutter of more than 48 hours’ 
duration are at risk of left atrial appendage thrombus, 
and thus systemic embolism after cardioversion. In such 
cases, cardioversion should be delayed until effective 
anticoagulation has been given for at least 4 weeks.
Defibrillation
This is the delivery of an unsynchronised shock during 
a cardiac arrest caused by ventricular fibrillation. The 
precise timing of the discharge is not important in 
this situation. In ventricular fibrillation and other 
Extracardiac manifestations
• Anorexia, nausea, vomiting
• Diarrhoea
• Altered colour vision 
(xanthopsia)
Cardiac manifestations
• Bradycardia
• Multiple ventricular 
ectopics
• Ventricular bigeminy 
(alternate ventricular 
ectopics)
• Atrial tachycardia (with 
variable block)
• Ventricular tachycardia
• Ventricular fibrillation
18.41  Digoxin toxicity
Fig. 18.59  Radiofrequency ablation. 
Trans-septal
puncture
Sinus node
AV node
Accessory
pathway
ablation via
catheter
Accessory pathway
(e.g. Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome)
Cardiovascular disease
18
578
around 70–80% of younger patients with structurally 
normal hearts, and tends to be reserved for patients with 
drug-resistant atrial fibrillation.
In patients with permanent atrial fibrillation and poor 
rate control, in whom drugs are ineffective or are not 
tolerated, rate control can be achieved by: (i) implanta-
tion of a permanent pacemaker, followed by (ii) ablation 
of the AV node to induce complete AV block and brady-
cardia, thus allowing the pacemaker to assume control 
of the heart rate.
Temporary pacemakers
Temporary pacing involves delivery of an electrical 
impulse into the heart to initiate tissue depolarisation 
and to trigger cardiac contraction. This is achieved by 
inserting a bipolar pacing electrode via the internal 
jugular, subclavian or femoral vein and positioning it at 
the apex of the RV, using fluoroscopic imaging. The 
electrode is connected to an external pacemaker with an 
adjustable energy output and pacing rate. The ECG of 
right ventricular pacing is characterised by regular 
broad QRS complexes with a left bundle branch block 
pattern. Each complex is immediately preceded by a 
‘pacing spike’ (Fig. 18.60). Nearly all pulse generators 
are used in the ‘demand’ mode, so that the pacemaker 
will only operate if the heart rate falls below a preset 
level. Occasionally, temporary atrial or dual-chamber 
pacing (see below) is used.
Temporary pacing may be indicated in the manage-
ment of transient AV block and other arrhythmias com-
plicating acute MI or cardiac surgery, to maintain the 
rhythm in other situations of reversible bradycardia (i.e. 
due to metabolic disturbance or drug overdose), or as a 
bridge to permanent pacing. Complications include 
pneumothorax, brachial plexus or subclavian artery 
injury, local infection or septicaemia (usually Staphylo­
coccus aureus), and pericarditis. Failure of the system 
may be due to lead displacement or a progressive 
increase in the threshold (exit block) caused by tissue 
oedema. Complication rates increase with time and so a 
temporary pacing system should ideally not be used for 
more than 7 days.
Transcutaneous pacing is administered by delivering 
an electrical stimulus through two large adhesive gel 
pad electrodes placed over the apex and upper right 
sternal edge, or over the anterior and posterior chest. It 
is easy and quick to set up, but causes discomfort 
because it induces forceful pectoral and intercostal 
muscle contraction. Modern external cardiac defibrilla-
tors often incorporate a transcutaneous pacing system 
that can be used during an emergency until transvenous 
pacing is established.
Permanent pacemakers
Permanent pacemakers are small, flat, metal devices that 
are implanted under the skin, usually in the pectoral 
area. They contain a battery, a pulse generator, and pro-
grammable electronics that allow adjustment of pacing 
and memory functions. Pacing electrodes (leads) can be 
placed via the subclavian or cephalic veins into the RV 
(usually at the apex), the right atrial appendage or, to 
maintain AV synchrony, both.
Permanent pacemakers are programmed using an 
external programmer via a wireless telemetry system. 
Pacing rate, output, timing and other parameters can be 
adjusted. This allows the device to be set to the optimum 
settings to suit the patient’s needs. Pacemakers store 
useful diagnostic data about the patient’s heart rate 
trends and the occurrence of tachyarrhythmias, such as 
ventricular tachycardia.
Single-chamber atrial pacing is used in patients with 
sinoatrial disease without AV block (the pacemaker acts 
as an external sinus node). Single-chamber ventricular 
pacing is used in patients with continuous atrial fibrilla-
tion and bradycardia. Dual-chamber pacing is most 
often used in patients with second- or third-degree AV 
block; here, the atrial electrode is used to detect sponta-
neous atrial activity and trigger ventricular pacing (see 
Fig. 18.60), thereby preserving AV synchrony and allow-
ing the ventricular rate to increase, together with the 
sinus node rate, during exercise and other forms of 
stress. Dual-chamber pacing has many advantages 
over ventricular pacing; these include superior haemo-
dynamics, leading to a better effort tolerance, a lower 
prevalence of atrial arrhythmias in patients with 
sinoatrial disease, and avoidance of ‘pacemaker syn-
drome’ (a fall in BP and dizziness precipitated by loss of 
AV synchrony).
A code is used to signify the pacing mode (Box 18.42). 
For example, a system that paces the atrium, senses the 
atrium and is inhibited if it senses spontaneous activity 
is designated AAI. Most dual-chamber pacemakers are 
programmed to a mode termed DDD; in this case, ven-
tricular pacing is triggered by a sensed sinus P wave and 
inhibited by a sensed spontaneous QRS complex. A 
fourth letter, ‘R’, is added if the pacemaker has a rate 
response function (e.g. AAIR = atrial demand pace-
maker with rate response function). Rate-responsive 
pacemakers are used in patients with chronotropic 
incompetence, who are unable to increase their heart 
rate during exercise. These devices have a sensor that 
triggers an increase in heart rate in response to move-
ment or increased respiratory rate. The sensitivity of 
Fig. 18.60  Dual-chamber pacing. The first three beats show atrial and 
ventricular pacing with narrow pacing spikes in front of each P wave and 
QRS complex. The last four beats show spontaneous P waves with a 
different morphology and no pacing spike; the pacemaker senses or tracks 
these P waves and maintains AV synchrony by pacing the ventricle after an 
appropriate interval. 
Chamber paced
Chamber sensed
Response to sensing
O = none
O = none
O = none
A = atrium
A = atrium
T = triggered
V = ventricle
V = ventricle
I = inhibited
D = both
D = both
D = both
18.42  International generic pacemaker code
Atherosclerosis
18
579
the sensor is programmable, as is the maximum paced 
heart rate.
Early complications of permanent pacing include 
pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade, infection and lead 
displacement. Late complications include infection 
(which usually necessitates removing the pacing system), 
erosion of the generator or lead, chronic pain related to 
the implant site, and lead fracture due to mechanical 
fatigue.
Implantable cardiac defibrillators
In addition to the functions of a permanent pacemaker, 
implantable cardiac defibrillators (ICDs) can also detect 
and terminate life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias. ICDs are larger than pacemakers mainly because 
of the need for a large battery and capacitor to enable 
cardioversion or defibrillation. ICD leads are similar to 
pacing leads but have one or two shock coils along the 
length of the lead, used for delivering defibrillation. 
ICDs treat ventricular tachyarrhythmias using over-
drive pacing, cardioversion or defibrillation. They are 
implanted in a similar manner to pacemakers and carry 
a similar risk of complications. In addition, patients can 
be prone to psychological problems and anxiety, par-
ticularly if they have experienced repeated shocks from 
their device.
The evidence-based indications for ICD implantation 
are shown in Box 18.43. These can be divided into 
‘secondary prevention’ indications, when patients have 
already had a potentially life-threatening ventricular 
arrhythmia, and ‘primary prevention’ indications, when 
patients are considered to be at significant future risk 
of arrhythmic death. ICDs may be used prophylacti-
cally in selected patients with inherited conditions 
associated with a high risk of sudden cardiac death, 
such as long QT syndrome (p. 571), hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dyspla-
sia (pp. 637 and 638). ICD treatment is expensive and 
so the indications for which the devices are routinely 
implanted depend on the health-care resources available.
sinus into one of the veins on the epicardial surface of 
the LV (see Fig. 18.28, p. 553). Simultaneous septal and 
left ventricular epicardial pacing resynchronises left 
ventricular contraction. These devices improve effort 
tolerance, reduce heart failure symptoms (Box 18.44), 
and are more effective in patients in sinus rhythm than 
in those with atrial fibrillation. Most devices are also 
defibrillators (CRT-D) because many patients with heart 
failure are predisposed to ventricular arrhythmias. CRT-
pacemakers (CRT-P) are used in patients considered to 
be at relatively low risk of these arrhythmias.
ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Atherosclerosis can affect any artery in the body. When 
it occurs in the heart, it may cause angina, MI and 
sudden death; in the brain, stroke and transient ischae-
mic attack (TIA); and in the limbs, claudication and criti-
cal limb ischaemia. Occult coronary artery disease is 
common in those who present with other forms of 
atherosclerotic vascular disease, such as intermittent 
claudication or stroke, and is an important cause of mor-
bidity and mortality in these patients.
Pathophysiology
Atherosclerosis is a progressive inflammatory disorder 
of the arterial wall that is characterised by focal lipid-
rich deposits of atheroma that remain clinically silent 
until they become large enough to impair tissue per-
fusion, or until ulceration and disruption of the lesion 
result in thrombotic occlusion or distal embolisation of 
the vessel. These mechanisms are common to the entire 
vascular tree, and the clinical manifestations of athero-
sclerosis depend upon the site of the lesion and the vul-
nerability of the organ supplied.
Atherosclerosis begins early in life. Abnormalities of 
arterial function have been detected among high-risk 
children and adolescents, such as cigarette smokers and 
those with familial hyperlipidaemia or hypertension. 
Early lesions have been found in the arteries of victims 
of accidental death in the second and third decades of 
life. Nevertheless, clinical manifestations often do not 
appear until the sixth, seventh or eighth decade.
Early atherosclerosis
Fatty streaks tend to occur at sites of altered arterial 
shear stress, such as bifurcations, and are associated 
with abnormal endothelial function. They develop when 
inflammatory cells, predominantly monocytes, bind to 
Primary prevention
• After MI, if LV ejection fraction < 30%
• Mild to moderate symptomatic heart failure on optimal drug 
therapy, with LV ejection fraction < 35%
Secondary prevention
• Survivors of ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia 
cardiac arrest not due to transient or reversible cause
• Ventricular tachycardia with haemodynamic compromise or 
significant LV impairment (LV ejection fraction < 35%)
18.43  Key indications for ICD therapy
‘CRT improves symptoms and quality of life, and reduces 
mortality in patients with moderate to severe (NYHA class III–IV) 
heart failure who are in sinus rhythm, with left bundle branch 
block and LV ejection fraction ≤ 35%. CRT also prevents heart 
failure progression in similar patients with mild (NYHA class I–II) 
heart failure symptoms.’
• Cardiac Resynchronisation-Heart Failure (CARE-HF) Study. Cleland J, et al. N Engl 
J Med 2005; 352:1539–1549.
• COMPANION Study. Bristow MR, et al. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:2140–2150.
• MADIT-CRT study. Moss AJ, et al. N Engl J Med 2009; 361:1329–1338.
18.44  Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT) 
for heart failure
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT) is a treatment 
for selected patients with heart failure, in whom 
cardiac function is further impaired by the presence 
of left bundle branch block. This conduction defect is 
associated with left ventricular dys-synchrony (poorly 
coordinated left ventricular contraction) and can aggra-
vate heart failure in susceptible patients. CRT systems 
have an additional lead that is placed via the coronary 
Cardiovascular disease
18
580
expose its contents to blood and will trigger platelet 
aggregation and thrombosis that extend into the athero-
matous plaque and the arterial lumen. This type of 
plaque event may cause partial or complete obstruction 
at the site of the lesion or distal embolisation resulting 
in infarction or ischaemia of the affected organ. This 
common mechanism underlies many of the acute mani-
festations of atherosclerotic vascular disease, such as 
acute lower limb ischaemia, MI and stroke.
The number and complexity of arterial plaques 
increase with age and with risk factors (see below) but 
the rate of progression of individual plaques is variable. 
There is a complex and dynamic interaction between 
mechanical wall stress and atherosclerotic lesions. ‘Vul-
nerable’ plaques are characterised by a lipid-rich core, a 
thin fibrocellular cap, speckled calcification and an 
increase in inflammatory cells that release specific 
enzymes to degrade matrix proteins. In contrast, stable 
plaques are typified by a small lipid pool, a thick fibrous 
cap, heavy calcification and plentiful collagenous cross-
struts. Fissuring or rupture tends to occur at sites of 
maximal mechanical stress, particularly the margins of 
an eccentric plaque, and may be triggered by a surge in 
BP, such as during exercise or emotional stress. Surpris-
ingly, the majority of plaque events are subclinical and 
heal spontaneously, although this may allow thrombus 
to be incorporated into the lesion, producing plaque 
growth and further obstruction to flow.
Atherosclerosis may induce complex changes in the 
media that lead to arterial remodelling. Some arterial 
segments may slowly constrict (negative remodelling), 
receptors expressed by endothelial cells, migrate into the 
intima, take up oxidised low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
particles and become lipid-laden macrophages or foam 
cells. Extracellular lipid pools appear in the intimal 
space when foam cells die and release their contents 
(Fig. 18.61). In response to cytokines and growth factors 
produced by activated macrophages, smooth muscle 
cells migrate from the media of the arterial wall into the 
intima, and change from a contractile to a repair pheno-
type in an attempt to stabilise the atherosclerotic lesion. 
If this is successful, the lipid core will be covered by 
smooth muscle cells and matrix, producing a stable 
atherosclerotic plaque that will remain asymptomatic 
until it becomes large enough to obstruct arterial flow.
Advanced atherosclerosis
In an established atherosclerotic plaque, macrophages 
mediate inflammation and smooth muscle cells pro­
mote repair. If inflammation predominates, the plaque 
becomes active or unstable and may be complicated 
by ulceration and thrombosis. Cytokines, such as 
interleukin-1, tumour necrosis factor-alpha, interferon-
gamma, platelet-derived growth factors, and matrix 
metalloproteinases are released by activated macro-
phages; they cause the intimal smooth muscle cells 
overlying the plaque to become senescent and collagen 
cross-struts within the plaque to degrade. This results in 
thinning of the protective fibrous cap, making the lesion 
vulnerable to mechanical stress that ultimately causes 
erosion, fissuring or rupture of the plaque surface (see 
Fig. 18.61). Any breach in the integrity of the plaque will 
Fig. 18.61  The six stages of atherosclerosis. American Heart Association classification. From Stary, et al. 1995 – see p. 641.
Sequences in
progression
I
II
IV
V
VI
Nomenclature and
main histology
Type I (initial) lesion
Isolated macrophage
foam cells
Main 
growth
mechanism
Earliest
onset
Clinical
correlation
Type II (fatty streak) lesion
Mainly intracellular
lipid accumulation
Type III (intermediate) lesion
Type II changes and small
extracellular lipid pools
Type IV (atheroma) lesion
Type II changes and core
of extracellular lipid
Type V (fibroatheroma) lesion
Lipid core and fibrotic layer,
or multiple lipid cores and
fibrotic layers, or mainly
calcific, or mainly fibrotic
Type VI (complicated) lesion
Surface defect,
haematoma-haemorrhage,
thrombus
Thrombosis,
haematoma
Accelerated
smooth muscle
and collagen
increase
Growth mainly
by lipid
accumulation
From
fourth
decade
Clinically
silent
or overt
Clinically
silent
From
third
decade
From
first
decade
III
Atherosclerosis
18
581
whilst others may gradually enlarge (positive remodel-
ling). These changes are important because they may 
amplify or minimise the degree to which atheroma 
encroaches into the arterial lumen.
Risk factors
The role and relative importance of many risk factors 
for the development of coronary, peripheral and cere-
brovascular disease have been defined in experimental 
animal studies, epidemiological studies and clinical 
interventional trials. Key factors have emerged but do 
not explain all the risk, and unknown factors may 
account for up to 40% of the variation in risk from one 
person to the next.
The impact of genetic risk is illustrated by twin 
studies; a monozygotic twin of an affected individual 
has an eightfold increased risk and a dizygotic twin a 
fourfold increased risk of dying from coronary artery 
disease, compared to the general population.
The effect of risk factors is multiplicative rather than 
additive. People with a combination of risk factors are 
at greatest risk and so assessment should take account 
of all identifiable risk factors. It is important to distin-
guish between relative risk (the proportional increase in 
risk) and absolute risk (the actual chance of an event). 
Thus, a man of 35 years with a plasma cholesterol of 
7 mmol/L (approximately 170 mg/dL), who smokes 
40 cigarettes a day, is relatively much more likely to die 
from coronary disease within the next decade than a 
non-smoking woman of the same age with a normal 
cholesterol, but the absolute likelihood of his dying 
during this time is still small (high relative risk, low 
absolute risk).
•	 Age and sex. Age is the most powerful independent 
risk factor for atherosclerosis. Pre-menopausal 
women have lower rates of disease than men, 
although this sex difference disappears after the 
menopause. However, hormone replacement 
therapy has no role in the primary or secondary 
prevention of coronary artery disease, and isolated 
oestrogen therapy may cause an increased 
cardiovascular event rate.
•	 Family history. Atherosclerotic vascular disease often 
runs in families, due to a combination of shared 
genetic, environmental and lifestyle factors. The 
most common inherited risk characteristics 
(hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus) 
are polygenic. A ‘positive’ family history is present 
when clinical problems in first-degree relatives 
occur at relatively young age, such as below  
50 years for men and below 55 years for women.
•	 Smoking. This is probably the most important 
avoidable cause of atherosclerotic vascular disease. 
There is a strong, consistent and dose-linked 
relationship between cigarette smoking and 
coronary artery disease, especially in younger  
(< 70 years) individuals.
•	 Hypertension (see below). The incidence of 
atherosclerosis increases as BP rises, and this excess 
risk is related to both systolic and diastolic BP, as 
well as pulse pressure. Antihypertensive therapy 
reduces cardiovascular mortality, stroke and heart 
failure.
•	 Hypercholesterolaemia (p. 453). Risk rises with 
increasing serum cholesterol concentrations. 
Lowering serum total and LDL cholesterol 
concentrations reduces the risk of cardiovascular 
events, including death, MI, stroke and coronary 
revascularisation.
•	 Diabetes mellitus. This is a potent risk factor for all 
forms of atherosclerosis and is often associated with 
diffuse disease that is difficult to treat. Insulin 
resistance (normal glucose homeostasis with high 
levels of insulin) is associated with obesity and 
physical inactivity, and is a risk factor for coronary 
artery disease (p. 805). Glucose intolerance accounts 
for a major part of the high incidence of ischaemic 
heart disease in certain ethnic groups, e.g. South 
Asians.
•	 Haemostatic factors. Platelet activation and high 
plasma fibrinogen concentrations are associated 
with an increased risk of coronary thrombosis. 
Antiphospholipid antibodies are associated with 
recurrent arterial thromboses (p. 1055).
•	 Physical activity. Physical inactivity roughly 
doubles the risk of coronary artery disease and  
is a major risk factor for stroke. Regular exercise 
(brisk walking, cycling or swimming for 20 minutes 
two or three times a week) has a protective  
effect that may be related to increased serum 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol 
concentrations, lower BP, and collateral vessel 
development.
•	 Obesity (p. 115). Obesity, particularly if central or 
truncal, is an independent risk factor, although it is 
often associated with other adverse factors, such as 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus and physical 
inactivity.
•	 Alcohol. Alcohol consumption is associated with 
reduced rates of coronary artery disease. Excess 
alcohol consumption is associated with 
hypertension and cerebrovascular disease.
•	 Other dietary factors. Diets deficient in fresh fruit, 
vegetables and polyunsaturated fatty acids are 
associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular 
disease. The introduction of a Mediterranean-style 
diet reduces cardiovascular events. However, 
dietary supplements, such as vitamin C and E, 
beta-carotene, folate and fish oils, do not reduce 
cardiovascular events and, in some cases, have been 
associated with harm.
•	 Personality. Certain personality traits are associated 
with an increased risk of coronary disease. 
Nevertheless, there is little or no evidence to 
support the popular belief that stress is a major 
cause of coronary artery disease.
•	 Social deprivation. Health inequalities have a major 
influence on cardiovascular disease. The impact of 
established risk factors is amplified in patients who 
are socially deprived and current guidelines 
recommend that treatment thresholds should be 
lowered for them.
Primary prevention
Two complementary strategies can be used to prevent 
atherosclerosis in apparently healthy but at-risk indi-
viduals: population and targeted strategies.
The population strategy aims to modify the risk 
factors of the whole population through diet and life-
style advice, on the basis that even a small reduction in 
Cardiovascular disease
18
582
The targeted strategy aims to identify and treat 
high-risk individuals, who usually have a combination 
of risk factors and can be identified by using composite 
scoring systems (Fig. 18.62). It is important to consider 
the absolute risk of atheromatous cardiovascular disease 
that an individual is facing before contemplating specific 
antihypertensive or lipid-lowering therapy because this 
will help to determine whether the possible benefits of 
intervention are likely to outweigh the expense, incon-
venience and possible side-effects of treatment. For 
example, a 65-year-old man with an average BP of 
150/90 mmHg, who smokes and has diabetes mellitus, 
a total : HDL cholesterol ratio of 8 and left ventricular 
hypertrophy on ECG, will have a 10-year risk of coro-
nary artery disease of 68% and a 10-year risk of any 
cardiovascular event of 90%. Lowering his cholesterol 
will reduce these risks by 30% and lowering his BP will 
produce a further 20% reduction; both would obviously 
be worthwhile. Conversely, a 55-year-old woman who 
has an identical BP, is a non-smoker, does not have 
diabetes mellitus and has a normal ECG and a total : HDL 
cholesterol ratio of 6 has a much better outlook, with a 
predicted coronary artery disease risk of 14% and car-
diovascular risk of 19% over the next 10 years. Although 
lowering her cholesterol and BP would also reduce risk 
by 30% and 20% respectively, the value of either or both 
treatments is questionable.
Secondary prevention
Patients who already have evidence of atheromatous 
vascular disease are at high risk of future cardiovascular 
events and should be offered treatments and measures 
to improve their outlook. The energetic correction of 
smoking or average cholesterol, or modification of exer-
cise and diet will produce worthwhile benefits (Box 
18.45). Some risk factors for atheroma, such as obesity 
and smoking, are also associated with a higher risk of 
other diseases and should be actively discouraged 
through public health measures. Legislation restricting 
smoking in public places is associated with reductions 
in rates of MI.
• Do not smoke
• Take regular exercise (minimum of 20 mins, three times/wk)
• Maintain ‘ideal’ body weight
• Eat a mixed diet rich in fresh fruit and vegetables
• Aim to get no more than 10% of energy intake from 
saturated fat
18.45  Population advice to prevent 
coronary disease
Fig. 18.62  Example of cardiovascular risk prediction chart for 
non-diabetic men. Cardiovascular risk is predicted from the patient’s 
age, sex, smoking habit, BP and cholesterol ratio. The ratio of total to 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol can be determined in a 
non-fasting blood sample. Where HDL cholesterol concentration is 
unknown, it should be assumed to be 1 mmol/L; the lipid scale should be 
used as total serum cholesterol. Current guidelines suggest initiation of 
primary prevention in individuals with a 10-year cardiovascular risk ≥ 20%. 
Patients with diabetes mellitus should be assumed to have a 10-year 
cardiovascular risk of ≥ 20% and receive secondary prevention therapy.
Modified charts exist for women. For further details, see www.who.int/
cardiovascular_diseases/guidelines/Pocket_GL_information/en/index.html. 
From Joint British Societies Cardiovascular Risk Prediction Chart – see  
p. 641.
•	 To estimate an individual’s absolute 10-year risk of developing 
cardiovascular disease (CVD), choose the panel for the appropriate 
gender, smoking status and age. Within this, define the level of risk 
from the point where the coordinates for systolic blood pressure (SBP) 
and ratio of the total to high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol cross.
•	 Highest-risk individuals (red areas) are those whose 10-year CVD risk 
exceeds 20%, which is approximately equivalent to a 10-year coronary 
artery disease risk of > 15%. As a minimum, those with CVD risk 
> 30% (shown by the line within the red area) should be targeted and 
treated now. When resources allow, others with a CVD risk > 20% 
should be targeted progressively.
•	 The chart also assists in identification of individuals with a moderately 
high 10-year CVD risk, in the range of 10–20% (orange area) and 
those in whom it is < 10% (green area).
•	 Smoking status should reflect lifetime exposure to tobacco. For further 
information, see www.bhf.org.uk 
Non-smoker
Smoker
Age under 50 years
Non-diabetic men
160
180
SBP 140
120
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
TC:HDL 
160
180
SBP 140
120
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
TC:HDL 
160
180
SBP 140
120
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
TC:HDL 
160
180
SBP 140
120
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
TC:HDL 
160
180
SBP 140
120
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
TC:HDL 
160
180
SBP 140
120
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
TC:HDL 
Age  50–59 years
Age 60 years and over
CVD risk < 10% over next 10 years
CVD risk 10–20% over next 10 years
CVD risk > 20% over next 10 years
CVD risk over
next 10 years
30%
10% 20%
      SBP = systolic blood pressure mmHg
TC:HDL = serum total cholesterol to HDL  cholesterol ratio
Coronary artery disease
18
583
modifiable risk factors, particularly smoking, hyperten-
sion and hypercholesterolaemia, is particularly impor-
tant because the absolute risk of further vascular events 
is high. All patients with coronary artery disease should 
be given statin therapy, irrespective of their serum cho-
lesterol concentration (Box 18.46). BP should be treated 
to a target of 140/85 mmHg or lower (p. 610). Aspirin 
and ACE inhibitors are of benefit in patients with evi-
dence of vascular disease (Boxes 18.47 and 18.48). Beta-
blockers benefit patients with a history of MI (see below) 
or heart failure.
Many clinical events offer an unrivalled opportunity 
to introduce effective secondary preventive measures; 
patients who have just survived an MI or undergone 
bypass surgery are usually keen to help themselves and 
may be particularly receptive to lifestyle advice, such as 
dietary modification and smoking cessation.
Primary prevention
‘In patients without evidence of coronary disease but with high 
serum cholesterol concentrations, cholesterol-lowering with 
statins does not lower mortality but does prevent coronary 
events (angina and MI).’
Secondary prevention
‘In patients with established coronary disease (MI or angina), 
statin therapy can safely reduce the 5-year incidence of 
all-cause death, as well as major coronary events, coronary 
revascularisation and stroke. Benefit depends on the overall  
risk of the study population but the NNTB for 5 years to prevent 
1 death ranges from 10 to 90.’
• Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ Collaborators. Lancet 2005; 366:1267–1277.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/93-97/index.html
18.46  Use of statins in prevention of 
atherosclerotic disease
‘In patients with established coronary artery disease, peripheral 
vascular disease or thrombotic stroke, aspirin is effective in 
reducing morbidity and mortality (non-fatal MI, stroke and 
cardiovascular death). In patients at high risk of future vascular 
events, the overall risk reduction is 22%.’
• Antithrombotic Trialist Collaboration. BMJ 2002; 324:71–86.
For further information: 
 www.clinicalevidence.org
18.48  Aspirin and secondary prevention in 
atherosclerotic vascular disease
‘ACE inhibitor therapy reduces the risk of death, MI and stroke in 
patients with atherosclerotic vascular disease without apparent 
left ventricular systolic dysfunction or heart failure. NNTB to avoid 
1 event over 4 years ranges from 6 to 50, depending upon the 
level of cardiovascular risk.’
• HOPE trial. N Engl J Med 2000; 342:145–153.
• EUROPA trial. Lancet 2003; 362:782–788.
18.47  ACE inhibitors and secondary prevention of 
atherosclerotic disease
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common 
form of heart disease and the single most important 
cause of premature death in Europe, the Baltic states, 
Russia, North and South America, Australia and New 
Zealand. By 2020, it is estimated that it will be the major 
cause of death in all regions of the world.
In the UK, 1 in 3 men and 1 in 4 women die from 
CAD, an estimated 330 000 people have a myocardial 
infarct each year, and approximately 1.3 million people 
have angina. The death rates from CAD in the UK are 
amongst the highest in Western Europe (more than 
140 000 people) but are falling, particularly in younger 
age groups; in the last 10 years, CAD mortality has fallen 
by 42% among UK men and women aged 16–64. 
However, in Eastern Europe and much of Asia, the rates 
of CAD are rapidly rising.
Disease of the coronary arteries is almost always due 
to atheroma and its complications, particularly throm-
bosis (Box 18.49). Occasionally, the coronary arteries are 
involved in other disorders such as aortitis, polyarteritis 
and other connective tissue disorders.
Clinical problem
Pathology
Stable angina
Ischaemia due to fixed atheromatous 
stenosis of one or more coronary arteries
Unstable angina
Ischaemia caused by dynamic obstruction 
of a coronary artery due to plaque rupture 
or erosion with superimposed thrombosis
Myocardial 
infarction
Myocardial necrosis caused by acute 
occlusion of a coronary artery due to 
plaque rupture or erosion with 
superimposed thrombosis
Heart failure
Myocardial dysfunction due to infarction 
or ischaemia
Arrhythmia
Altered conduction due to ischaemia or 
infarction
Sudden death
Ventricular arrhythmia, asystole or 
massive myocardial infarction
18.49  Coronary artery disease: clinical 
manifestations and pathology
Stable angina
Angina pectoris is the symptom complex caused by tran-
sient myocardial ischaemia and constitutes a clinical 
syndrome rather than a disease. It may occur whenever 
there is an imbalance between myocardial oxygen 
supply and demand (Box 18.50). Coronary atheroma is 
by far the most common cause of angina, although the 
symptom may be a manifestation of other forms of heart 
disease, particularly aortic valve disease and hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy
Clinical features
The history is the most important factor in making the 
diagnosis (p. 539). Stable angina is characterised by 
central chest pain, discomfort or breathlessness that is 
Cardiovascular disease
18
584
precipitated by exertion or other forms of stress (Box 
18.51), and is promptly relieved by rest (see Figs 18.17 
and 18.18, pp. 540 and 541). Some patients find the dis-
comfort comes when they start walking, and that later it 
does not return despite greater effort (‘warm-up angina’).
Physical examination is frequently unremarkable but 
should include a careful search for evidence of valve 
disease (particularly aortic), important risk factors (e.g. 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus), left ventricular dys-
function (cardiomegaly, gallop rhythm), other manifes-
tations of arterial disease (carotid bruits, peripheral 
vascular disease) and unrelated conditions that may 
exacerbate angina (anaemia, thyrotoxicosis).
Investigations
Resting ECG
The ECG may show evidence of previous MI but is often 
normal, even in patients with severe coronary artery 
disease. Occasionally, there is T-wave flattening or 
inversion in some leads, providing non-specific evi-
dence of myocardial ischaemia or damage. The most 
convincing ECG evidence of myocardial ischaemia is the 
demonstration of reversible ST segment depression or 
elevation, with or without T-wave inversion, at the time 
the patient is experiencing symptoms (whether sponta-
neous or induced by exercise testing).
Exercise ECG
An exercise tolerance test (ETT) is usually performed 
using a standard treadmill or bicycle ergometer protocol 
(p. 534) while monitoring the patient’s ECG, BP and 
general condition. Planar or down-sloping ST segment 
depression of 1 mm or more is indicative of ischaemia 
(Fig. 18.63). Up-sloping ST depression is less specific and 
often occurs in normal individuals.
Exercise testing is also a useful means of assessing the 
severity of coronary disease and identifying high-risk 
individuals (Box 18.52). For example, the amount of 
exercise that can be tolerated and the extent and degree 
of any ST segment change (Fig. 18.64) provide a useful 
guide to the likely extent of coronary disease. Exercise 
testing is not infallible and may produce false-positive 
results in the presence of digoxin therapy, left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy, bundle branch block or WPW syn-
drome. The predictive accuracy of exercise testing is 
Common
• Physical exertion
• Cold exposure
• Heavy meals
• Intense emotion
Uncommon
• Lying flat (decubitus 
angina)
• Vivid dreams (nocturnal 
angina)
18.51  Activities precipitating angina
Fig. 18.63  Forms of exercise-induced ST depression.  A Planar 
ST depression is usually indicative of myocardial ischaemia.  B Down-
sloping depression also usually indicates myocardial ischaemia. 
 C Up-sloping depression may be a normal finding. 
B
C
A
High risk
Low risk
Post-infarct angina
Predictable exertional angina
Poor effort tolerance
Good effort tolerance
Ischaemia at low workload
Ischaemia only at high 
workload
Left main or three-vessel 
disease
Single-vessel or two-vessel 
disease
Poor LV function
Good LV function
N.B. Patients may fall between these categories.
18.52  Risk stratification in stable angina
Fig. 18.64  A positive exercise test (chest leads only). The resting 
12-lead ECG shows some minor T-wave changes in the inferolateral leads 
but is otherwise normal. After 3 minutes’ exercise on a treadmill, there is 
marked planar ST depression in leads V4 and V5 (right offset). Subsequent 
coronary angiography revealed critical three-vessel coronary artery disease. 
V3
V6
V5
V2
V1
V4
Oxygen demand: cardiac work
• Heart rate
• BP
• Myocardial contractility
• Left ventricular hypertrophy
• Valve disease, e.g. aortic 
stenosis
Oxygen supply: coronary blood flow
• Duration of diastole
• Coronary perfusion 
pressure (aortic diastolic 
minus coronary sinus or 
right atrial diastolic 
pressure)
• Coronary vasomotor tone
• Oxygenation
Haemoglobin
Oxygen saturation
N.B. Coronary blood flow occurs mainly in diastole.
18.50  Factors influencing myocardial 
oxygen supply and demand
Coronary artery disease
18
585
contractility during exercise or pharmacological 
stress, and the latter do not contract at rest or 
during stress.
Coronary arteriography
This provides detailed anatomical information about 
the extent and nature of coronary artery disease (see 
Fig. 18.15, p. 538), and is usually performed with a 
view to coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery or 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) (pp. 587 and 
588). In some patients, diagnostic coronary angiography 
may be indicated when non-invasive tests have failed to 
establish the cause of atypical chest pain. The procedure 
is performed under local anaesthesia and requires spe-
cialised radiological equipment, cardiac monitoring and 
an experienced operating team.
Management: general measures
The management of angina pectoris involves:
•	 a careful assessment of the likely extent and 
severity of arterial disease
•	 the identification and control of risk factors such as 
smoking, hypertension and hyperlipidaemia
•	 the use of measures to control symptoms
•	 the identification of high-risk patients for treatment 
to improve life expectancy.
Symptoms alone are a poor guide to the extent of 
coronary artery disease. Stress testing is therefore advis-
able in all patients who are potential candidates for 
revascularisation. An algorithm for the investigation 
and treatment of patients with stable angina is shown in 
Figure 18.66.
Management should start with a careful explanation 
of the problem and a discussion of the potential lifestyle 
and medical interventions that may relieve symptoms 
and improve prognosis (Box 18.53). Anxiety and miscon-
ceptions often contribute to disability; for example, some 
patients avoid all forms of exertion because they believe 
that each attack of angina is a ‘mini heart attack’ that 
results in permanent damage. Effective management of 
these psychological factors can make a huge difference 
to the patient’s quality of life.
Antiplatelet therapy
Low-dose (75 mg) aspirin reduces the risk of adverse 
events such as MI and should be prescribed for all 
patients with coronary artery disease indefinitely (see 
Box 18.48). Clopidogrel (75 mg daily) is an equally effec-
tive antiplatelet agent that can be prescribed if aspirin 
causes troublesome dyspepsia or other side-effects.
lower in women than in men. The test should be classed 
as inconclusive (rather than negative) if the patient 
cannot achieve an adequate level of exercise because of 
locomotor or other non-cardiac problems.
Other forms of stress testing
•	 Myocardial perfusion scanning. This may be helpful in 
the evaluation of patients with an equivocal or 
uninterpretable exercise test and those who are 
unable to exercise (p. 539). It entails obtaining 
scintiscans of the myocardium at rest and during 
stress (either exercise testing or pharmacological 
stress, such as a controlled infusion of dobutamine), 
after the administration of an intravenous 
radioactive isotope, such as 99technetium 
tetrofosmin. Thallium and tetrofosmin are taken up 
by viable perfused myocardium. A perfusion defect 
present during stress but not at rest provides 
evidence of reversible myocardial ischaemia  
(Fig. 18.65), whereas a persistent perfusion defect 
seen during both phases of the study is usually 
indicative of previous MI.
•	 Stress echocardiography. This is an alternative to 
myocardial perfusion scanning and can achieve 
similar predictive accuracy. It uses transthoracic 
echocardiography to identify ischaemic segments of 
myocardium and areas of infarction (p. 537). The 
former characteristically exhibit reversible defects in 
Fig. 18.65  A myocardial perfusion scan showing reversible 
anterior myocardial ischaemia. The images are cross-sectional 
tomograms of the LV. The resting scans (left) show even uptake of the 
99technetium-labelled tetrofosmin and look like doughnuts. During stress 
(e.g. a dobutamine infusion), there is reduced uptake of technetium, 
particularly along the anterior wall (arrows), and the scans look like 
crescents (right). 
At rest
During stress
• Do not smoke
• Aim for ideal body weight
• Take regular exercise (exercise up to, but not beyond, the 
point of chest discomfort is beneficial and may promote 
collateral vessels)
• Avoid severe unaccustomed exertion, and vigorous exercise 
after a heavy meal or in very cold weather
• Take sublingual nitrate before undertaking exertion that may 
induce angina
18.53  Advice to patients with stable angina
Cardiovascular disease
18
586
Anti-anginal drug treatment
Five groups of drug are used to help relieve or prevent 
the symptoms of angina: nitrates, β-blockers, calcium 
antagonists, potassium channel activators and an If 
channel antagonist.
Nitrates
These drugs act directly on vascular smooth muscle to 
produce venous and arteriolar dilatation. Their benefi-
cial effects are due to a reduction in myocardial oxygen 
demand (lower preload and afterload) and an increase 
in myocardial oxygen supply (coronary vasodilatation). 
Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (GTN), administered from 
a metered-dose aerosol (400 µg per spray) or as a tablet 
(300 or 500 µg), will relieve an attack of angina in 
2–3 minutes. Side-effects include headache, sympto-
matic hypotension and, rarely, syncope.
Preparation
Peak action
Duration of action
Sublingual GTN
4–8 mins
10–30 mins
Buccal GTN
4–10 mins
30–300 mins
Transdermal GTN
1–3 hrs
Up to 24 hrs
Oral isosorbide 
dinitrate
45–120 mins
2–6 hrs
Oral isosorbide 
mononitrate
45–120 mins
6–10 hrs
(GTN = glyceryl trinitrate)
18.54  Duration of action of some 
nitrate preparations
Fig. 18.66  A scheme for the investigation and treatment of 
stable angina on effort. The selection of percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) or coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) depends upon 
patient choice, coronary artery anatomy and extent of coronary artery 
disease. In general, left main stem and three-vessel coronary artery 
disease should be treated by CABG surgery. 
Lifestyle advice,
secondary prevention
and anti-anginal therapy
Stable angina on effort
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
High
risk?
Stress
tests
Consider
CT coronary
angiogram and
review diagnosis
Negative
Positive
Suitable for
revascularisation?
No
Invasive
coronary
angiography
PCI or CABG
Persistent
symptoms?
Medical
therapy
Patients should be encouraged to use the drug pro-
phylactically before taking exercise that is liable to 
provoke symptoms. Sublingual GTN has a short dura-
tion of action (Box 18.54); however, a variety of alterna-
tive nitrate preparations can provide a more prolonged 
therapeutic effect. GTN can be given transcutaneously 
as a patch (5–10 mg daily), or as a slow-release buccal 
tablet (1–5 mg 4 times daily). GTN undergoes extensive 
first-pass metabolism in the liver and is ineffective when 
swallowed. Other nitrates, such as isosorbide dinitrate 
(10–20 mg 3 times daily) and isosorbide mononitrate 
(20–60 mg once or twice daily), can be given by mouth. 
Headache is common but tends to diminish if the 
patient perseveres with the treatment. Continuous 
nitrate therapy can cause pharmacological tolerance. 
This can be avoided by a 6–8-hour nitrate-free period, 
best achieved at night when the patient is inactive. If 
nocturnal angina is a predominant symptom, long-
acting nitrates can be given at the end of the day.
Beta-blockers
These lower myocardial oxygen demand by reducing 
heart rate, BP and myocardial contractility, but they may 
provoke bronchospasm in patients with asthma. The 
properties and side-effects of β-blockers are discussed 
on page 599.
In theory, non-selective β-blockers may aggravate 
coronary vasospasm by blocking the coronary artery β2-
adrenoceptors and so a once-daily cardioselective prep-
aration is used (e.g. slow-release metoprolol 50–200 mg 
daily, bisoprolol 5–15 mg daily). Beta-blockers should 
not be withdrawn abruptly as rebound effects may pre-
cipitate dangerous arrhythmias, worsening angina or 
MI: the β-blocker withdrawal syndrome.
Calcium channel antagonists
These drugs inhibit the slow inward current caused by 
the entry of extracellular calcium through the cell mem-
brane of excitable cells, particularly cardiac and arteri-
olar smooth muscle, and lower myocardial oxygen 
demand by reducing BP and myocardial contractility.
Dihydropyridine calcium antagonists, such as nifed-
ipine and nicardipine, often cause a reflex tachycardia. 
This may be counterproductive and it is best to use 
them in combination with a β-blocker. In contrast, 
verapamil and diltiazem are particularly suitable for 
patients who are not receiving a β-blocker (e.g. those 
with airways obstruction) because they slow SA node 
firing, inhibit conduction through the AV node and 
Coronary artery disease
18
587
both acute complications and the incidence of clinically 
important re-stenosis (Box 18.56 and Fig. 18.76, p. 595).
PCI provides an effective symptomatic treatment but 
definitive evidence that it improves survival in patients 
with chronic stable angina is lacking. It is mainly used 
in single- or two-vessel disease. Stenoses in bypass grafts 
can be dilated, as well as those in the native coronary 
arteries. The technique is often used to provide palliative 
therapy for patients with recurrent angina after CABG. 
Coronary surgery is usually the preferred option in 
patients with three-vessel or left main stem disease, 
although recent trials have demonstrated that PCI is also 
feasible in such patients.
The main acute complications of PCI are occlusion of 
the target vessel or a side branch by thrombus or a loose 
flap of intima (coronary artery dissection), and conse-
quent myocardial damage. This occurs in about 2–5% of 
procedures and can often be corrected by deploying a 
stent; however, emergency CABG is sometimes required. 
Minor myocardial damage, as indicated by elevation of 
sensitive intracellular markers (troponins, p. 535), occurs 
tend to cause a bradycardia. Calcium channel antago-
nists reduce myocardial contractility and can aggravate 
or precipitate heart failure. Other unwanted effects 
include peripheral oedema, flushing, headache and 
dizziness (Box 18.55).
Potassium channel activators
These have arterial and venous dilating properties but 
do not exhibit the tolerance seen with nitrates. Nicoran-
dil (10–30 mg twice daily orally) is the only drug in this 
class currently available for clinical use.
If channel antagonist
Ivabradine is the first of this class of drug. It induces 
bradycardia by modulating ion channels in the sinus 
node. In contrast to β-blockers and rate-limiting calcium 
antagonists, it does not have other cardiovascular effects. 
It appears to be safe to use in patients with heart failure.
Although each of these anti-anginal drugs is superior to 
placebo in relieving the symptoms of angina, there is 
little evidence that one group is more effective than 
another. It is conventional to start therapy with low-dose 
aspirin, a statin, sublingual GTN and a β-blocker, and 
then add a calcium channel antagonist or a long-acting 
nitrate later, if needed. The goal is the control of angina 
with minimum side-effects and the simplest possible 
drug regimen. There is little evidence that prescribing 
multiple anti-anginal drugs is of benefit, and revascu-
larisation should be considered if an appropriate combi-
nation of two or more drugs fails to achieve an acceptable 
symptomatic response.
Invasive treatment
Percutaneous coronary intervention
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is performed 
by passing a fine guidewire across a coronary stenosis 
under radiographic control and using it to position a 
balloon, which is then inflated to dilate the stenosis (Fig. 
18.67). A coronary stent is a piece of coated metallic 
‘scaffolding’ that can be deployed on a balloon and used 
to maximise and maintain dilatation of a stenosed vessel. 
The routine use of stents in appropriate vessels reduces 
Drug
Dose
Feature
Nifedipine
5–20 mg  
3 times daily*
May cause marked 
tachycardia
Nicardipine
20–40 mg  
3 times daily
May cause less myocardial 
depression than the other 
calcium antagonists
Amlodipine
2.5–10 mg daily
Ultra-long-acting
Verapamil
40–80 mg  
3 times daily*
Commonly causes 
constipation; useful 
anti-arrhythmic properties 
(p. 576)
Diltiazem
60–120 mg  
3 times daily*
Similar anti-arrhythmic 
properties to verapamil
*Once- or twice-daily slow-release preparations are available.
18.55  Calcium channel antagonists used for 
the treatment of angina
Fig. 18.67  Vascular and valvular balloon dilatations. 
Atrial septal
puncture
Balloon
catheter
Mitral
valve
IVC
RA
1
2
3
Coronary angioplasty and stenting
Mitral valvoplasty
‘In comparison with simple balloon angioplasty, intracoronary 
stents afford superior acute and long-term clinical and 
angiographic results, with lower rates of re-stenosis (e.g. 17% 
vs 40%) and recurrent angina (13% vs 30%). Re-stenosis rates 
are reduced even further (< 10%) with drug-eluting stents.’
• Stettler C, et al. BMJ 2008; 337:a1331.
For further information: 
 http://guidance.nice.org.uk/TA152
18.56  Angioplasty and intracoronary stents in 
angina
Cardiovascular disease
18
588
in up to 10% of cases. The main long-term complication 
of PCI is re-stenosis (Box 18.57), in up to one-third of 
cases. This is due to a combination of elastic recoil and 
smooth muscle proliferation (neo-intimal hyperplasia) 
and tends to occur within 3 months. Stenting substan-
tially reduces the risk of re-stenosis, probably because 
it allows the operator to achieve more complete dilata-
tion in the first place. Drug-eluting stents reduce this 
risk even further by allowing an antiproliferative drug, 
e.g. sirolimus or paclitaxel, to elute slowly from the 
coating and prevent neo-intimal hyperplasia and in-stent 
re-stenosis. There is an increased risk of late stent throm-
bosis with drug-eluting stents, although the absolute 
risk is small (< 0.5%). Recurrent angina (affecting up to 
15–20% of patients receiving an intracoronary stent at 
6 months) may require further PCI or bypass grafting.
The risk of complications and the likely success of the 
procedure are closely related to the morphology of the 
stenoses, the experience of the operator and the presence 
of important comorbidity, e.g. diabetes, peripheral arte-
rial disease. A good outcome is less likely if the target 
lesion is complex, long, eccentric or calcified, lies on a 
bend or within a tortuous vessel, involves a branch or 
contains acute thrombus.
In combination with aspirin and heparin, adjunctive 
therapy with potent platelet inhibitors, such as clopi­
dogrel or glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists, 
improves the outcome of PCI, with lower short- and 
long-term rates of death and MI.
Coronary artery bypass grafting
The internal mammary arteries, radial arteries or 
reversed segments of the patient’s own saphenous vein 
can be used to bypass coronary artery stenoses (Fig. 
18.68). This usually involves major surgery under cardio­
pulmonary bypass but, in some cases, grafts can be 
applied to the beating heart: ‘off-pump’ surgery. The 
operative mortality is approximately 1.5% but risks are 
higher in elderly patients, those with poor left ventricu-
lar function and those with significant comorbidity, such 
as renal failure.
Approximately 90% of patients are free of angina 
1 year after CABG surgery, but fewer than 60% of 
patients are asymptomatic after 5 or more years. Early 
postoperative angina is usually due to graft failure 
arising from technical problems during the operation, 
or poor ‘run-off’ due to disease in the distal native coro-
nary vessels. Late recurrence of angina may be due to 
progressive disease in the native coronary arteries or 
graft degeneration. Fewer than 50% of vein grafts are 
patent 10 years after surgery. However, arterial grafts 
have a much better long-term patency rate, with more 
than 80% of internal mammary artery grafts patent at 
‘PCI is more effective than medical therapy in alleviating angina 
pectoris and improving exercise tolerance but does not reduce 
mortality. It carries risks of procedure-related MI, emergency 
CABG and repeat procedures for re-stenosis.’
• Weintraub WS, et al. N Engl J Med 2008; 359(7):677–687.
For further information: 
 www.nice.org.uk/CG126
18.57  Percutaneous coronary intervention vs 
medical therapy in stable angina
10 years. This has led many surgeons to consider total 
arterial revascularisation during CABG surgery. Aspirin 
(75–150 mg daily) and clopidogrel (75 mg daily) both 
improve graft patency, and one or other should be pre-
scribed indefinitely, if well tolerated. Intensive lipid-
lowering therapy slows the progression of disease in the 
native coronary arteries and bypass grafts, and reduces 
clinical cardiovascular events. There is substantial excess 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients who 
continue to smoke after bypass grafting. Persistent 
smokers are twice as likely to die in the 10 years follow-
ing surgery than those who give up at surgery.
CABG improves survival in symptomatic patients 
with left main stem stenosis or three-vessel coronary 
disease (i.e. involving LAD, CX and right coronary arter-
ies, Box 18.58) or two-vessel disease involving the 
Fig. 18.68  Coronary artery bypass graft surgery.  A Narrowed 
or stenosed arteries are bypassed using saphenous vein grafts connected 
to the aorta: or by utilising the internal mammary artery.  B Three-
dimensional reconstruction of multidetector CT of the heart. The image 
shows the patent saphenous vein grafts (SVG) to the right coronary artery 
(RCA), obtuse marginal branch (OM) and diagonal branch (LADD), and left 
internal mammary artery graft (LIMA) to the left anterior descending (LAD) 
coronary artery. 
Saphenous
vein bypass
graft
Blocked
artery
Internal mammary
artery bypass graft
A
LIMA-LAD
SVG-RCA
SVG-OM
SVG-LADD
B
Coronary artery disease
18
589
Prognosis
Symptoms are a poor guide to prognosis; nevertheless, 
the 5-year mortality of patients with severe angina 
(NYHA class III or IV, p. 539) is nearly double that of 
patients with mild symptoms. Exercise testing and other 
forms of stress testing are much more powerful predic-
tors of mortality; for example, in one study, the 4-year 
mortality of patients with stable angina and a negative 
exercise test was 1%, compared to more than 20% in 
those with a strongly positive test.
In general, the prognosis of coronary artery disease 
is related to the number of diseased vessels and the 
degree of left ventricular dysfunction. A patient with 
single-vessel disease and good left ventricular function 
has an excellent outlook (5-year survival > 90%), whereas 
a patient with severe left ventricular dysfunction and 
extensive three-vessel disease has a poor prognosis 
(5-year survival < 30%) without revascularisation. Spon-
taneous symptomatic improvement due to the develop-
ment of collateral vessels is common.
Angina with normal  
coronary arteries
Approximately 10% of patients who report stable angina 
on effort will have angiographically normal coronary 
arteries. Many of these patients are women and the 
mechanism of their symptoms is often difficult to estab-
lish. It is important to review the original diagnosis and 
explore other potential causes.
Coronary artery spasm
Vasospasm in coronary arteries may coexist with 
atheroma, especially in unstable angina (see below); in 
less than 1% of cases, vasospasm may occur without 
angiographically detectable atheroma. This is some-
times known as variant angina, and may be accom­
panied by spontaneous and transient ST elevation 
on the ECG (Prinzmetal’s angina). Calcium channel 
antagonists, nitrates and other coronary vasodilators 
are the most useful therapeutic agents but may be 
ineffective.
Syndrome X
The constellation of typical angina on effort, objective 
evidence of myocardial ischaemia on stress testing, and 
angiographically normal coronary arteries is sometimes 
known as syndrome X. This disorder is poorly under-
stood but carries a good prognosis and may respond to 
treatment with anti-anginal therapy.
Acute coronary syndrome
Acute coronary syndrome is a term that encompasses 
both unstable angina and myocardial infarction (MI). It 
is characterised by new-onset or rapidly worsening 
angina (crescendo angina), angina on minimal exertion 
or angina at rest in the absence of myocardial damage. 
In contrast, MI occurs when symptoms occur at rest and 
there is evidence of myocardial necrosis, as demon-
strated by an elevation in cardiac troponin or creatine 
kinase-MB isoenzyme (Box 18.61).
An acute coronary syndrome may present as a 
new phenomenon or against a background of chronic 
stable angina. The culprit lesion is usually a complex 
proximal LAD coronary artery. Improvement in sur-
vival is most marked in those with impaired left ven-
tricular function or positive stress testing prior to surgery 
and in those who have undergone left internal mammary 
artery grafting.
Neurological complications are common, with a 
1–5% risk of peri-operative stroke. Between 30% and 
80% of patients develop short-term cognitive impair-
ment that typically resolves within 6 months. There are 
also reports of long-term cognitive decline that may be 
evident in more than 30% of patients at 5 years. PCI and 
CABG are compared in Boxes 18.59 and 18.60.
‘CABG is superior to medical treatment for at least 10 years after 
surgery in terms of survival. Greatest benefit occurs in those 
with a significant stenosis in the left main coronary artery or 
those with three-vessel disease and impaired ventricular 
function.’
• Yusuf S, et al. Lancet 1994; 344:563–570.
• Davies RF, et al. Circulation 1997; 95:2037–2043.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/96/index.html
18.58  Coronary artery bypass grafting for 
stable angina
‘Systematic reviews and meta-analyses have found similar rates 
of death and MI, and similar quality of life. PCI is associated with 
a greater need for repeat procedures, although this has been 
halved by the introduction of intracoronary stent implantation. 
For patients with multi-vessel disease or diabetes, CABG 
appears to confer better survival rates at 4–5 years.’
• Serruys PW, et al. N Engl J Med 2009; 360:961–972.
For further information: 
 www.nice.org.uk/CG126
18.60  Comparison of PCI and CABG surgery in 
stable angina
PCI
CABG
Death
< 0.5%
< 1.5%
Myocardial 
infarction*
2%
10%
Hospital stay
12–36 hrs
5–8 days
Return to work
2–5 days
6–12 wks
Recurrent angina
15–20% at 6 mths
10% at 1 yr
Repeat 
revascularisation
10–20% at 2 yrs
2% at 2 yrs
Neurological 
complications
Rare
Common (see text)
Other 
complications
Emergency CABG
Vascular damage 
related to access 
site
Diffuse myocardial 
damage
Infection  
(chest, wound) 
Wound pain
*Defined as CK-MB > 2 × normal, p. 589.
18.59  Comparison of PCI and CABG
Cardiovascular disease
18
590
fibrinolysis. In acute MI, occlusive thrombus is almost 
always present at the site of rupture or erosion of an 
atheromatous plaque. The thrombus may undergo spon-
taneous lysis over the course of the next few days, 
although, by this time, irreversible myocardial damage 
has occurred. Without treatment, the infarct-related 
artery remains permanently occluded in 20–30% of 
patients. The process of infarction progresses over 
several hours (Fig. 18.69) and most patients present 
when it is still possible to salvage myocardium and 
improve outcome.
Clinical features
Pain is the cardinal symptom of an acute coronary syn-
drome but breathlessness, vomiting and collapse are 
common features (Box 18.62). The pain occurs in the 
same sites as angina but is usually more severe and lasts 
longer; it is often described as a tightness, heaviness or 
constriction in the chest. In acute MI, the pain can be 
excruciating, and the patient’s expression and pallor 
may vividly convey the seriousness of the situation.
Most patients are breathless and, in some, this is the 
only symptom. Indeed, MI may pass unrecognised. 
Painless or ‘silent’ MI is particularly common in older 
patients or those with diabetes mellitus. If syncope 
ulcerated or fissured atheromatous plaque with adher-
ent platelet-rich thrombus and local coronary artery 
spasm (see Fig. 18.61, p. 580). This is a dynamic process 
whereby the degree of obstruction may either increase, 
leading to complete vessel occlusion, or regress due to 
the effects of platelet disaggregation and endogenous 
Fig. 18.69  The time course of MI. The relative proportion of 
ischaemic, infarcting and infarcted tissue slowly changes over a period of 
12 hours. In the early stages of MI, a significant proportion of the 
myocardium in jeopardy is potentially salvageable. 
Ischaemia
Infarction
4 hours
8 hours
1 hour
Criteria for acute myocardial infarction
The term acute myocardial infarction (MI) should be used when 
there is evidence of myocardial necrosis in a clinical setting 
consistent with acute myocardial ischaemia. Under these 
conditions, any one of the following criteria meets the diagnosis 
for MI:
• Detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarker values 
(preferably cardiac troponin (cTn)), with at least one value 
above the 99th centile upper reference limit (URL) and with 
at least one of the following:
1. Symptoms of ischaemia
2. New or presumed new significant ST segment–T wave 
(ST–T) changes or new left bundle branch block (LBBB)
3. Development of pathological Q waves in the ECG
4. Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or 
new regional wall motion abnormality
5. Identification of an intracoronary thrombus by 
angiography or post-mortem
• Cardiac death with symptoms suggestive of myocardial 
ischaemia and presumed new ischaemic ECG changes or 
new LBBB, but death occurred before cardiac biomarkers 
were obtained, or before cardiac biomarker values would be 
increased
• Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)-related MI is 
arbitrarily defined by elevation of cTn values (> 5 × 99th 
centile URL) in patients with normal baseline values (≤ 99th 
centile URL) or a rise of cTn values > 20% if the baseline 
values are elevated and are stable or falling. In addition, 
either (i) symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischaemia, or 
(ii) new ischaemic ECG changes, or (iii) angiographic findings 
consistent with a procedural complication, or (iv) imaging 
demonstration of new loss of viable myocardium or new 
regional wall motion abnormality are required
• Stent thrombosis associated with MI when detected by 
coronary angiography or post-mortem in the setting of 
myocardial ischaemia and with a rise and/or fall of cardiac 
biomarker values with at least one value above the 99th 
centile URL
• Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)-related MI is 
arbitrarily defined by elevation of cardiac biomarker values  
(> 10 × 99th centile URL) in patients with normal baseline 
cTn values (≤ 99th centile URL). In addition, either (i) new 
pathological Q waves or new LBBB, or (ii) angiographic 
documented new graft or new native coronary artery 
occlusion, or (iii) imaging evidence of new loss of viable 
myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality
Criteria for prior myocardial infarction
Any one of the following criteria meets the diagnosis for prior MI:
• Pathological Q waves with or without symptoms in the 
absence of non-ischaemic causes
• Imaging evidence of a region of loss of viable myocardium 
that is thinned and fails to contract, in the absence of a 
non-ischaemic cause
Pathological findings of a prior MI
18.61  Universal definition of myocardial 
infarction
Adapted from Thygesen K, et al. Eur Heart J 2012;33:2251–2267.
Symptoms
• Prolonged cardiac pain: chest, throat, arms, epigastrium or 
back
• Anxiety and fear of impending death
• Nausea and vomiting
• Breathlessness
• Collapse/syncope
Physical signs
• Signs of sympathetic activation: pallor, sweating, tachycardia
• Signs of vagal activation: vomiting, bradycardia
• Signs of impaired myocardial function
Hypotension, oliguria, cold peripheries
Narrow pulse pressure
Raised JVP
Third heart sound
Quiet first heart sound
Diffuse apical impulse
Lung crepitations
• Signs of tissue damage: fever
• Signs of complications: e.g. mitral regurgitation, pericarditis
18.62  Clinical features of acute coronary 
syndromes
Coronary artery disease
18
591
features, evaluation of the ECG, and serial measure-
ments of biochemical markers of cardiac damage, such 
as troponin I and T. A 12-lead ECG is mandatory and 
defines the initial triage, management and treatment 
(see Fig. 18.19, p. 542). Patients with ST-segment eleva-
tion or new bundle branch block require emergency 
reperfusion therapy (see below). In patients with acute 
coronary syndrome without ST-segment elevation, 
the ECG may show transient or persistent ST–T 
wave changes, including ST depression and T-wave 
inversion.
Approximately 12% of patients will die within 
1 month and a fifth within 6 months of the index event. 
The risk markers that are indicative of an adverse 
prognosis include recurrent ischaemia, extensive ECG 
changes at rest or during pain, the release of biochemical 
markers (creatine kinase or troponin), arrhythmias, 
recurrent ischaemia and haemodynamic complications 
(e.g. hypotension, mitral regurgitation) during episodes 
of ischaemia. Risk stratification is important because it 
guides the use of more complex pharmacological and 
interventional treatment (Figs 18.70 and 18.19 (p. 542) ).
occurs, it is usually due to an arrhythmia or profound 
hypotension. Vomiting and sinus bradycardia are often 
due to vagal stimulation and are particularly common 
in patients with inferior MI. Nausea and vomiting may 
also be caused or aggravated by opiates given for pain 
relief. Sometimes infarction occurs in the absence of 
physical signs.
Sudden death, from ventricular fibrillation or asys-
tole, may occur immediately and often within the first 
hour. If the patient survives this most critical stage, the 
liability to dangerous arrhythmias remains, but dimin-
ishes as each hour goes by. It is vital that patients know 
not to delay calling for help if symptoms occur. The 
development of cardiac failure reflects the extent of 
myocardial ischaemia and is the major cause of death in 
those who survive the first few hours.
Diagnosis and risk stratification
The differential diagnosis is wide and includes most 
causes of central chest pain or collapse (pp. 540 and 554). 
The assessment of acute chest pain depends heavily on 
an analysis of the character of the pain and its associated 
Fig. 18.70  Risk stratification in the acute coronary syndrome: the GRACE score. Killip class refers to a categorisation of the severity of heart 
failure based on easily obtained clinical signs. The main clinical features are as follows: class I = no heart failure; class II = crackles audible halfway up the 
chest; class III = crackles heard in all the lung fields; class IV = cardiogenic shock (SBP = systolic blood pressure). From SIGN 93 – see p. 641.
1. Find points for each predictive factor
2. Sum points for all predictive factors
Killip
class
Points
I
II
III
IV
0
20
39
59
SBP
(mmHg)
Points
≤ 80
80–99
100–119
120–139
58
53
43
34
140–159
24
160–199
10
0
≥ 200
Heart rate
(beats/min)
Points
≤ 50
50–69
70–89
90–109
0
3
9
15
24
110–149
38
150–199
46
≥ 200
Age
(years)
Points
≤ 30
30–39
40–49
50–59
0
8
25
41
58
60–69
75
70–79
91
80–89
100
≥ 90
Serum
creatinine
level
(µmol/L)
Killip
class
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
SBP
Heart
rate
Age
Creatinine
level
Cardiac
arrest at
admission
ST-segment
deviation
=
Elevated
cardiac enzyme
levels
Total
points
3. Look up risk corresponding to total points
Total points
Probability of
in-hospital death (%)
≤ 60
≤ 0.2
70
0.3
80
0.4
90
0.6
100
0.8
110
1.1
120
1.6
130
2.1
140
2.9
150
3.9
160
5.4
170
7.3
180
9.8
190
13
200
18
210
23
220
29
230
36
240
44
≤ 250
≤ 52
Other risk
factors
Cardiac arrest at
admission
39
ST-segment deviation
28
Elevated cardiac
enzyme levels
14
Points
Points
0–34
35–70
71–105
106–140
1
4
7
10
13
141–176
21
177–353
28
≥ 353
Examples
A patient has Killip class II, SBP of 99 mmHg, heart rate of 100 beats/min, is 65 years of age, has a serum creatinine level of
76 µmol/L, did not have a cardiac arrest at admission but did have ST-segment deviation and elevated enzyme levels. His
score would be: 20 + 53 + 15 + 58 + 7 + 0 + 28 + 14 = 195. This gives about a 16% risk of having an in-hospital death.
Similarly, a patient with Killip class I, SBP of 80 mmHg, heart rate of 60 beats/min, who is 55 years of age, has a serum
creatinine level of 30 µmol/L, and no risk factors would have the following score: 0 + 58 + 3 + 41 + 1 = 103. This gives
about a 0.9% risk of having an in-hospital death.
Cardiovascular disease
18
592
Investigations
Electrocardiography
The ECG is central to confirming the diagnosis but may 
be difficult to interpret if there is bundle branch block or 
previous MI. The initial ECG may be normal or non-
diagnostic in one-third of cases. Repeated ECGs are 
important, especially where the diagnosis is uncertain or 
the patient has recurrent or persistent symptoms.
The earliest ECG change is usually ST-segment devia-
tion. With proximal occlusion of a major coronary artery, 
ST-segment elevation (or new bundle branch block) is 
seen initially, with later diminution in the size of the R 
wave and, in transmural (full-thickness) infarction, 
development of a Q wave. Subsequently, the T wave 
becomes inverted because of a change in ventricular 
repolarisation; this change persists after the ST segment 
has returned to normal. These sequential features (Fig. 
18.71) are sufficiently reliable for the approximate age of 
the infarct to be deduced.
In non-ST segment elevation acute coronary syn-
drome, there is partial occlusion of a major vessel or 
complete occlusion of a minor vessel, causing unstable 
angina or partial-thickness (subendocardial) MI. This is 
usually associated with ST-segment depression and 
T-wave changes. In the presence of infarction, this may 
be accompanied by some loss of R waves in the absence 
of Q waves (Fig. 18.72).
The ECG changes are best seen in the leads that ‘face’ 
the ischaemic or infarcted area. When there has been 
anteroseptal infarction, abnormalities are found in one 
or more leads from V1 to V4, while anterolateral infarc-
tion produces changes from V4 to V6, in aVL and in lead 
I. Inferior infarction is best shown in leads II, III and 
aVF, while, at the same time, leads I, aVL and the ante-
rior chest leads may show ‘reciprocal’ changes of ST 
depression (Figs 18.73–18.74). Infarction of the posterior 
Fig. 18.71  The serial evolution of ECG changes in transmural MI.
 A Normal ECG complex. B Acute ST elevation (‘the current of injury’).
 C Progressive loss of the R wave, developing Q wave, resolution of the 
ST elevation and terminal T-wave inversion.  D Deep Q wave and T-wave 
inversion.  E Old or established infarct pattern; the Q wave tends to 
persist but the T-wave changes become less marked. The rate of evolution 
is very variable but, in general, stage B appears within minutes, stage C 
within hours, stage D within days and stage E after several weeks or 
months. This should be compared with the 12-lead ECGs in Figures 
18.72–18.74. 
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 18.72  Recent anterior non-ST elevation (subendocardial) 
MI. This ECG demonstrates deep symmetrical T-wave inversion, 
together with a reduction in the height of the R wave in leads V1, V2, V3 
and V4. 
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
aVF
V3
V6
III
II
I
Fig. 18.73  Acute transmural anterior MI. This ECG was recorded 
from a patient who had developed severe chest pain 6 hours earlier. There 
is ST elevation in leads I, aVL, V2, V3, V4, V5 and V6, and there are Q waves 
in leads V3, V4 and V5. Anterior infarcts with prominent changes in leads 
V2, V3 and V4 are sometimes called ‘anteroseptal’ infarcts, as opposed to 
anterolateral’ infarcts, in which the ECG changes are predominantly found 
in V4, V5 and V6. 
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
aVF
V3
V6
III
II
I
Coronary artery disease
18
593
wall of the LV does not cause ST elevation or Q waves 
in the standard leads, but can be diagnosed by the pres-
ence of reciprocal changes (ST depression and a tall R 
wave in leads V1–V4). Some infarctions (especially infe-
rior) also involve the RV. This may be identified by 
recording from additional leads placed over the right 
precordium.
Plasma cardiac biomarkers
In unstable angina, there is no detectable rise in cardiac 
biomarkers or enzymes, and the initial diagnosis is made 
from the clinical history and ECG only. In contrast, MI 
causes a rise in the plasma concentration of enzymes and 
proteins that are normally concentrated within cardiac 
cells. These biochemical markers are creatine kinase 
(CK), a more sensitive and cardio-specific isoform of this 
enzyme (CK-MB), and the cardio-specific proteins, tro-
ponins T and I (p. 535). Admission and serial (usually 
daily) estimations are helpful because it is the change in 
plasma concentrations of these markers that confirms 
the diagnosis of MI (Fig. 18.75 and Box 18.61).
CK starts to rise at 4–6 hours, peaks at about 12 hours 
and falls to normal within 48–72 hours. CK is also 
present in skeletal muscle, and a modest rise in CK (but 
not CK-MB) may sometimes be due to an intramuscular 
injection, vigorous physical exercise or, particularly in 
older people, a fall. Defibrillation causes significant 
release of CK but not CK-MB or troponins. The most 
sensitive markers of myocardial cell damage are the 
cardiac troponins T and I, which are released within 
4–6 hours and remain elevated for up to 2 weeks.
Fig. 18.74  Acute transmural inferolateral MI. This ECG was 
recorded from a patient who had developed severe chest pain 4 hours 
earlier. There is ST elevation in the inferior leads II, III and aVF and the 
lateral leads V4, V5 and V6. There is also ‘reciprocal’ ST depression in leads 
aVL and V2. 
aVR
V1
V4
V2
V5
aVL
V3
V6
aVF
III
II
I
Fig. 18.75  Changes in plasma cardiac biomarker concentrations 
after MI. Creatine kinase (CK) and troponin I (Tn I) are the first to rise, 
followed by aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and then lactate 
(hydroxybutyrate) dehydrogenase (LDH). In patients treated with reperfusion 
therapy, a rapid rise in plasma creatine kinase (curve CK (R)) occurs, due 
to a washout effect. 
96
AST
CK(R)
72
0
48
36
24
12
6
Normal plasma activity
Tn1
Hours after coronary occlusion
LDH
2
4
6
8
10
Other blood tests
A leucocytosis is usual, reaching a peak on the first day. 
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive 
protein (CRP) are also elevated.
Chest X-ray
This may demonstrate pulmonary oedema that is not 
evident on clinical examination (see Fig. 18.25, p. 550). 
The heart size is often normal but there may be cardio­
megaly due to pre-existing myocardial damage.
Echocardiography
This is useful for assessing ventricular function and for 
detecting important complications, such as mural throm-
bus, cardiac rupture, ventricular septal defect, mitral 
regurgitation and pericardial effusion.
Immediate management: the first 
12 hours
Patients should be admitted urgently to hospital because 
there is a significant risk of death or recurrent myocar-
dial ischaemia during the early unstable phase, and 
appropriate medical therapy can reduce the incidence of 
these by at least 60%. The essentials of the immediate 
in-hospital management of acute coronary syndrome are 
shown in Figure 18.19 (p. 542).
Patients are usually managed in a dedicated cardiac 
unit, where the necessary expertise, monitoring and 
resuscitation facilities can be concentrated. If there are 
no complications, the patient can be mobilised from the 
second day and discharged after 3–5 days.
Analgesia
Adequate analgesia is essential, not only to relieve dis-
tress but also to lower adrenergic drive and thereby 
reduce vascular resistance, BP, infarct size and suscepti-
bility to ventricular arrhythmias. Intravenous opiates 
(initially, morphine sulphate 5–10 mg or diamorphine 
2.5–5 mg) and antiemetics (initially, metoclopramide 
10 mg) should be administered, and titrated by giving 
repeated small aliquots until the patient is comfortable. 
Intramuscular injections should be avoided because the 
clinical effect may be delayed by poor skeletal muscle 
Cardiovascular disease
18
594
perfusion, and a painful haematoma may form follow-
ing thrombolytic or antithrombotic therapy.
Antithrombotic therapy
Antiplatelet therapy
In patients with acute coronary syndrome, oral admin-
istration of 75–325 mg aspirin daily improves survival, 
with a 25% relative risk reduction in mortality. The first 
tablet (300 mg) should be given orally within the first 
12 hours and therapy should be continued indefinitely 
if there are no side-effects. In combination with aspirin, 
the early (within 12 hours) use of clopidogrel (600 mg, 
followed by 150 mg daily for 1 week and 75 mg daily 
thereafter) confers a further reduction in ischaemic 
events (Box 18.63). In patients with an acute coronary 
syndrome, with or without ST-segment elevation, tica-
grelor (180 mg, followed by 90 mg twice daily) is more 
effective than clopidogrel in reducing vascular death, MI 
or stroke, and all-cause death, without affecting overall 
major bleeding risk.
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists, such as 
tirofiban and abciximab, block the final common 
pathway of platelet aggregation and are potent inhibi-
tors of platelet-rich thrombus formation. They are of 
particular benefit in patients with acute coronary syn-
dromes who undergo PCI (Box 18.64), those with recur-
rent ischaemia and those at particularly high risk, such 
as patients with diabetes mellitus or an elevated tro-
ponin concentration.
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulation reduces the risk of thromboembolic 
complications, and prevents re-infarction in the absence 
of reperfusion therapy or after successful thrombolysis 
(Box 18.65). Anticoagulation can be achieved using 
unfractionated heparin, fractioned (low-molecular-
weight) heparin or a pentasaccharide. Comparative 
clinical trials suggest that the pentasaccharides (subcu-
taneous fondaparinux 2.5 mg daily) have the best safety 
and efficacy profile, with low-molecular-weight heparin 
(subcutaneous enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily) being a 
reasonable alternative. Anticoagulation should be con-
tinued for 8 days or until discharge from hospital or 
coronary revascularisation.
A period of treatment with warfarin should be con-
sidered if there is persistent atrial fibrillation or evidence 
of extensive anterior infarction, or if echocardiography 
shows mobile mural thrombus, because these patients 
are at increased risk of systemic thromboembolism.
Anti-anginal therapy
Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (300–500 µg) is a valuable 
first-aid measure in unstable angina or threatened 
infarction, and intravenous nitrates (glyceryl trinitrate 
0.6–1.2 mg/hr or isosorbide dinitrate 1–2 mg/hr) are 
useful for the treatment of left ventricular failure and the 
relief of recurrent or persistent ischaemic pain.
Intravenous β-blockers (e.g. atenolol 5–10 mg or 
metoprolol 5–15 mg given over 5 mins) relieve pain, 
reduce arrhythmias and improve short-term mortality 
in patients who present within 12 hours of the onset of 
symptoms (see Fig. 18.19). However, they should be 
avoided if there is heart failure (pulmonary oedema), 
hypotension (systolic BP < 105 mmHg) or bradycardia 
(heart rate < 65/min).
A dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist (e.g. 
nifedipine or amlodipine) can be added to the β-blocker 
if there is persistent chest discomfort but may cause 
tachycardia if used alone. Because of their rate-limiting 
action, verapamil and diltiazem are the calcium channel 
antagonists of choice if a β-blocker is contraindicated. 
Reperfusion therapy
Non-ST segment elevation acute  
coronary syndrome
Immediate emergency reperfusion therapy has no 
demonstrable benefit in patients with non-ST segment 
elevation MI and thrombolytic therapy may be harmful. 
Selected medium- to high-risk patients do benefit from 
in-hospital coronary angiography and coronary revas-
cularisation but this does not need to take place in the 
first 12 hours.
‘Aspirin alone (75–325 mg/day) reduces the risk of death, MI 
and stroke in acute coronary syndromes (NNTB = 20–25). 
Although the addition of clopidogrel to aspirin reduces recurrent 
ischaemic events, ticagrelor (90 mg twice daily) is more effective 
than clopidogrel and causes a further reduction in these events 
(NNTB = 60), including all-cause mortality (NNTB = 85).’
• Antithrombotic Trialists Collaboration. BMJ 2002; 324:71–86.
• The Study of Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes (PLATO) trial investigators. 
N Engl J Med 2009; 361:1045–1057.
For further information: 
 www.acc.org
18.63  Oral antiplatelet agents in acute coronary 
syndromes
‘In patients with acute coronary syndromes, antiplatelet 
treatment with IV glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors reduces the 
combined endpoint of death or MI. Most benefit is seen in the 
context of percutaneous coronary intervention, but there is no 
convincing evidence of benefit in patients who are treated 
without revascularisation (NNTB (death or MI at 30 days) = 100; 
NNTB (death, MI or revascularisation at 30 days) = 63).’
• Boersma E, et al. Lancet 2002; 359:189–198.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/93/index.html
18.64  Intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors 
in acute coronary syndromes
‘Aspirin plus low-molecular-weight heparin is more effective 
than aspirin alone in reducing the combined endpoint of death, 
MI, refractory angina and urgent need for revascularisation.  
In comparison to low-molecular-weight heparin, the 
pentasaccharide, fondaparinux (2.5 mg SC), is associated with 
lower bleeding rates and better overall survival.’
• Antman EM, et al. for the TIMI IIB (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction) and 
ESSENCE (Efficacy and Safety of Subcutaneous Enoxaparin in Non-Q-wave 
Coronary Events) Investigators. TIMI IIB-ESSENCE meta-analysis. Circulation 
1999; 100:1602–1608.
• Elkelboom JW, et al. Lancet 2000; 355:1936–1942.
• Yusuf S, et al. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:1464–1476.
For further information: 
 www.acc.org
18.65  Anticoagulation in acute coronary 
syndromes
Coronary artery disease
18
595
and the practical advantages of bolus administration 
provide opportunities for prompt treatment in the emer-
gency department or in the pre-hospital setting. rPA is 
administered as a double bolus and also produces a 
similar outcome to that achieved with alteplase, although 
some of the bleeding risks appear slightly higher.
An overview of all large randomised trials confirms 
that thrombolytic therapy reduces short-term mortality 
in patients with MI if given within 12 hours of the onset 
ST segment elevation acute coronary syndrome
Immediate reperfusion therapy restores coronary artery 
patency, preserves left ventricular function and improves 
survival. Successful therapy is associated with pain 
relief, resolution of acute ST elevation and, sometimes, 
transient arrhythmias (e.g. idioventricular rhythm).
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).  This 
is the treatment of choice for ST segment elevation MI 
(Figs 18.19 and 18.76). Outcomes are best when it is used 
in combination with glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor 
antagonists and intracoronary stent implantation. In 
comparison to thrombolytic therapy, it is associated 
with a greater reduction in the risk of death, recurrent 
MI or stroke (Box 18.67). The universal use of primary 
PCI has been limited by availability of the necessary 
resources to provide this highly specialised emergency 
service. Thus, intravenous thrombolytic therapy remains 
the first-line reperfusion treatment in many hospitals, 
especially those in rural or remote areas. When primary 
PCI cannot be achieved within 2 hours of diagnosis, 
thrombolytic therapy should be administered.
Thrombolysis.  The appropriate use of thrombolytic 
therapy can reduce hospital mortality by 25–50% and 
this survival advantage is maintained for at least 
10 years (Box 18.68). The benefit is greatest in those 
patients who receive treatment within the first few 
hours: ‘minutes mean muscle’.
Alteplase (human tissue plasminogen activator, or 
tPA) is a genetically engineered drug that is given over 
90 minutes (bolus dose of 15 mg, followed by 0.75 mg/
kg body weight but not exceeding 50 mg, over 30 mins, 
and then 0.5 mg/kg body weight but not exceeding 
35 mg, over 60 mins). Its use is associated with better 
survival rates than other thrombolytic agents, such as 
streptokinase, but carries a slightly higher risk of intra­
cerebral bleeding (10 per 1000 increased survival, but 
1 per 1000 more non-fatal stroke).
Analogues of tPA, such as tenecteplase (TNK) and 
reteplase (rPA), have a longer plasma half-life than 
alteplase and can be given as an intravenous bolus. TNK 
is as effective as alteplase at reducing death and MI, 
whilst conferring similar intracerebral bleeding risks. 
However, other bleeding and transfusion risks are lower 
• Incidence: coronary artery disease increases in and affects 
women almost as often as men.
• Comorbid conditions: anaemia and thyroid disease are 
common and may worsen angina.
• Calcific aortic stenosis: common and should be sought in 
all old people with angina.
• Atypical presentations: when myocardial ischaemia occurs, 
age-related changes in myocardial compliance and diastolic 
relaxation can cause the presentation to be with symptoms 
of heart failure, such as breathlessness, rather than with 
chest discomfort.
• Angioplasty and coronary artery bypass surgery: provide 
symptomatic relief, although with an increased procedure-
related morbidity and mortality. Outcome is determined by 
the number of diseased vessels, severity of cardiac 
dysfunction and the number of concomitant diseases, as 
much as age itself.
18.66  Angina in old age
Fig. 18.76  Primary PCI.  A Acute right coronary artery occlusion.
 B Initial angioplasty demonstrates a large thrombus filling defect (arrows).
 C Complete restoration of normal flow following intracoronary stenting. 
A
B
C
Cardiovascular disease
18
596
Complications of acute  
coronary syndrome
Complications are seen in all forms of acute coronary 
syndrome, although the frequency and extent vary with 
the severity of ischaemia and infarction. Major mechani-
cal and structural complications are seen only with sig-
nificant, often transmural, MI.
Arrhythmias
Many patients with acute coronary syndrome have 
some form of arrhythmia (Box 18.70). In the majority of 
cases this is transient and of no haemodynamic or prog-
nostic importance. Pain relief, rest and the correction of 
hypokalaemia may help prevent arrhythmias. Diagnosis 
and management of arrhythmias are discussed in detail 
on pages 562–579.
Ventricular fibrillation
This occurs in 5–10% of patients who reach hospital 
and is thought to be the major cause of death in those 
who die before receiving medical attention. Prompt 
defibrillation restores sinus rhythm and is life-saving. 
The prognosis of patients with early ventricular fibrilla-
tion (within the first 48 hours) who are successfully and 
promptly resuscitated is identical to that of patients 
who do not suffer ventricular fibrillation.
Atrial fibrillation
This is common but frequently transient, and usually 
does not require emergency treatment. However, if it 
causes a rapid ventricular rate with hypotension or cir-
culatory collapse, prompt cardioversion by immediate 
synchronised DC shock is essential. In other situations, 
digoxin or a β-blocker is usually the treatment of choice. 
Atrial fibrillation (due to acute atrial stretch) is often a 
feature of impending or overt left ventricular failure, 
and therapy may be ineffective if heart failure is not 
recognised and treated appropriately. Anticoagulation 
is required if atrial fibrillation persists.
Bradycardia
This does not usually require treatment, but if there is 
hypotension or haemodynamic deterioration, atropine 
(0.6–1.2 mg IV) may be given. AV block complicating 
inferior infarction is usually temporary and often 
resolves following reperfusion therapy. If there is clini-
cal deterioration due to second-degree or complete AV 
block, a temporary pacemaker should be considered. AV 
block complicating anterior infarction is more serious 
because asystole may suddenly supervene; a prophylac-
tic temporary pacemaker should be inserted (p. 578).
Ischaemia
Patients who develop recurrent angina at rest or on 
minimal exertion following an acute coronary syndrome 
of symptoms and the ECG shows bundle branch block 
or characteristic ST segment elevation of more than 
1 mm in the limb leads or 2 mm in the chest leads (see 
Box 18.68). Thrombolysis appears to be of little net 
benefit and may be harmful in those who present more 
than 12 hours after the onset of symptoms and in those 
with a normal ECG or ST depression. In patients with 
ST elevation or bundle branch block, the absolute benefit 
of thrombolysis plus aspirin is approximately 50 lives 
saved per 1000 patients treated within 6 hours, and 40 
lives saved per 1000 treated between 7 and 12 hours after 
the onset of symptoms. The benefit is greatest for patients 
treated within the first 2 hours.
The major hazard of thrombolytic therapy is bleed-
ing. Cerebral haemorrhage causes 4 extra strokes per 
1000 patients treated, and the incidence of other major 
bleeds is between 0.5% and 1%. Accordingly, the treat-
ment should be withheld if there is a significant risk of 
serious bleeding (Box 18.69).
For some patients, thrombolytic therapy is contra­
indicated or fails to achieve coronary arterial reperfusion 
(see Fig. 18.19, p. 542). Early emergency PCI may then 
be considered, particularly where there is evidence of 
cardiogenic shock.
‘Prompt thrombolytic treatment (within 12 hours, and particularly 
within 6 hours, of the onset of symptoms) reduces mortality in 
patients with acute MI and ECG changes of ST elevation or new 
bundle branch block (NNTB = 56). Intracranial haemorrhage is 
more common in people given thrombolysis, with 1 additional 
stroke for every 250 people treated.’
• Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists’ (FTT) Collaborative Group. Lancet 1994; 
343:311–322.
• Collins R. N Engl J Med 1997; 336:847–860.
For further information: 
 www.escardio.org
18.68  Thrombolytic treatment in acute 
ST segment elevation MI
‘Primary PCI is more effective than thrombolysis for the 
treatment of acute MI. Death, non-fatal re-infarction and stroke 
are reduced from 14% with thrombolytic therapy to 8% with 
primary PCI (NNTB = 33 for death and 9 for recurrent 
ischaemia).’
• Keeley EC, et al. Lancet 2003; 361:13–20.
For further information: 
 www.acc.org
 www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/93/index.html
18.67  Primary PCI in acute ST segment 
elevation MI
• Active internal bleeding
• Previous subarachnoid or intracerebral haemorrhage
• Uncontrolled hypertension
• Recent surgery (within 1 mth)
• Recent trauma (including traumatic resuscitation)
• High probability of active peptic ulcer
• Pregnancy
18.69  Relative contraindications to thrombolytic 
therapy: potential candidates for primary PCI
• Ventricular fibrillation
• Ventricular tachycardia
• Accelerated idioventricular 
rhythm
• Ventricular ectopics
• Atrial fibrillation
• Atrial tachycardia
• Sinus bradycardia 
(particularly after inferior MI)
• Atrioventricular block
18.70  Common arrhythmias in acute coronary 
syndrome
Coronary artery disease
18
597
an acquired ventricular septal defect tend to 
develop right heart failure rather than pulmonary 
oedema. Doppler echocardiography and right heart 
catheterisation will confirm the diagnosis. Without 
prompt surgery, the condition is usually fatal.
•	 Rupture of the ventricle may lead to cardiac 
tamponade and is usually fatal (p. 545), although it 
may rarely be possible to support a patient with an 
incomplete rupture until emergency surgery is 
performed.
Embolism
Thrombus often forms on the endocardial surface of 
freshly infarcted myocardium. This can lead to systemic 
embolism and occasionally causes a stroke or ischaemic 
limb. Venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism may 
occur but have become less common with the use of 
prophylactic anticoagulants and early mobilisation.
Impaired ventricular function, remodelling 
and ventricular aneurysm
Acute transmural MI is often followed by thinning and 
stretching of the infarcted segment (infarct expansion). 
This leads to an increase in wall stress with progressive 
dilatation and hypertrophy of the remaining ventricle 
(ventricular remodelling, Fig. 18.77). As the ventricle 
dilates, it becomes less efficient and heart failure may 
supervene. Infarct expansion occurs over a few days 
and weeks but ventricular remodelling can take years. 
ACE inhibitor therapy reduces late ventricular remodel-
ling and can prevent the onset of heart failure (p. 551).
A left ventricular aneurysm develops in approxi-
mately 10% of patients with MI and is particularly 
common when there is persistent occlusion of the infarct-
related vessel. Heart failure, ventricular arrhythmias, 
mural thrombus and systemic embolism are all recog-
nised complications of aneurysm formation. Other fea-
tures include a paradoxical impulse on the chest wall, 
persistent ST elevation on the ECG, and sometimes an 
unusual bulge from the cardiac silhouette on the chest 
X-ray. Echocardiography is diagnostic. Surgical removal 
are at high risk and should be considered for prompt 
coronary angiography with a view to revascularisation. 
Patients with dynamic ECG changes and ongoing pain 
should be treated with intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa 
receptor antagonists. Patients with resistant pain or 
marked haemodynamic changes should be considered 
for intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation and emergency 
coronary revascularisation.
Post-infarct angina occurs in up to 50% of patients 
treated with thrombolysis. Most patients have a residual 
stenosis in the infarct-related vessel, despite successful 
thrombolysis, and this may cause angina if there is still 
viable myocardium downstream. For this reason, all 
patients who have received successful thrombolysis 
should be considered for early (within the first 
6–24 hours) coronary angiography with a view to coro-
nary revascularisation.
Acute circulatory failure
Acute circulatory failure usually reflects extensive myo-
cardial damage and indicates a bad prognosis. All the 
other complications of MI are more likely to occur when 
acute heart failure is present. The assessment and man-
agement of heart failure complicating acute MI are dis-
cussed in detail on page 545.
Pericarditis
This only occurs following infarction and is particularly 
common on the second and third days. The patient may 
recognise that a different pain has developed, even 
though it is at the same site, and that it is positional and 
tends to be worse or sometimes only present on inspira-
tion. A pericardial rub may be audible. Opiate-based 
analgesia should be used. Non-steroidal (NSAIDs) and 
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may increase the risk 
of aneurysm formation and myocardial rupture in the 
early recovery period, and so should be avoided.
The post-MI syndrome (Dressler’s syndrome) is char-
acterised by persistent fever, pericarditis and pleurisy, 
and is probably due to autoimmunity. The symptoms 
tend to occur a few weeks or even months after the 
infarct and often subside after a few days; prolonged or 
severe symptoms may require treatment with high-dose 
aspirin, NSAIDs or even corticosteroids.
Mechanical complications
Part of the necrotic muscle in a fresh infarct may tear or 
rupture, with devastating consequences:
•	 Rupture of the papillary muscle can cause acute 
pulmonary oedema and shock due to the sudden 
onset of severe mitral regurgitation, which presents 
with a pansystolic murmur and third heart sound. 
In the presence of severe regurgitation, the murmur 
may be quiet or absent. The diagnosis is confirmed 
by echocardiography and emergency valve 
replacement may be necessary. Lesser degrees of 
mitral regurgitation due to papillary muscle 
dysfunction are common and may be transient.
•	 Rupture of the interventricular septum causes left-to-
right shunting through a ventricular septal defect. 
This usually presents with sudden haemodynamic 
deterioration accompanied by a new loud 
pansystolic murmur radiating to the right sternal 
border, but may be difficult to distinguish from 
acute mitral regurgitation. However, patients with 
Fig. 18.77  Infarct expansion and ventricular remodelling. 
Full-thickness Ml causes thinning and stretching of the infarcted segment 
(infarct expansion), which leads to increased wall stress with progressive 
dilatation and hypertrophy of the remaining ventricle (ventricular 
remodelling). 
  
  
I
n
f
a
r
c
t
  
  
e
x
p
a
n
s
i
o
n
Increased
wall
stress
Cardiovascular disease
18
598
Arrhythmias
The presence of ventricular arrhythmias during the con-
valescent phase of acute coronary syndrome may be a 
marker of poor ventricular function and may herald 
sudden death. Although empirical anti-arrhythmic 
treatment is of no value and is even hazardous, selected 
patients may benefit from electrophysiological testing 
and specific anti-arrhythmic therapy (including implant-
able cardiac defibrillators, p. 579).
Recurrent ventricular arrhythmias are sometimes 
manifestations of myocardial ischaemia or impaired left 
ventricular function and may respond to appropriate 
treatment directed at the underlying problem.
Lifestyle and risk factor modification
Smoking
The 5-year mortality of patients who continue to smoke 
cigarettes is double that of those who quit smoking at 
the time of their acute coronary syndrome. Giving up 
smoking is the single most effective contribution a 
patient can make to his or her future. The success of 
smoking cessation can be increased by supportive advice 
and pharmacological therapy (p. 100).
Hyperlipidaemia
The importance of lowering serum cholesterol following 
acute coronary syndrome has been demonstrated in 
large-scale randomised trials. Lipids should be meas-
ured within 24 hours of presentation because there is 
often a transient fall in cholesterol in the 3 months fol-
lowing infarction. HMG CoA reductase enzyme inhibi-
tors (‘statins’, p. 456) can produce marked reductions in 
total (and LDL) cholesterol and reduce the subsequent 
risk of death, re-infarction, stroke and the need for revas-
cularisation (see Box 18.46, p. 583). Irrespective of serum 
cholesterol concentrations, all patients should receive 
statin therapy after acute coronary syndrome, but those 
with serum LDL cholesterol concentrations above 
3.2 mmol/L (~120 mg/dL) benefit from more intensive 
therapy, such as atorvastatin 80 mg daily.
Other risk factors
Maintaining 
an 
ideal 
body 
weight, 
eating 
a 
Mediterranean-style diet, taking regular exercise, and 
achieving good control of hypertension and diabetes 
mellitus may all improve the long-term outlook.
Mobilisation and rehabilitation
The necrotic muscle of an acute myocardial infarct takes 
4–6 weeks to be replaced with fibrous tissue and it is 
conventional to restrict physical activities during this 
period. When there are no complications, the patient can 
mobilise on the second day, return home in 3–5 days 
and gradually increase activity, with the aim of return-
ing to work in 4–6 weeks. The majority of patients 
may resume driving after 4–6 weeks, although, in most 
countries, vocational driving licence holders (e.g. heavy 
goods and public service vehicles) require special 
assessment.
Emotional problems, such as denial, anxiety and 
depression, are common and must be addressed. Many 
patients are severely and even permanently incapaci-
tated as a result of the psychological effects of acute 
coronary syndrome rather than the physical ones, and 
all benefit from thoughtful explanation, counselling and 
of a left ventricular aneurysm carries a high morbidity 
and mortality but is sometimes necessary.
Later in-hospital management
Late management of MI is summarised in Box 18.71.
Risk stratification and further investigation
Simple clinical tools can be used to identify medium- to 
high-risk patients. The GRACE score (see Fig. 18.70, 
p. 591) is a simple method of calculating early mortality 
that can help guide which patients should be selected 
for intensive therapy, and specifically early inpatient 
coronary angiography.
The prognosis of patients who have survived an 
acute coronary syndrome is related to the extent of resid-
ual myocardial ischaemia, the degree of myocardial 
damage and the presence of ventricular arrhythmias.
Left ventricular function
The degree of left ventricular dysfunction can be crudely 
assessed from physical findings (tachycardia, third heart 
sound, crackles at the lung bases, elevated venous pres-
sure and so on), ECG changes and chest X-ray (size of 
the heart and presence of pulmonary oedema). Formal 
assessment with echocardiography should, however, be 
undertaken in the early recovery phase.
Ischaemia
Patients with early ischaemia following an acute coro-
nary syndrome should undergo coronary angiography 
with a view to revascularisation. Low-risk patients 
without spontaneous ischaemia should undergo an 
exercise tolerance test approximately 4 weeks after the 
acute coronary syndrome. This will help to identify 
those individuals with residual myocardial ischaemia 
who require further investigation, and may help to boost 
the confidence of the remainder.
If the exercise test is negative and the patient has a 
good effort tolerance, the outlook is good, with a 1–4% 
chance of an adverse event in the next 12 months. In 
contrast, patients with residual ischaemia in the form of 
chest pain or ECG changes at low exercise levels are at 
high risk, with a 15–25% chance of suffering a further 
ischaemic event in the next 12 months.
Risk stratification and further investigation (see text)
Lifestyle modification
• Diet (weight control, 
lipid-lowering, 
‘Mediterranean diet’)
• Cessation of smoking
• Regular exercise
Secondary prevention drug therapy
• Antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 
and/or clopidogrel)
• β-blocker
• ACE inhibitor/ARB
• Statin
• Additional therapy for 
control of diabetes and 
hypertension
• Mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonist
Rehabilitation
Devices
• Implantable cardiac defibrillator (high-risk patients)
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB = angiotensin receptor blocker)
18.71  Late management of Ml
Coronary artery disease
18
599
oedema or diabetes mellitus further benefit from addi-
tional mineralocorticoid receptor antagonism (e.g. epler-
enone 25–50 mg daily).
Coronary revascularisation
Most low-risk patients stabilise with aspirin, clopido­
grel, anticoagulation and anti-anginal therapy, and can 
be rapidly mobilised. In the absence of recurrent symp-
toms, low-risk patients do not benefit from routine coro-
nary angiography. Coronary angiography should be 
considered with a view to revascularisation in all 
patients at moderate or high risk, including those who 
fail to settle on medical therapy, those with extensive 
ECG changes, those with an elevated plasma troponin 
and those with severe pre-existing stable angina. This 
often reveals disease that is amenable to PCI or urgent 
CABG. In these cases, coronary revascularisation is asso-
ciated with short- and long-term benefits, including 
reductions in MI and death.
Device therapy
Implantable cardiac defibrillators are of benefit in pre-
venting sudden cardiac death in patients who have 
severe left ventricular impairment (ejection fraction 
≤ 30%) after MI (p. 579).
Prognosis
In almost one-quarter of all cases of MI, death occurs 
within a few minutes without medical care. Half the 
deaths occur within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms 
and about 40% of all affected patients die within the 
first month. The prognosis of those who survive to 
reach hospital is much better, with a 28-day survival of 
more than 85%. Patients with unstable angina have a 
mortality of approximately half that of those patients 
with MI.
Early death is usually due to an arrhythmia and is 
independent of the extent of MI. However, late out-
comes are determined by the extent of myocardial 
damage, and unfavourable features include poor left 
ventricular function, AV block and persistent ventricu-
lar arrhythmias. The prognosis is worse for anterior than 
for inferior infarcts. Bundle branch block and high 
reassurance at every stage of the illness. Many patients 
mistakenly believe that ‘stress’ was the cause of their 
heart attack and may restrict their activity inappropri-
ately. The patient’s spouse or partner will also require 
emotional support, information and counselling. Formal 
rehabilitation programmes, based on graded exercise 
protocols with individual and group counselling, are 
often very successful and, in some cases, have been 
shown to improve the long-term outcome.
Secondary prevention drug therapy
Aspirin and clopidogrel
Low-dose aspirin therapy reduces the risk of further 
infarction and other vascular events by approximately 
25% and should be continued indefinitely if there are no 
unwanted effects. Clopidogrel should be given in com-
bination with aspirin for at least 3 months. If patients are 
intolerant of long-term aspirin, clopidogrel is a suitable 
alternative.
Beta-blockers
Continuous treatment with an oral β-blocker reduces 
long-term mortality by approximately 25% among the 
survivors of acute MI (Box 18.72). Unfortunately, a 
minority of patients do not tolerate β-blockers because 
of bradycardia, AV block, hypotension or asthma. 
Patients with heart failure, irreversible chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease or peripheral vascular disease 
derive similar, if not greater secondary preventative 
benefits from β-blocker therapy if they can tolerate it, so 
it should be tried. The secondary preventative role of 
β-blockers in patients with unstable angina is unknown.
ACE inhibitors
Several clinical trials have shown that long-term treat-
ment with an ACE inhibitor (e.g. enalapril 10 mg twice 
daily or ramipril 2.5–5 mg twice daily) can counteract 
ventricular remodelling, prevent the onset of heart 
failure, improve survival, reduce recurrent MI and avoid 
rehospitalisation. The benefits are greatest in those with 
overt heart failure (clinical or radiological) but extend to 
patients with asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction 
and those with preserved left ventricular function. They 
should therefore be considered in all patients with acute 
coronary syndrome. Caution must be exercised in hypo-
volaemic or hypotensive patients because the introduc-
tion of an ACE inhibitor may exacerbate hypotension 
and impair coronary perfusion. In patients intolerant of 
ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (e.g. val-
sartan 40–160 mg twice daily or candesartan 4–16 mg 
daily) are alternatives and are better tolerated.
Patients with acute MI and left ventricular dysfunc-
tion (ejection fraction < 35%) and either pulmonary 
‘Beta-blockers reduce the risk of overall mortality (NNTB = 48), 
sudden death (NNTB = 63) and non-fatal re-infarction (NNTB = 
56) after MI. The greatest benefit is seen in those at highest 
risk, and about one-quarter of patients suffer adverse events.’
• Freemantle N, et al. BMJ 1999; 318:1730–1737.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/93/index.html
18.72  Beta-blockers in secondary prevention 
after MI
• Atypical presentation: often with anorexia, fatigue or 
weakness rather than chest pain.
• Case fatality: rises steeply. Hospital mortality exceeds 25% 
in those over 75 yrs old, which is five times greater than that 
seen in those aged less than 55 yrs.
• Survival benefit of treatments: not influenced by age. The 
absolute benefit of evidence-based treatments may therefore 
be greatest in older people.
• Hazards of treatments: rise with age (e.g. increased risk of 
intracerebral bleeding after thrombolysis) and are due partly 
to increased comorbidity.
• Quality of evidence: older patients, particularly those with 
significant comorbidity, were under-represented in many of 
the randomised controlled clinical trials that helped to 
establish the treatment of MI. The balance of risk and benefit 
for many treatments (e.g. thrombolysis, primary 
percutaneous transluminal coronary angiography) in frail 
older people is therefore uncertain.
18.73  Myocardial infarction in old age
Cardiovascular disease
18
600
shares common risk factors with coronary artery disease: 
namely, smoking, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidaemia 
and hypertension. As with coronary artery disease, 
plaque rupture is responsible for the most serious mani-
festations of PAD, and not infrequently occurs in a 
plaque that hitherto has been asymptomatic.
Approximately 20% of middle-aged (55–75 years) 
people in the UK have PAD but only one-quarter of 
them will have symptoms. The clinical manifestations 
depend upon the anatomical site, the presence or absence 
of a collateral supply, the speed of onset and the mecha-
nism of injury (Box 18.75).
Chronic lower limb arterial disease
PAD affects the leg eight times more often than the arm. 
The lower limb arterial tree comprises the aorto-iliac 
cardiac marker levels both indicate extensive myocar-
dial damage. Old age, depression and social isolation are 
also associated with a higher mortality.
Of those who survive an acute attack, more than 80% 
live for a further year, about 75% for 5 years, 50% for 
10 years and 25% for 20 years.
Cardiac risk of non-cardiac surgery
Non-cardiac surgery, particularly major vascular, 
abdominal or thoracic surgery, can precipitate serious 
peri-operative cardiac complications, such as MI and 
death, in patients with coronary artery and other forms 
of heart disease. Careful pre-operative cardiac assess-
ment may help to determine the balance of benefit 
versus risk on an individual basis, and identify meas-
ures that minimise the operative risk (Box 18.74).
A hypercoagulable state is part of the normal physi-
ological response to surgery, and may promote coronary 
thrombosis leading to an acute coronary syndrome in 
the early post-operative period. Patients with a history 
of recent PCI or acute coronary syndrome are at greatest 
risk and, whenever possible, elective non-cardiac sur­
gery should be avoided for 3 months after such an event. 
Antiplatelet agents, statins and β-blockers reduce the 
risk of peri-operative MI in patients with coronary 
artery disease and, where possible, should be prescribed 
throughout the peri-operative period.
Careful attention to fluid balance during and after 
surgery is particularly important in patients with 
impaired left ventricular function and valvular heart 
disease because antidiuretic hormone is released as part 
of the normal physiological response to surgery and, in 
these circumstances, the overzealous administration of 
intravenous fluids can easily precipitate heart failure. 
Patients with severe valvular heart disease, particularly 
aortic stenosis and mitral stenosis, are also at increased 
risk because they may not be able to increase their 
cardiac output in response to the stress of surgery.
Atrial fibrillation may be triggered by hypoxia, myo-
cardial ischaemia or heart failure, and is a common post-
operative complication in patients with pre-existing 
heart disease. It usually terminates spontaneously when 
the precipitating factors have been eliminated, but 
digoxin or β-blockers can be prescribed to control the 
heart rate.
• Recent (< 6 mths) MI or unstable angina
• Severe coronary artery disease: left main stem or three-
vessel disease
• Severe stable angina on effort
• Severe left ventricular dysfunction
• Severe valvular heart disease (especially aortic stenosis)
18.74  Major risk factors for cardiac 
complications of non-cardiac surgery
Anatomical site
Cerebral circulation
• TIA, amaurosis fugax, vertebrobasilar insufficiency
Renal arteries
• Hypertension and renal failure
Mesenteric arteries
• Mesenteric angina, acute intestinal ischaemia
Limbs (legs ≫ arms)
• Intermittent claudication, critical limb ischaemia, acute limb 
ischaemia
Collateral supply
• In a patient with a complete circle of Willis, occlusion of one 
carotid artery may be asymptomatic
• In a patient without cross-circulation, stroke is likely
Speed of onset
• Where PAD develops slowly, a collateral supply will develop
• Sudden occlusion of a previously normal artery is likely to 
cause severe distal ischaemia
Mechanism of injury
Haemodynamic
• Plaque must reduce arterial diameter by 70% (‘critical 
stenosis’) to reduce flow and pressure at rest. On exertion 
(e.g. walking), a much lesser stenosis may become ‘critical’. 
This mechanism tends to have a relatively benign course due 
to collateralisation
Thrombotic
• Occlusion of a long-standing critical stenosis may be 
asymptomatic due to collateralisation. However, acute 
rupture and thrombosis of a non-haemodynamically 
significant plaque usually has severe consequences
Atheroembolic
• Symptoms depend upon embolic load and size
• Carotid (TIA, amaurosis fugax or stroke) and peripheral 
arterial (blue toe/finger syndrome) plaque are common 
examples
Thromboembolic
• Usually secondary to atrial fibrillation
• The consequences are usually dramatic, as the thrombus 
load is often large and occludes a major, previously healthy, 
non-collateralised artery suddenly and completely
(TIA = transient ischaemic attack)
18.75  Factors influencing the clinical 
manifestations of peripheral arterial disease
VASCULAR DISEASE
Peripheral arterial disease
In developed countries, almost all peripheral arterial 
disease (PAD) is due to atherosclerosis (p. 579) and so 
Vascular disease
18
601
vasodilator, cilostazol, has been shown to improve 
walking distance. Intervention with angioplasty, stent-
ing, endarterectomy or bypass is usually only consid-
ered after BMT has been given at least 6 months to effect 
symptomatic improvement, and then only in patients 
who are severely disabled or whose livelihood is threat-
ened by their disability.
Critical limb ischaemia
This is defined as rest (night) pain, requiring opiate 
analgesia, and/or tissue loss (ulceration or gangrene), 
present for more than 2 weeks, in the presence of an 
ankle BP of less than 50 mmHg (Fig. 18.78). Rest pain 
only, with ankle pressures above 50 mmHg, is known as 
subcritical limb ischaemia (SCLI). The term severe limb 
ischaemia (SLI) is used to describe both CLI and SCLI. 
Whereas IC is usually due to single-segment plaque, SLI 
is always due to multilevel disease.
Many patients with SLI have not previously sought 
medical advice for IC, principally because they have 
other comorbidity that prevents them from walking to a 
point where claudication pain might develop. In con-
trast to patients with IC, those with SLI are at high risk 
of losing their limb, and sometimes their life, in a 
matter of weeks or months without surgical bypass or 
endovascular revascularisation by angioplasty or stent-
ing. Treatment is difficult, however, because patients 
(‘inflow’), femoro-popliteal and infra-popliteal (‘out­
flow’) segments. One or more segments may be affected 
in a variable and asymmetric manner. Lower limb 
ischaemia presents as two distinct clinical entities: inter-
mittent claudication (IC) and critical limb ischaemia 
(CLI). The presence and severity of ischaemia can be 
determined by clinical examination (Box 18.76) and 
measurement of the ankle–brachial pressure index 
(ABPI), which is the ratio between the (highest systolic) 
ankle and brachial blood pressures. In health, the ABPI 
is over 1.0, in IC typically 0.5–0.9 and in CLI usually 
below 0.5.
Intermittent claudication
This term describes ischaemic pain affecting the muscles 
of the leg upon walking. The pain is usually felt in the 
calf because the disease most commonly affects the 
superficial femoral artery. However, the pain may be felt 
in the thigh or buttock if the iliac arteries are involved. 
Typically, the pain comes on after a reasonably constant 
‘claudication distance’ and rapidly subsides on stopping 
walking. Resumption of walking leads to a return of the 
pain. Most patients describe a cyclical pattern of exacer-
bation and resolution due to the progression of disease 
and the subsequent development of collaterals.
Approximately 5% of middle-aged men report IC. 
Provided patients comply with ‘best medical therapy’ 
(BMT, Box 18.77), only 1–2% per year will deteriorate to 
a point where amputation and/or revascularisation are 
required. However, the annual mortality rate exceeds 
5%, 2–3 times higher than in an equivalent non-
claudicant population. This is because IC is nearly 
always found in association with widespread athero-
sclerosis, so that most claudicants succumb to MI or 
stroke. The mainstay of treatment is BMT, including 
(preferably supervised) exercise therapy. The peripheral 
• Pulses: diminished or absent
• Bruits: denote turbulent flow but bear no relationship to the 
severity of the underlying disease
• Reduced skin temperature
• Pallor on elevation and rubor on dependency (Buerger’s sign)
• Superficial veins that fill sluggishly and empty (‘gutter’) upon 
minimal elevation
• Muscle-wasting
• Skin and nails: dry, thin and brittle
• Loss of hair
18.76  Clinical features of chronic lower limb 
ischaemia
• Smoking cessation
• Regular exercise (30 mins of walking, three times per week)
• Antiplatelet agent (aspirin 75 mg or clopidogrel 75 mg daily)
• Reduction of cholesterol (diet and statin therapy)
• Diagnosis and treatment of diabetes mellitus (all should have 
fasting glucose measured)
• Diagnosis and treatment of frequently associated conditions 
(e.g. hypertension, anaemia, heart failure)
18.77  Best medical therapy (BMT) for peripheral 
arterial disease*
*All patients with any manifestation of PAD should be considered for BMT.
Fig. 18.78  Progressive night pain and the development of tissue 
loss. 
Pain develops, typically in forefoot, about
an hour after patient goes to bed because:
• beneficial effects of gravity on perfusion
  are lost
• patient’s blood pressure and cardiac
  output fall during sleep
Severe pain awakens patient
Pain relieved by hanging limb out of bed.
In due course patient has to get up and
walk about, with resulting loss of sleep
Patient takes to sleeping in chair, leading
to dependent oedema. Interstitial tissue
pressure is increased so arterial perfusion is
further reduced. Vicious circle of increasing
pain and sleep loss
Trivial injury fails to heal, and entry
of bacteria leads to infection and increase
in metabolic demands of foot.
Rapid development of ulcers and gangrene
Cardiovascular disease
18
602
Buerger’s disease (thromboangiitis 
obliterans)
This is an inflammatory obliterative arterial disease that 
is distinct from atherosclerosis and usually presents in 
young (20–30 years) male smokers. It is most common 
in those from the Mediterranean and North Africa. It 
characteristically affects distal arteries, giving rise to 
claudication in the feet or rest pain in the fingers or toes. 
Wrist and ankle pulses are absent but brachial and pop-
liteal pulses are present. Disease also affects the veins, 
giving rise to superficial thrombophlebitis. It often 
remits if the patient stops smoking; sympathectomy and 
prostaglandin infusions may be helpful. Major limb 
amputation is the most frequent outcome if patients con-
tinue to smoke.
Chronic upper limb  
arterial disease
In the arm, the subclavian artery is the most common 
site of disease, which may manifest as:
•	 Arm claudication (rare).
•	 Atheroembolism (blue finger syndrome). Small 
emboli lodge in digital arteries and may be 
confused with Raynaud’s phenomenon (see below) 
but, in this case, the symptoms are unilateral. 
Failure to make the diagnosis may eventually lead 
to amputation.
•	 Subclavian steal. When the arm is used, blood is 
‘stolen’ from the brain via the vertebral artery. This 
leads to vertebro-basilar ischaemia, which is 
characterised by dizziness, cortical blindness and/
or collapse. Where possible, subclavian artery 
disease is treated by means of angioplasty and 
stenting, as surgery (e.g. carotid–subclavian bypass) 
can be difficult.
Raynaud’s phenomenon and 
Raynaud’s disease
Cold (and emotional) stimuli may trigger vasospasm, 
leading to the characteristic sequence of digital pallor 
due to vasospasm, cyanosis due to deoxygenated blood, 
and rubor due to reactive hyperaemia.
Primary Raynaud’s phenomenon (or disease)
This affects 5–10% of young women aged 15–30 years in 
temperate climates and may be familial. It does not 
have extensive and severe (often bilateral) end-stage 
disease, are usually elderly and nearly always have sig-
nificant multisystem comorbidity. Imaging is performed 
using duplex ultrasonography, MRI or CT with intra­
venous injection of contrast agents. Intra-arterial digital 
subtraction angiography (IA-DSA) is usually reserved 
for those undergoing endovascular revascularisation.
Diabetic vascular disease
Approximately 5–10% of patients with PAD have diabe-
tes but this proportion increases to 30–40% in those with 
SLI. Diabetes does not cause obstructive microangiopa-
thy at the capillary level, as previously thought, and so 
is not a contraindication to lower limb revascularisation. 
Nevertheless, the ‘diabetic foot’ does pose a number of 
particular problems (Box 18.78 and p. 833). If the blood 
supply is adequate, then dead tissue can be excised in 
the expectation that healing will occur, provided infec-
tion is controlled and the foot is protected from pressure. 
However, if significant ischaemia is also present, the 
priority is to revascularise the foot if possible. Sadly, 
many diabetic patients present late with extensive tissue 
loss, which accounts for the high amputation rate.
• Prevalence: related almost exponentially to age in developed 
countries, although atherosclerosis is not considered part of 
the normal ageing process.
• Statin therapy: no role in the primary prevention of 
atherosclerotic disease in those over 75 yrs but reduces 
cardiovascular events in those with established vascular 
disease, albeit with no reduction in overall mortality.
• Presentation in the frail: frequently with advanced 
multisystem arterial disease, along with a host of other 
comorbidities.
• Intervention in the frail: in those with extensive disease and 
limited life expectancy, the risks of surgery may outweigh 
the benefits, and symptomatic care is all that should be 
offered.
18.79  Atherosclerotic vascular disease in old age
Feature
Difficulty
Arterial calcification
Spuriously high ABPI due to 
incompressible ankle vessels. Inability 
to clamp arteries for the purposes of 
bypass surgery. Resistant to 
angioplasty
Immunocompromise
Prone to rapidly spreading cellulitis, 
gangrene and osteomyelitis
Multisystem arterial 
disease
Coronary and cerebral arterial disease 
increase the risks of intervention
Distal disease
Diabetic vascular disease has a 
predilection for the calf vessels. 
Although vessels in the foot are often 
spared, performing a satisfactory 
bypass or angioplasty to these small 
vessels is a technical challenge
Sensory neuropathy
Even severe ischaemia and/or tissue 
loss may be completely painless. 
Diabetic patients often present late 
with extensive destruction of the foot. 
Loss of proprioception leads to 
abnormal pressure loads and worsens 
joint destruction (Charcot joints)
Motor neuropathy
Weakness of the long and short flexors 
and extensors leads to abnormal foot 
architecture, abnormal pressure loads, 
callus formation and ulceration
Autonomic 
neuropathy
Leads to a dry foot deficient in sweat 
that normally lubricates the skin and is 
antibacterial. Scaling and fissuring 
create a portal of entry for bacteria. 
Abnormal blood flow in the bones of 
the ankle and foot may also contribute 
to osteopenia and bony collapse
(ABPI = ankle–brachial pressure index)
18.78  Diabetic vascular disease: 
the ‘diabetic foot’
Vascular disease
18
603
progress to ulceration or infarction, and significant pain 
is unusual. The underlying cause is unclear. No investi-
gation is necessary. The patient should be reassured 
and advised to avoid exposure to cold. Long-acting 
nifedipine may be helpful but sympathectomy is not 
indicated.
Secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon  
(or syndrome)
This occurs in older people in association with connec-
tive tissue disease (most commonly systemic sclerosis 
or CREST syndrome, p. 1112), vibration-induced injury 
(from the use of power tools) and thoracic outlet obstruc-
tion (e.g. cervical rib). Unlike primary disease, it is often 
associated with fixed obstruction of the digital arteries, 
fingertip ulceration, and necrosis and pain. The fingers 
must be protected from cold and trauma, infection 
requires treatment with antibiotics, and surgery should 
be avoided if possible. Vasoactive drugs have no clear 
benefit. Sympathectomy helps for a year or two. Prosta-
cyclin infusions are sometimes beneficial.
Acute limb ischaemia
This is most frequently caused by acute thrombotic 
occlusion of a pre-existing stenotic arterial segment, 
thromboembolism, and trauma that may be iatrogenic. 
Apart from paralysis (inability to wiggle toes/fingers) 
and paraesthesia (loss of light touch over the dorsum of 
the foot/hand), the so-called ‘Ps of acute ischaemia’ (Box 
18.80) are non-specific for ischaemia and/or inconsist-
ently related to its severity. Pain on squeezing the calf 
indicates muscle infarction and impending irreversible 
ischaemia.
All patients with suspected acutely ischaemic limbs 
must be discussed immediately with a vascular surgeon; 
a few hours can make the difference between death/
amputation and complete recovery of limb function. If 
there are no contraindications (for example, acute aortic 
dissection or trauma, particularly head injury), an intra-
venous bolus of heparin (3000–5000 U) should be admin-
istered to limit propagation of thrombus and protect the 
collateral circulation. Distinguishing thrombosis from 
embolism is frequently difficult but is important because 
treatment and prognosis are different (Box 18.81). Acute 
limb ischaemia due to thrombosis in situ can usually be 
treated medically in the first instance with intravenous 
heparin (target activated partial thromboplastin time 
(APTT) 2.0–3.0), antiplatelet agents, high-dose statins, 
intravenous fluids to avoid dehydration, correction of 
anaemia, oxygen and sometimes prostaglandins, such 
as iloprost. Careful monitoring is required. Embolism 
will normally result in extensive tissue necrosis within 
6 hours unless the limb is revascularised. The indica-
tions for thrombolysis, if any, remain controversial. 
Irreversible ischaemia mandates early amputation or 
palliative care.
Cerebrovascular/renovascular 
disease and ischaemic gut injury
See Ch. 27 and pp. 494 and 909.
Diseases of the aorta
Aneurysm, dissection and aortitis are the main patholo-
gies (Fig. 18.79).
Aortic aneurysm
This is an abnormal dilatation of the aortic lumen; a true 
aneurysm involves all the layers of the wall, whereas a 
false aneurysm does not.
Aetiology and types of aneurysm
Non-specific aneurysms
Why some patients develop occlusive vascular disease, 
some develop aneurysmal vascular disease and some 
develop both in response to atherosclerosis risk factors 
remains unclear. Unlike occlusive disease, aneurysmal 
disease tends to run in families and genetic factors are 
undoubtedly important. The most common site for ‘non-
specific’ aneurysm formation is the infrarenal abdomi-
nal aorta. The suprarenal abdominal aorta and a variable 
length of the descending thoracic aorta may be affected 
in 10–20% of patients but the ascending aorta is usually 
spared.
Marfan’s syndrome
This disorder of connective tissue is inherited as an auto-
somal dominant trait and is caused by mutations in the 
18.80  Symptoms and signs of acute 
limb ischaemia
Clinical features
Embolism
Thrombosis in situ
Severity
Complete (no 
collaterals)
Incomplete 
(collaterals)
Onset
Seconds or 
minutes
Hours or days
Limb
Leg 3 : 1 arm
Leg 10 : 1 arm
Multiple sites
Up to 15%
Rare
Embolic source
Present (usually 
atrial fibrillation)
Absent
Previous 
claudication
Absent
Present
Palpation of artery
Soft, tender
Hard, calcified
Bruits
Absent
Present
Contralateral leg 
pulses
Present
Absent
Diagnosis
Clinical
Angiography
Treatment
Embolectomy, 
warfarin
Medical, bypass, 
thrombolysis
Prognosis
Loss of life > loss 
of limb
Loss of limb > loss 
of life
18.81  Acute limb ischaemia: distinguishing 
features of embolism and thrombosis in situ
Cardiovascular disease
18
604
fibrillin gene on chromosome 15. Affected systems 
include the skeleton (arachnodactyly, joint hypermobil-
ity, scoliosis, chest deformity and high arched palate), 
the eyes (dislocation of the lens) and the cardiovascular 
system (aortic disease and mitral regurgitation). Weak-
ening of the aortic media leads to aortic root dilatation, 
regurgitation and dissection (see below). Pregnancy is 
particularly hazardous. Chest X-ray, echocardiography, 
MRI or CT may detect aortic dilatation at an early stage 
and can be used to monitor the disease.
Treatment with β-blockers reduces the rate of aortic 
dilatation and the risk of rupture. Elective replacement 
of the ascending aorta may be considered in patients 
with evidence of progressive aortic dilatation but carries 
a mortality of 5–10%.
Aortitis
Syphilis is a rare cause of aortitis that characteristically 
produces saccular aneurysms of the ascending aorta 
containing calcification. Other rare conditions associ-
ated with aortitis include Takayasu’s disease (p. 1116), 
Reiter’s syndrome (p. 1107), giant cell arteritis and 
ankylosing spondylitis (pp. 1105 and 1117).
Thoracic aortic aneurysms
These may produce chest pain, aortic regurgitation, 
compressive symptoms such as stridor (trachea, bron-
chus) and hoarseness (recurrent laryngeal nerve), and 
superior vena cava syndrome (see Fig. 18.79A). If they 
erode into adjacent structures, e.g. aorto-oesophageal 
fistula, massive bleeding occurs.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) are present in 5% 
of men aged over 60 years and 80% are confined to the 
infrarenal segment. Men are affected three times more 
commonly than women. AAAs can present in a number 
of ways (Box 18.82). The usual age at presentation is 
65–75 years for elective presentations and 75–85 years 
for emergency presentations. Ultrasound is the best way 
of establishing the diagnosis and of following up patients 
with asymptomatic aneurysms that are not yet large 
Fig. 18.79  Types of aortic disease and their complications.  A Types of aortic aneurysm.  B Types of aortic dissection. 
DILATED THORACIC,
e.g. Marfan's
ABDOMINAL
Expansion
Thrombus
Embolism
Aortic
regurgitation
Compression,
e.g. of bronchus
Coronary
occlusion
Aortic
regurgitation
Loss of
arm pulse
Neurological
deficit
Renal or
mesenteric
occlusion
Loss of
leg pulse
Type A
Type B
Aortic dissection
Aortic aneurysm
A
B
Diaphragm
SACCULAR THORACIC,
e.g. atheromatous, syphilitic 
Vascular disease
18
605
procedure is approximately 5–8% for elective asympto-
matic AAA, 10–20% for emergency symptomatic AAA 
and 50% for ruptured AAA. However, patients who 
survive the operation to leave hospital have a long- 
term survival which approaches that of the normal 
population. Increasingly, endovascular aneurysm repair 
(EVAR), using a stent-graft introduced via the femoral 
arteries in the groin, is replacing open surgery. It is cost-
effective and likely to become the treatment of choice for 
infra­renal AAA. It is possible to treat many suprarenal 
and thoraco-abdominal aneurysms by EVAR too.
In the UK, a national screening programme for men 
over 65 years of age has been introduced using ultra-
sound scanning. For every 10 000 men scanned, 65 rup-
tures are prevented and 52 lives saved.
Aortic dissection
A breach in the integrity of the aortic wall allows arterial 
blood to enter the media, which is then split into two 
layers, creating a ‘false lumen’ alongside the existing or 
‘true lumen’ (see Fig. 18.79B). The aortic valve may be 
damaged and the branches of the aorta may be compro-
mised. Typically, the false lumen eventually re-enters 
the true lumen, creating a double-barrelled aorta, but it 
may also rupture into the left pleural space or pericar-
dium with fatal consequences.
The primary event is often a spontaneous or iatro-
genic tear in the intima of the aorta; multiple tears or 
entry points are common. Other dissections are trig-
gered by primary haemorrhage in the media of the aorta, 
which then ruptures through the intima into the true 
lumen. This form of spontaneous bleeding from the vasa 
vasorum is sometimes confined to the aortic wall, when 
it may present as a painful intramural haematoma.
Aortic disease and hypertension are the most impor-
tant aetiological factors but other conditions may also be 
implicated (Box 18.84). Chronic dissections may lead to 
aneurysmal dilatation of the aorta, and thoracic aneu-
rysms may be complicated by dissection. It can therefore 
be difficult to identify the primary pathology.
The peak incidence is in the sixth and seventh decades 
but dissection can occur in younger patients, usually in 
association with Marfan’s syndrome, pregnancy or 
trauma; men are twice as frequently affected as women.
Aortic dissection is classified anatomically and for 
management purposes into type A and type B (see 
Fig. 18.79B), involving or sparing the ascending 
aorta, respectively. Type A dissections account for two-
thirds of cases and frequently also extend into the 
descending aorta.
enough to warrant surgical repair. CT provides more 
accurate information about the size and extent of the 
aneurysm, the surrounding structures and whether 
there is any other intra-abdominal pathology. It is the 
standard pre-operative investigation but is not suitable 
for surveillance because of cost and radiation dose.
Management.  Until an asymptomatic AAA has reached 
a maximum of 5.5 cm in diameter, the risks of surgery 
generally outweigh the risks of rupture (Box 18.83). All 
symptomatic AAAs should be considered for repair, not 
only to rid the patient of symptoms but also because 
pain often predates rupture. Distal embolisation is a 
strong indication for repair, regardless of size, because 
otherwise limb loss is common. Most patients with a 
ruptured AAA do not survive to reach hospital, but if 
they do and surgery is thought to be appropriate, there 
must be no delay in getting them to the operating theatre 
to clamp the aorta.
Open AAA repair has been the treatment of choice in 
both the elective and the emergency settings, and entails 
replacing the aneurysmal segment with a prosthetic 
(usually Dacron) graft. The 30-day mortality for this 
‘Ultrasound screening for AAA in men aged 65–75 years, with 
surgical repair of those AAAs that are bigger than 5.5 cm, are 
rapidly growing or become symptomatic, reduces the community 
incidence of rupture by approximately 50% and is 
cost-effective.’
• MASS Study Group. Lancet 2002; 360:1531–1539.
• MASS Study Group. BMJ 2002; 352:1135.
For further information: 
 www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk
18.83  Population screening and prevention of 
ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
Incidental
• On physical examination, plain X-ray or, most commonly, 
abdominal ultrasound
• Even large AAAs can be difficult to feel, so many remain 
undetected until they rupture
• Studies are currently under way to determine whether 
screening will reduce the number of deaths from rupture 
(see Box 18.83)
Pain
• In the central abdomen, back, loin, iliac fossa or groin
Thromboembolic complications
• Thrombus within the aneurysm sac may be a source of 
emboli to the lower limbs
• Less commonly, the aorta may undergo thrombotic occlusion
Compression
• Surrounding structures such as the duodenum (obstruction 
and vomiting) and the inferior vena cava (oedema and deep 
vein thrombosis)
Rupture
• Into the retroperitoneum, the peritoneal cavity or surrounding 
structures (most commonly the inferior vena cava, leading to 
an aortocaval fistula)
18.82  Abdominal aortic aneurysm: common 
presentations
• Hypertension (in 80%)
• Aortic atherosclerosis
• Non-specific aortic 
aneurysm
• Aortic coarctation (p. 632)
• Collagen disorders (e.g. 
Marfan’s syndrome, 
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome)
• Fibromuscular dysplasia
• Previous aortic surgery 
(e.g. CABG, aortic valve 
replacement)
• Pregnancy (usually third 
trimester)
• Trauma
• Iatrogenic (e.g. cardiac 
catheterisation, intra-aortic 
balloon pumping)
(CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting)
18.84  Factors that may predispose to 
aortic dissection
Cardiovascular disease
18
606
Investigations
The chest X-ray characteristically shows broadening of 
the upper mediastinum and distortion of the aortic 
‘knuckle’, but these findings are variable and are absent 
in 10% of cases. A left-sided pleural effusion is common. 
The ECG may show left ventricular hypertrophy in 
patients with hypertension, or rarely changes of acute 
MI (usually inferior). Doppler echocardiography may 
Clinical features
Involvement of the ascending aorta typically gives rise 
to anterior chest pain, and involvement of the descend-
ing aorta to intrascapular pain. The pain is typically 
described as ‘tearing’ and very abrupt in onset; collapse 
is common. Unless there is major haemorrhage, the 
patient is invariably hypertensive. There may be asym-
metry of the brachial, carotid or femoral pulses and 
signs of aortic regurgitation. Occlusion of aortic branches 
may cause MI (coronary), stroke (carotid) paraplegia 
(spinal), mesenteric infarction with an acute abdomen 
(coeliac and superior mesenteric), renal failure (renal) 
and acute limb (usually leg) ischaemia.
Fig. 18.80  Echocardiograms from a patient with a chronic aortic 
dissection. Colour flow Doppler shows flow from the larger false lumen 
(FL) into the true lumen (TL), characteristic of chronic disease. 
TL
FL
Fig. 18.81  Sagittal view of an MRI scan from a patient with 
longstanding aortic dissection, illustrating a biluminal aorta. There 
is sluggish flow in the false lumen (FL), accounting for its grey appearance. 
(TL = true lumen) 
FL
TL
Fig. 18.82  Images from a patient with an acute type B aortic dissection that had ruptured into the left pleural space and was repaired 
by deploying an endoluminal stent graft.  A CT scan illustrating an intimal flap (arrow) in the descending aorta and a large pleural effusion.
 B Aortogram illustrating aneurysmal dilatation; a stent graft has been introduced from the right femoral artery and is about to be deployed.  C CT scan 
after endoluminal repair. The pleural effusion has been drained but there is a haematoma around the descending aorta.  D Aortogram illustrating the stent 
graft.  E Three-dimensional reconstruction of aortic stent graft. 
A
B
D
C
E
Vascular disease
18
607
Hypertension is more common in some ethnic groups, 
particularly African Americans and Japanese, and 
approximately 40–60% is explained by genetic factors. 
Important environmental factors include a high salt 
intake, heavy consumption of alcohol, obesity, lack of 
exercise and impaired intrauterine growth. There is little 
evidence that ‘stress’ causes hypertension.
In about 5% of cases, hypertension can be shown to 
be a consequence of a specific disease or abnormality 
leading to sodium retention and/or peripheral vasocon-
striction (secondary hypertension, Box 18.86).
Approach to newly diagnosed hypertension
Hypertension is predominantly an asymptomatic condi-
tion and the diagnosis is usually made at routine exami-
nation or when a complication arises. A BP check is 
advisable every 5 years in adults.
show aortic regurgitation, a dilated aortic root and, occa-
sionally, the flap of the dissection. Transoesophageal 
echocardiography is particularly helpful because trans­
thoracic echocardiography can only provide images of 
the first 3–4 cm of the ascending aorta (Fig. 18.80). CT 
and MRI angiography (Figs 18.81 and 18.82) are both 
highly specific and sensitive.
Management
The early mortality of acute dissection is approximately 
1–5% per hour and so treatment is urgently required. 
Initial management comprises pain control and anti­
hypertensive treatment. Type A dissections require 
emergency surgery to replace the ascending aorta. Type 
B aneurysms are treated medically unless there is actual 
or impending external rupture, or vital organ (gut, 
kidneys) or limb ischaemia, as the morbidity and mortal-
ity associated with surgery are very high. The aim of 
medical management is to maintain a mean arterial pres-
sure (MAP) of 60–75 mmHg to reduce the force of the 
ejection of blood from the LV. First-line therapy is 
with β-blockers; the additional α-blocking properties of 
labetalol make it especially useful. Rate-limiting calcium 
channel blockers, such as verapamil or diltiazem, are 
used if β-blockers are contraindicated. Sodium nitro-
prusside may be considered if these fail to control BP 
adequately.
Percutaneous or minimal access endoluminal repair 
is sometimes possible and involves either ‘fenestrating’ 
(perforating) the intimal flap so that blood can return 
from the false to the true lumen (so decompressing the 
former), or implanting a stent graft placed from the 
femoral artery (see Fig. 18.82).
Hypertension
Within any population, blood pressure values occur 
within a continuum, and are determined by mechanical, 
hormonal and environmental factors. Any definition 
of hypertension therefore utilises arbitrary threshold 
values within this continuum. Systemic BP rises with 
age, and the incidence of cardiovascular disease (par-
ticularly stroke and coronary artery disease) is closely 
related to average BP at all ages, even when BP readings 
are within the so-called ‘normal range’.
The cardiovascular risks associated with BP depend 
upon the combination of risk factors in an individual, 
such as age, gender, weight, physical activity, smoking, 
family history, serum cholesterol, diabetes mellitus and 
pre-existing vascular disease. Thus a practical definition 
of hypertension is ‘the level of BP at which the benefits 
of treatment outweigh the costs and hazards’. The British 
Hypertension Society classification is provided in Box 
18.85 and is consistent with those defined by the Euro-
pean Society of Hypertension and the World Health 
Organization–International Society of Hypertension.
Aetiology
In more than 95% of cases, a specific underlying cause 
of hypertension cannot be found. Such patients are said 
to have essential hypertension. The pathogenesis is not 
clearly understood. Many factors may contribute to its 
development, including renal dysfunction, peripheral 
resistance vessel tone, endothelial dysfunction, auto-
nomic tone, insulin resistance and neurohumoral factors. 
Category
Systolic BP 
(mmHg)
Diastolic BP 
(mmHg)
BP
Optimal
< 120
< 80
Normal
< 130
85
High normal
130–139
85–89
Hypertension
Grade 1 (mild)
140–159
90–99
Grade 2 (moderate)
160–179
100–109
Grade 3 (severe)
≥ 180
> 110
Isolated systolic hypertension
Grade 1
140–159
< 90
Grade 2
≥ 160
< 90
18.85  Definition of hypertension
Alcohol
Obesity
Pregnancy (pre-eclampsia)
Renal disease (Ch. 17)
• Parenchymal renal disease, 
particularly 
glomerulonephritis
• Renal vascular disease
• Polycystic kidney disease
Endocrine disease (Ch. 20)
• Phaeochromocytoma
• Cushing’s syndrome
• Primary hyperaldosteronism 
(Conn’s syndrome)
• Glucocorticoid-suppressible 
hyperaldosteronism
• Hyperparathyroidism
• Acromegaly
• Primary hypothyroidism
• Thyrotoxicosis
• Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia due to 
11-β-hydroxylase or 
17-α-hydroxylase 
deficiency
• Liddle’s syndrome (p. 441)
• 11-β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase deficiency
Drugs
• e.g. Oral contraceptives containing oestrogens, anabolic 
steroids, corticosteroids, NSAIDs, carbenoxolone, 
sympathomimetic agents
Coarctation of the aorta (p. 632)
18.86  Causes of secondary hypertension
Cardiovascular disease
18
608
The objectives of the initial evaluation of a patient 
with high BP readings are:
•	 to obtain accurate, representative BP measurements
•	 to identify contributory factors and any underlying 
cause (secondary hypertension)
•	 to assess other risk factors and quantify 
cardiovascular risk
•	 to detect any complications (target organ damage) 
that are already present
•	 to identify comorbidity that may influence the 
choice of antihypertensive therapy.
These goals are attained by a careful history, clinical 
examination and some simple investigations.
Measurement of blood pressure
A decision to embark upon antihypertensive therapy 
effectively commits the patient to life-long treatment, so 
BP readings must be as accurate as possible.
Measurements should be made to the nearest 
2 mmHg, in the sitting position with the arm supported, 
and repeated after 5 minutes’ rest if the first recording 
is high (Box 18.87). To avoid spuriously high readings 
in obese subjects, the cuff should contain a bladder 
that encompasses at least two-thirds of the arm 
circumference.
Home and ambulatory BP recordings
Exercise, anxiety, discomfort and unfamiliar surround-
ings can all lead to a transient rise in BP. Sphygmoma-
nometry, particularly when performed by a doctor, can 
cause an unrepresentative surge in BP which has been 
termed ‘white coat’ hypertension, and as many as 20% 
of patients with apparent hypertension in the clinic may 
have a normal BP when it is recorded by automated 
devices used at home. The risk of cardiovascular disease 
in these patients is less than that in patients with sus-
tained hypertension but greater than that in normoten-
sive subjects.
A series of automated ambulatory BP measurements 
obtained over 24 hours or longer provides a better 
profile than a limited number of clinic readings and 
correlates more closely with evidence of target organ 
damage than casual BP measurements. Treatment 
thresholds and targets (see Box 18.93, p. 611) must be 
adjusted downwards, however, because ambulatory 
BP readings are systematically lower (approximately 
12/7 mmHg) than clinic measurements. The average 
ambulatory daytime (not 24-hour or night-time) BP 
should be used to guide management decisions.
Patients can measure their own BP at home using a 
range of commercially available semi-automatic devices. 
The value of such measurements is less well established 
and is dependent on the environment and timing of the 
readings measured. Home or ambulatory BP measure-
ments are particularly helpful in patients with unusually 
labile BP, those with refractory hypertension, those who 
may have symptomatic hypotension, and those in whom 
white coat hypertension is suspected.
History
Family history, lifestyle (exercise, salt intake, smoking 
habit) and other risk factors should be recorded. A 
careful history will identify those patients with drug- or 
alcohol-induced hypertension and may elicit the symp-
toms of other causes of secondary hypertension, such as 
phaeochromocytoma (paroxysmal headache, palpita-
tion and sweating, p. 781) or complications such as coro-
nary artery disease (e.g. angina, breathlessness).
Examination
Radio-femoral delay (coarctation of the aorta; see Fig. 
18.97, p. 632), enlarged kidneys (polycystic kidney 
disease), abdominal bruits (renal artery stenosis) and the 
characteristic facies and habitus of Cushing’s syndrome 
are all examples of physical signs that may help to iden-
tify causes of secondary hypertension (see Box 18.86). 
Examination may also reveal features of important risk 
factors, such as central obesity and hyperlipidaemia 
(tendon xanthomas and so on). Most abnormal signs are 
due to the complications of hypertension.
Non-specific findings may include left ventricular 
hypertrophy (apical heave), accentuation of the aortic 
component of the second heart sound, and a fourth heart 
sound. The optic fundi are often abnormal (see Fig. 18.83 
below) and there may be evidence of generalised 
atheroma or specific complications, such as aortic aneu-
rysm or peripheral vascular disease.
Target organ damage
The adverse effects of hypertension on the organs can 
often be detected clinically.
Blood vessels
In larger arteries (> 1 mm in diameter), the internal 
elastic lamina is thickened, smooth muscle is hypertro-
phied and fibrous tissue is deposited. The vessels dilate 
and become tortuous, and their walls become less com-
pliant. In smaller arteries (< 1 mm), hyaline arterio­
sclerosis occurs in the wall, the lumen narrows and 
aneurysms may develop. Widespread atheroma devel-
ops and may lead to coronary and cerebrovascular 
disease, particularly if other risk factors (e.g. smoking, 
hyperlipidaemia, diabetes) are present.
These structural changes in the vasculature often 
perpetuate and aggravate hypertension by increasing 
peripheral vascular resistance and reducing renal blood 
flow, thereby activating the renin–angiotensin–aldoster-
one axis (p. 547).
Hypertension is a major risk factor in the patho­
genesis of aortic aneurysm and aortic dissection.
• Use a machine that has been validated, well maintained and 
properly calibrated
• Measure sitting BP routinely, with additional standing BP in 
elderly and diabetic patients and those with possible postural 
hypotension
• Remove tight clothing from the arm
• Support the arm at the level of the heart
• Use a cuff of appropriate size (the bladder must encompass 
more than two-thirds of the arm)
• Lower the pressure slowly (2 mmHg per second)
• Read the BP to the nearest 2 mmHg
• Use phase V (disappearance of sounds) to measure  
diastolic BP
• Take two measurements at each visit
18.87  How to measure blood pressure
Vascular disease
18
609
‘Malignant’ or ‘accelerated’ phase 
hypertension
This rare condition may complicate hypertension of any 
aetiology and is characterised by accelerated microvas-
cular damage with necrosis in the walls of small arteries 
and arterioles (‘fibrinoid necrosis’) and by intravascular 
thrombosis. The diagnosis is based on evidence of high 
BP and rapidly progressive end organ damage, such as 
retinopathy (grade 3 or 4), renal dysfunction (especially 
proteinuria) and/or hypertensive encephalopathy (see 
above). Left ventricular failure may occur and, if this is 
untreated, death occurs within months.
Investigations
All hypertensive patients should undergo a limited 
number of investigations (Box 18.89). Additional inves-
tigations are appropriate in selected patients (Box 18.90).
Management
Quantification of cardiovascular risk
The sole objective of antihypertensive therapy is to 
reduce the incidence of adverse cardiovascular events, 
particularly coronary artery disease, stroke and heart 
failure. Randomised controlled trials have demonstrated 
that antihypertensive therapy can reduce the incidence 
of stroke and, to a lesser extent, coronary artery disease 
(Box 18.91). The relative benefits (approximately 30% 
reduction in risk of stroke and 20% reduction in risk of 
coronary artery disease) are similar in all patient groups, 
Central nervous system
Stroke is a common complication of hypertension and 
may be due to cerebral haemorrhage or infarction. 
Carotid atheroma and TIAs are more common in hyper-
tensive patients. Subarachnoid haemorrhage is also 
associated with hypertension.
Hypertensive encephalopathy is a rare condition 
characterised by high BP and neurological symptoms, 
including transient disturbances of speech or vision, 
paraesthesiae, disorientation, fits and loss of conscious-
ness. Papilloedema is common. A CT scan of the brain 
often shows haemorrhage in and around the basal 
ganglia; however, the neurological deficit is usually 
reversible if the hypertension is properly controlled.
Retina
The optic fundi reveal a gradation of changes linked to 
the severity of hypertension; fundoscopy can, therefore, 
provide an indication of the arteriolar damage occurring 
elsewhere (Box 18.88).
‘Cotton wool’ exudates are associated with retinal 
ischaemia or infarction, and fade in a few weeks (Fig. 
18.83A). ‘Hard’ exudates (small, white, dense deposits 
of lipid) and microaneurysms (‘dot’ haemorrhages) are 
more characteristic of diabetic retinopathy (see Fig. 
21.12, p. 829). Hypertension is also associated with 
central retinal vein thrombosis (Fig. 18.83B).
Fig. 18.83  Retinal changes in hypertension.  A Grade 4 
hypertensive retinopathy showing swollen optic disc, retinal haemorrhages 
and multiple cotton wool spots (infarcts).  B Central retinal vein 
thrombosis showing swollen optic disc and widespread fundal 
haemorrhage, commonly associated with systemic hypertension. 
A
B
• Grade 1
Arteriolar thickening, tortuosity and increased 
reflectiveness (‘silver wiring’)
• Grade 2
Grade 1 plus constriction of veins at arterial 
crossings (‘arteriovenous nipping’)
• Grade 3
Grade 2 plus evidence of retinal ischaemia 
(flame-shaped or blot haemorrhages and 
‘cotton wool’ exudates)
• Grade 4
Grade 3 plus papilloedema
18.88  Hypertensive retinopathy
Heart
The excess cardiac mortality and morbidity associated 
with hypertension are largely due to a higher incidence 
of coronary artery disease. High BP places a pressure 
load on the heart and may lead to left ventricular hyper-
trophy with a forceful apex beat and fourth heart sound. 
ECG or echocardiographic evidence of left ventricular 
hypertrophy is highly predictive of cardiovascular 
complications and therefore particularly useful in risk 
assessment.
Atrial fibrillation is common and may be due to 
diastolic dysfunction caused by left ventricular hyper-
trophy or the effects of coronary artery disease.
Severe hypertension can cause left ventricular failure 
in the absence of coronary artery disease, particularly 
when renal function, and therefore sodium excretion, 
are impaired.
Kidneys
Long-standing hypertension may cause proteinuria and 
progressive renal failure (p. 478) by damaging the renal 
vasculature.
Cardiovascular disease
18
610
Patients with diabetes or cardiovascular disease 
are at particularly high risk and the threshold for 
initiating antihypertensive therapy is therefore lower 
(≥ 140/90 mmHg) in these patient groups. The thresh-
olds for treatment in the elderly are the same as for 
younger patients (Box 18.92).
Treatment targets
The optimum BP for reduction of major cardiovascular 
events has been found to be 139/83 mmHg, and even 
lower in patients with diabetes mellitus. Moreover, 
reducing BP below this level causes no harm. The targets 
suggested by the British Hypertension Society (Box 
18.93) are ambitious. Primary care strategies have been 
devised to improve screening and detection of hyperten-
sion that, in the past, remained undetected in up to half 
of affected individuals. Application of new guidelines 
should help establish patients on appropriate treatment, 
and allow step-up if lifestyle modification and first-line 
drug therapy fail to control patients’ BP.
Patients taking antihypertensive therapy require 
follow-up at 3-monthly intervals to monitor BP, mini-
mise side-effects and reinforce lifestyle advice.
Non-drug therapy
Appropriate lifestyle measures may obviate the need for 
drug therapy in patients with borderline hypertension, 
reduce the dose and/or the number of drugs required 
in patients with established hypertension, and directly 
reduce cardiovascular risk.
Correcting obesity, reducing alcohol intake, restrict-
ing salt intake, taking regular physical exercise and 
increasing consumption of fruit and vegetables can all 
lower BP. Moreover, quitting smoking, eating oily fish 
and adopting a diet that is low in saturated fat may 
produce further reductions in cardiovascular risk.
so the absolute benefit of treatment (total number of 
events prevented) is greatest in those at highest risk. For 
example, to extrapolate from the Medical Research 
Council (MRC) Mild Hypertension Trial (1985), 566 
young patients would have to be treated with bendro­
flumethiazide for 1 year to prevent 1 stroke, while in the 
MRC trial of antihypertensive treatment in the elderly 
(1992), 1 stroke was prevented for every 286 patients 
treated for 1 year.
A formal estimate of absolute cardiovascular risk, 
which takes account of all the relevant risk factors, may 
help to determine whether the likely benefits of therapy 
will outweigh its costs and hazards. A variety of risk 
algorithms are available for this purpose (see Fig. 18.62, 
p. 582). Most of the excess morbidity and mortality asso-
ciated with hypertension is attributable to coronary 
artery disease and many treatment guidelines are there-
fore based on estimates of the 10-year coronary artery 
disease risk. Total cardiovascular risk can be estimated 
by multiplying coronary artery disease risk by 4/3 (i.e. 
if coronary artery disease risk is 30%, cardiovascular risk 
is 40%). The value of this approach can be illustrated by 
comparing the two hypothetical cases on page 582.
Threshold for intervention
Systolic BP and diastolic BP are both powerful predic-
tors of cardiovascular risk. The British Hypertension 
Society management guidelines therefore utilise both 
readings, and treatment should be initiated if they 
exceed the given threshold (Fig. 18.84).
• Prevalence: affects more than half of all people over the age 
of 60 yrs (including isolated systolic hypertension).
• Risks: hypertension is the most important risk factor for MI, 
heart failure and stroke in older people.
• Benefit of treatment: absolute benefit from therapy is 
greatest in older people (at least up to age 80 yrs).
• Target BP: similar to that for younger patients.
• Tolerance of treatment: antihypertensives are tolerated as 
well as in younger patients.
• Drug of choice: low-dose thiazides but, in the presence of 
coexistent disease (e.g. gout, diabetes), other agents may be 
more appropriate.
18.92  Hypertension in old age
‘Diuretics or β-blockers have been shown to reduce the risk of 
coronary artery disease by 16%, stroke by 38%, cardiovascular 
death by 21% and all causes of mortality by 13%. The effects of 
ACE inhibitors and calcium antagonists are similar. NNTB varies 
greatly, according to the absolute baseline risk of cardiovascular 
disease.’
• Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration. Lancet 2003; 
362:1527–1535.
18.91  Benefit of antihypertensive drug therapy
• Chest X-ray: to detect cardiomegaly, heart failure, coarctation 
of the aorta
• Ambulatory BP recording: to assess borderline or ‘white coat’ 
hypertension
• Echocardiogram: to detect or quantify left ventricular 
hypertrophy
• Renal ultrasound: to detect possible renal disease
• Renal angiography: to detect or confirm presence of renal 
artery stenosis
• Urinary catecholamines: to detect possible 
phaeochromocytoma (p. 781)
• Urinary cortisol and dexamethasone suppression test: to 
detect possible Cushing’s syndrome (p. 773)
• Plasma renin activity and aldosterone: to detect possible 
primary aldosteronism (p. 780)
18.90  Hypertension: investigation of selected 
patients
• Urinalysis for blood, protein and glucose
• Blood urea, electrolytes and creatinine
N.B. Hypokalaemic alkalosis may indicate primary 
hyperaldosteronism but is usually due to diuretic therapy
• Blood glucose
• Serum total and HDL cholesterol
• Thyroid function tests
• 12-lead ECG (left ventricular hypertrophy, coronary artery 
disease)
(HDL = high-density lipoprotein)
18.89  Hypertension: investigation of all patients
Vascular disease
18
611
loop diuretics, such as furosemide (40 mg daily) or 
bumetanide (1 mg daily), have few advantages over thi-
azides in the treatment of hypertension, unless there is 
substantial renal impairment or they are used in con-
junction with an ACE inhibitor.
ACE inhibitors.  ACE inhibitors (e.g. enalapril 20 mg 
daily, ramipril 5–10 mg daily or lisinopril 10–40 mg 
daily) inhibit the conversion of angiotensin I to angio­
tensin II and are usually well tolerated. They should 
be used with particular care in patients with impaired 
renal function or renal artery stenosis because they can 
reduce the filtration pressure in the glomeruli and pre-
cipitate renal failure. Electrolytes and creatinine should 
be checked before and 1–2 weeks after commencing 
therapy. Side-effects include first-dose hypotension, 
cough, rash, hyperkalaemia and renal dysfunction.
Angiotensin receptor blockers.  Angiotensin receptor 
blockers (e.g. irbesartan 150–300 mg daily, valsartan 
Fig. 18.84  Management of hypertension: British Hypertension Society guidelines. 1Signs of papilloedema or retinal haemorrhage. 2Labile or 
postural hypotension, headache, palpitations, pallor and diaphoresis (ABPM = ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; HBPM = home blood pressure 
monitoring). From NICE Clinical Guideline 127 – see p. 641.
Clinic blood pressure
≥ 140/90 mmHg
Offer
antihypertensive
drug treatment
Consider alternative
causes for target
organ damage
Clinic blood pressure
≥ 180/110 mmHg
Consider starting hypertensive
drug treatment immediately
Offer ABPM (or HBPM if ABPM is declined
or not tolerated)
Offer lifestyle interventions
Offer patient education and interventions to support
adherence to treatment
Offer annual review of care to monitor blood pressure, provide
support and discuss lifestyle, symptoms and medication
Offer to check blood pressure
at least every 5 yrs, more
often if blood pressure is close
to 140/90 mmHg
Offer to assess cardiovascular risk
and target organ damage
ABPM/HBPM
≥ 135/85 mmHg
Stage 1 hypertension
ABPM/HBPM
≥ 150/95 mmHg
Stage 2 hypertension
ABPM/HBPM
< 135/85 mmHg
Normotensive
If accelerated
hypertension1
or suspected
phaeochromocytoma2
If target organ damage
present or 10-yr
cardiovascular risk > 20%
Consider
specialist
referral
If < 40 yrs
If evidence
of target organ
damage
Refer
same day
for
specialist
care
Clinic blood pressure
< 140/90 mmHg
Normotensive
Antihypertensive drugs
Thiazide and other diuretics.  The mechanism of action 
of these drugs is incompletely understood and it may 
take up to a month for the maximum effect to be 
observed. An appropriate daily dose is 2.5 mg bendro­
flumethiazide or 0.5 mg cyclopenthiazide. More potent 
Age
Clinic BP (mmHg)
Ambulatory or home
BP (mmHg)2
< 80 yrs
< 140/90
< 135/85
≥ 80 yrs
< 150/90
< 140/85
1Both systolic and diastolic values should be attained.
2Average BP during waking hours.
18.93  Optimal target blood pressures1
Cardiovascular disease
18
612
Emergency treatment of accelerated phase or 
malignant hypertension
In accelerated phase hypertension, lowering BP too 
quickly may compromise tissue perfusion (due to altered 
autoregulation) and can cause cerebral damage, includ-
ing occipital blindness, and precipitate coronary or renal 
insufficiency. Even in the presence of cardiac failure or 
hypertensive encephalopathy, a controlled reduction 
to a level of about 150/90 mmHg over a period of 
24–48 hours is ideal.
In most patients, it is possible to avoid parenteral 
therapy and bring BP under control with bed rest 
and oral drug therapy. Intravenous or intramuscular 
labetalol (2 mg/min to a maximum of 200 mg), intra­
venous glyceryl trinitrate (0.6–1.2 mg/hr), intramuscu-
lar hydralazine (5 or 10 mg aliquots repeated at half- 
hourly intervals) and intravenous sodium nitroprusside 
(0.3–1.0 µg/kg body weight/min) are all effective but 
require careful supervision, preferably in a high-
dependency unit.
Refractory hypertension
The common causes of treatment failure in hypertension 
are non-adherence to drug therapy, inadequate therapy, 
and failure to recognise an underlying cause, such as 
40–160 mg daily) block the angiotensin II type I receptor 
and have similar effects to ACE inhibitors; however, 
they do not cause cough and are better tolerated.
Calcium channel antagonists.  The dihydropyridines 
(e.g. amlodipine 5–10 mg daily, nifedipine 30–90 mg 
daily) are effective and usually well-tolerated antihyper-
tensive drugs that are particularly useful in older people. 
Side-effects include flushing, palpitations and fluid 
retention. The rate-limiting calcium channel antagonists 
(e.g. diltiazem 200–300 mg daily, verapamil 240 mg 
daily) can be useful when hypertension coexists with 
angina but they may cause bradycardia. The main side-
effect of verapamil is constipation.
Beta-blockers.  These are no longer used as first-line 
antihypertensive therapy, except in patients with 
another indication for the drug (e.g. angina). Metoprolol 
(100–200 mg daily), atenolol (50–100 mg daily) and biso-
prolol (5–10 mg daily) preferentially block cardiac β1-
adrenoceptors, as opposed to the β2-adrenoceptors that 
mediate vasodilatation and bronchodilatation.
Labetalol and carvedilol.  Labetalol (200 mg–2.4 g daily 
in divided doses) and carvedilol (6.25–25 mg twice 
daily) are combined β- and α-adrenoceptor antagonists 
which are sometimes more effective than pure β-blockers. 
Labetalol can be used as an infusion in malignant phase 
hypertension (see below).
Other drugs.  A variety of vasodilators may be used. 
These 
include 
the 
α1-adrenoceptor 
antagonists 
(α-blockers), such as prazosin (0.5–20 mg daily in 
divided doses), indoramin (25–100 mg twice daily) and 
doxazosin (1–16 mg daily), and drugs that act directly 
on vascular smooth muscle, such as hydralazine 
(25–100 mg twice daily) and minoxidil (10–50 mg daily). 
Side-effects include first-dose and postural hypotension, 
headache, tachycardia and fluid retention. Minoxidil 
also causes increased facial hair and is therefore unsuit-
able for female patients.
Choice of antihypertensive drug
Trials that have compared thiazides, calcium antago-
nists, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers 
have not shown consistent differences in outcome, effi-
cacy, side-effects or quality of life. Beta-blockers, which 
previously featured as first-line therapy in guidelines, 
have a weaker evidence base (see Box 18.91). The choice 
of antihypertensive therapy is initially dictated by the 
patient’s age and ethnic background, although cost and 
convenience will influence the exact drug and prepara-
tion used. Response to initial therapy and side-effects 
guides subsequent treatment. Comorbid conditions also 
have an influence on initial drug selection (Box 18.94); 
for example, a β-blocker might be the most appropriate 
treatment for a patient with angina. Thiazide diuretics 
and dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonists are 
the most suitable drugs for treatment in older people.
Although some patients can be treated with a single 
antihypertensive drug, a combination of drugs is often 
required to achieve optimal BP control (Fig. 18.85). Com-
bination therapy may be desirable for other reasons; for 
example, low-dose therapy with two drugs may produce 
fewer unwanted effects than treatment with the 
maximum dose of a single drug. Some drug combina-
tions have complementary or synergistic actions; for 
example, thiazides increase activity of the renin–
angiotensin system, while ACE inhibitors block it.
Fig. 18.85  Antihypertensive drug combinations. Black patients are 
those of African or Caribbean descent, and not mixed-race, Asian or 
Chinese patients. 1A = ACE inhibitor or consider angiotensin II receptor 
blocker (ARB); choose a low-cost ARB. 2C = calcium channel blocker 
(CCB); a CCB is preferred but consider a thiazide-like diuretic if a CCB is 
not tolerated or the person has oedema, evidence of heart failure or a high 
risk of heart failure. 3D = thiazide-type diuretic. 4Consider a low dose of 
spironolactone or higher doses of a thiazide-like diuretic. At the time of 
publication by NICE (August 2011), spironolactone did not have a UK 
marketing authorisation for this indication. Informed consent should be 
obtained and documented. 5Consider an α- or β-blocker if further diuretic 
therapy is not tolerated, or is contraindicated or ineffective. From NICE 
Clinical Guideline 127 – see p. 641.
Aged < 55 yrs
A1
A + C
C2
Step 1
Step 2
A + C + D
3
Step 3
Resistant hypertension
A + C + D + consider
further diuretic4 or 
α- or β-blocker5
Consider seeking expert
advice
Step 4
Aged > 55 yrs or
black person
of African or
Caribbean family
origin of any age
Diseases of the heart valves
18
613
Class of drug
Compelling indications
Possible indications
Caution
Compelling 
contraindications
α-blockers
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
–
Postural hypotension, 
heart failure1
Urinary incontinence
ACE inhibitors
Heart failure
Left ventricular dysfunction, 
post-MI or established coronary 
artery disease
Type 1 diabetic nephropathy
Secondary stroke prevention4
Chronic renal disease2
Type 2 diabetic 
nephropathy
Renal impairment2
Peripheral vascular 
disease3
Pregnancy
Renovascular 
disease2
Angiotensin II 
receptor blockers
ACE inhibitor intolerance
Type 2 diabetic nephropathy
Hypertension with left 
ventricular hypertrophy
Heart failure in ACE-intolerant 
patients, after MI
Left ventricular dysfunction 
after MI
Intolerance of other 
antihypertensive drugs
Proteinuric renal disease, 
chronic renal disease2 
Heart failure
Renal impairment2
Peripheral vascular 
disease3
Pregnancy
β-blockers
MI, angina
Heart failure5
–
Heart failure5
Peripheral vascular 
disease
Diabetes (except with 
coronary artery disease)
Asthma or chronic 
obstructive 
pulmonary disease
Heart block
Calcium channel 
blockers 
(dihydropyridine)
Older patients, isolated systolic 
hypertension
Angina
–
–
Calcium channel 
blockers 
(rate-limiting)
Angina
Older patients
Combination with 
β-blockade
Atrioventricular 
block, heart failure
Thiazides or 
thiazide-like 
diuretics
Older patients, isolated systolic 
hypertension, heart failure, 
secondary stroke prevention
–
–
Gout6
1ln heart failure when used as monotherapy. 2ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers may be beneficial in chronic renal failure and renovascular disease 
but should be used with caution, close supervision and specialist advice when there is established and significant renal impairment. 3Caution with ACE inhibitors 
and angiotensin II receptor blockers in peripheral vascular disease because of association with renovascular disease. 4In combination with a thiazide or 
thiazide-like diuretic. 5β-blockers are used increasingly to treat stable heart failure but may worsen acute heart failure. 6Thiazides or thiazide-like diuretics may 
sometimes be necessary to control BP in people with a history of gout, ideally used in combination with allopurinol.
18.94  The influence of comorbidity on the choice of antihypertensive drug therapy
renal artery stenosis or phaeochromocytoma; of these, 
the first is by far the most prevalent. There is no easy 
solution to compliance problems but simple treatment 
regimens, attempts to improve rapport with the patient 
and careful supervision may all help.
Adjuvant drug therapy
•	 Aspirin. Antiplatelet therapy is a powerful means 
of reducing cardiovascular risk but may cause 
bleeding, particularly intracerebral haemorrhage,  
in a small number of patients. The benefits are 
thought to outweigh the risks in hypertensive 
patients aged 50 years or over who have well-
controlled BP and either target organ damage, 
diabetes or a 10-year coronary artery disease risk of 
at least 15% (or 10-year cardiovascular disease risk 
of at least 20%).
•	 Statins. Treating hyperlipidaemia can produce a 
substantial reduction in cardiovascular risk. These 
drugs are strongly indicated in patients who have 
established vascular disease, or hypertension with a 
high (at least 20% in 10 years) risk of developing 
cardiovascular disease (p. 583).
DISEASES OF THE HEART VALVES
A diseased valve may be narrowed (stenosed) or may 
fail to close adequately, and thus permit regurgitation of 
blood. ‘Incompetence’ is a less precise term for regurgi-
tation or reflux, and should be avoided. Box 18.95 gives 
the principal causes of valve disease.
Doppler echocardiography is the most useful tech-
nique for assessing valvular heart disease (p. 536) but 
may also detect minor and even ‘physiological’ abnor-
malities, e.g. trivial mitral regurgitation. Disease of the 
heart valves may progress with time and selected patients 
require regular review every 1 or 2 years, to ensure that 
deterioration is detected before complications, such as 
heart failure, ensue. Patients with valvular heart disease 
are susceptible to bacterial endocarditis, which can be 
prevented by good dental hygiene. The routine use of 
Cardiovascular disease
18
614
evidence of preceding streptococcal infection in cases of 
isolated chorea or pancarditis, if other causes for these 
have been excluded. In cases of established rheumatic 
heart disease or prior rheumatic fever, a diagnosis of 
acute rheumatic fever can be made based only on the 
presence of multiple minor criteria and evidence of pre-
ceding group A streptococcal pharyngitis.
Carditis
A ‘pancarditis’ involves the endocardium, myocardium 
and pericardium to varying degrees. Its incidence 
declines with increasing age, ranging from 90% at 
3 years to around 30% in adolescence. It may manifest 
as breathlessness (due to heart failure or pericardial effu-
sion), palpitations or chest pain (usually due to pericar-
ditis or pancarditis). Other features include tachycardia, 
antibiotic prophylaxis at times of bacteraemia, e.g. dental 
extraction, is no longer recommended.
Rheumatic heart disease
Acute rheumatic fever
Incidence and pathogenesis
Acute rheumatic fever usually affects children (most 
commonly between 5 and 15 years) or young adults, and 
has become very rare in Western Europe and North 
America. However, it remains endemic in parts of Asia, 
Africa and South America, with an annual incidence in 
some countries of more than 100 per 100 000, and is the 
most common cause of acquired heart disease in child-
hood and adolescence.
The condition is triggered by an immune-mediated 
delayed response to infection with specific strains of 
group A streptococci, which have antigens that may 
cross-react with cardiac myosin and sarcolemmal 
membrane protein. Antibodies produced against the 
streptococcal antigens cause inflammation in the endo-
cardium, myocardium and pericardium, as well as the 
joints and skin. Histologically, fibrinoid degeneration is 
seen in the collagen of connective tissues. Aschoff 
nodules are pathognomonic and occur only in the heart. 
They are composed of multinucleated giant cells sur-
rounded by macrophages and T lymphocytes, and are 
not seen until the subacute or chronic phases of rheu-
matic carditis.
Clinical features
Acute rheumatic fever is a multisystem disorder that 
usually presents with fever, anorexia, lethargy and joint 
pain, 2–3 weeks after an episode of streptococcal phar-
yngitis. There may, however, be no history of sore 
throat. Arthritis occurs in approximately 75% of patients. 
Other features include rashes, carditis and neurological 
changes (Fig. 18.86). The diagnosis, made using the 
revised Jones criteria (Box 18.96), is based upon two or 
more major manifestations, or one major and two or 
more minor manifestations, along with evidence of 
preceding streptococcal infection. Only about 25% of 
patients will have a positive culture for group A strep-
tococcus at the time of diagnosis because there is a latent 
period between infection and presentation. Serological 
evidence of recent infection with a raised antistrep-
tolysin O (ASO) antibody titre is helpful. A presumptive 
diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever can be made without 
Fig. 18.86  Clinical features of rheumatic fever. Bold labels indicate 
Jones major criteria (CCF = congestive cardiac failure). Inset (Erythema 
marginatum) From Savin et al. 1997 – see p. 641. 
Sydenham's chorea
St Vitus dance
Fever
Carditis
Dyspnoea (CCF)
Syncope
Pericarditis (pain, rub)
Carey Coombs murmur
Aortic or mitral
regurgitation
Heart block
39° C
38° C
37° C
Erythema marginatum
Oedema
(heart failure)
Flitting
polyarthritis
+ arthralgia
Subcutaneous
nodules (over bones
or tendons)
Prior sore throat
Valve regurgitation
• Congenital
• Acute rheumatic carditis
• Chronic rheumatic carditis
• Infective endocarditis
• Valve ring dilatation (e.g. 
dilated cardiomyopathy)
• Syphilitic aortitis
• Traumatic valve rupture
• Senile degeneration
• Damage to chordae and 
papillary muscles (e.g. MI)
Valve stenosis
• Congenital
• Rheumatic carditis
• Senile degeneration
18.95  Principal causes of valve disease
Major manifestations
• Carditis
• Polyarthritis
• Chorea
• Erythema marginatum
• Subcutaneous nodules
Minor manifestations
• Fever
• Arthralgia
• Previous rheumatic fever
• Raised ESR or CRP
• Leucocytosis
• First-degree AV block
Plus
• Supporting evidence of preceding streptococcal infection: 
recent scarlet fever, raised antistreptolysin O or other 
streptococcal antibody titre, positive throat culture
N.B. Evidence of recent streptococcal infection is particularly important if 
there is only one major manifestation.
18.96  Jones criteria for the diagnosis of 
rheumatic fever
Diseases of the heart valves
18
615
any residual streptococcal infection. If the patient is 
penicillin-allergic, erythromycin or a cephalosporin can 
be used. Treatment is then directed towards limiting 
cardiac damage and relieving symptoms.
Bed rest and supportive therapy
Bed rest is important, as it lessens joint pain and reduces 
cardiac workload. The duration should be guided by 
symptoms, along with temperature, leucocyte count and 
ESR, and should be continued until these have settled. 
Patients can then return to normal physical activity but 
strenuous exercise should be avoided in those who have 
had carditis.
Cardiac failure should be treated as necessary. Some 
patients, particularly those in early adolescence, develop 
a fulminant form of the disease with severe mitral regur-
gitation and, sometimes, concomitant aortic regurgita-
tion. If heart failure in these cases does not respond to 
medical treatment, valve replacement may be necessary 
and is often associated with a dramatic decline in rheu-
matic activity. AV block is seldom progressive and pace-
maker insertion rarely needed.
Aspirin
This usually relieves the symptoms of arthritis rapidly 
and a response within 24 hours helps confirm the diag-
nosis. A reasonable starting dose is 60 mg/kg body 
weight/day, divided into six doses. In adults, 100 mg/
kg per day may be needed up to the limits of tolerance 
or a maximum of 8 g per day. Mild toxicity includes 
nausea, tinnitus and deafness; vomiting, tachypnoea and 
acidosis are more serious. Aspirin should be continued 
until the ESR has fallen, and then gradually tailed off.
Corticosteroids
These produce more rapid symptomatic relief than 
aspirin and are indicated in cases with carditis or severe 
arthritis. There is no evidence that long-term steroids 
are beneficial. Prednisolone (1.0–2.0 mg/kg per day in 
divided doses) should be continued until the ESR is 
normal, and then tailed off.
Secondary prevention
Patients are susceptible to further attacks of rheumatic 
fever if another streptococcal infection occurs, and long-
term prophylaxis with penicillin should be given as 
benzathine penicillin (1.2 million U IM monthly), if 
cardiac enlargement and new or changed murmurs. A 
soft systolic murmur due to mitral regurgitation is very 
common. A soft mid-diastolic murmur (the Carey 
Coombs murmur) is typically due to valvulitis, with 
nodules forming on the mitral valve leaflets. Aortic 
regurgitation occurs in 50% of cases but the tricuspid 
and pulmonary valves are rarely involved. Pericarditis 
may cause chest pain, a pericardial friction rub and pre-
cordial tenderness. Cardiac failure may be due to myo-
cardial dysfunction or valvular regurgitation. ECG 
changes commonly include ST and T wave changes. 
Conduction defects sometimes occur and may cause 
syncope.
Arthritis
This is the most common major manifestation and occurs 
early when streptococcal antibody titres are high. An 
acute painful asymmetric and migratory inflammation 
of the large joints typically affects the knees, ankles, 
elbows and wrists. The joints are involved in quick suc-
cession and are usually red, swollen and tender for 
between a day and 4 weeks. The pain characteristically 
responds to aspirin; if not, the diagnosis is in doubt.
Skin lesions
Erythema marginatum occurs in less than 5% of patients. 
The lesions start as red macules that fade in the centre 
but remain red at the edges, and occur mainly on the 
trunk and proximal extremities but not the face. The 
resulting red rings or ‘margins’ may coalesce or overlap 
(see Fig. 18.86). Subcutaneous nodules occur in 5–7% of 
patients. They are small (0.5–2.0 cm), firm and painless, 
and are best felt over extensor surfaces of bone or 
tendons. They typically appear more than 3 weeks after 
the onset of other manifestations and therefore help to 
confirm rather than make the diagnosis. Other systemic 
manifestations are rare but include pleurisy, pleural 
effusion and pneumonia.
Sydenham’s chorea (St Vitus dance)
This is a late neurological manifestation that appears at 
least 3 months after the episode of acute rheumatic fever, 
when all the other signs may have disappeared. It occurs 
in up to one-third of cases and is more common in 
females. Emotional lability may be the first feature and 
is typically followed by purposeless, involuntary, 
choreiform movements of the hands, feet or face. Speech 
may be explosive and halting. Spontaneous recovery 
usually occurs within a few months. Approximately 
one-quarter of affected patients will go on to develop 
chronic rheumatic valve disease.
Investigations
The ESR and CRP are useful for monitoring progress of 
the disease (Box 18.97). Positive throat swab cultures are 
obtained in only 10–25% of cases. ASO titres are normal 
in one-fifth of adult cases of rheumatic fever and most 
cases of chorea. Echocardiography typically shows 
mitral regurgitation with dilatation of the mitral annulus 
and prolapse of the anterior mitral leaflet, and may also 
show aortic regurgitation and pericardial effusion.
Management of the acute attack
A single dose of benzyl penicillin (1.2 million U IM) or 
oral phenoxymethylpenicillin (250 mg 4 times daily for 
10 days) should be given on diagnosis to eliminate 
Evidence of a systemic illness (non-specific)
• Leucocytosis, raised ESR and CRP
Evidence of preceding streptococcal infection (specific)
• Throat swab culture: group A β-haemolytic streptococci (also 
from family members and contacts)
• Antistreptolysin O antibodies (ASO titres): rising titres, or 
levels of > 200 U (adults) or > 300 U (children)
Evidence of carditis
• Chest X-ray: cardiomegaly; pulmonary congestion
• ECG: first- and rarely second-degree AV block; features of 
pericarditis; T-wave inversion; reduction in QRS voltages
• Echocardiography: cardiac dilatation and valve abnormalities
18.97  Investigations in acute rheumatic fever
Cardiovascular disease
18
616
ventricular filling becomes more dependent on left 
atrial contraction.
Any increase in heart rate shortens diastole when the 
mitral valve is open and produces a further rise in left 
atrial pressure. Situations that demand an increase in 
cardiac output also increase left atrial pressure, so exer-
cise and pregnancy are poorly tolerated.
The mitral valve orifice is normally about 5 cm2 in 
diastole and may be reduced to 1 cm2 in severe mitral 
stenosis. Patients usually remain asymptomatic until the 
stenosis is less than 2 cm2. Reduced lung compliance, 
due to chronic pulmonary venous congestion, contri­
butes to breathlessness, and a low cardiac output may 
cause fatigue.
Atrial fibrillation due to progressive dilatation of 
the LA is very common. Its onset often precipitates 
pulmonary oedema because the accompanying tachy-
cardia and loss of atrial contraction lead to marked 
haemodynamic deterioration with a rapid rise in left 
atrial pressure. In contrast, a more gradual rise in left 
atrial pressure tends to cause an increase in pulmonary 
vascular resistance, which leads to pulmonary hyperten-
sion that may protect the patient from pulmonary 
oedema. Pulmonary hypertension leads to right ven-
tricular hypertrophy and dilatation, tricuspid regurgita-
tion and right heart failure.
Fewer than 20% of patients remain in sinus rhythm; 
many of these have a small fibrotic LA and severe pul-
monary hypertension.
Clinical features
Effort-related dyspnoea is usually the dominant 
symptom (Box 18.98). Exercise tolerance typically dimin-
ishes very slowly over many years and patients often do 
not appreciate the extent of their disability. Eventually, 
symptoms occur at rest. Acute pulmonary oedema or 
pulmonary hypertension can lead to haemoptysis. All 
patients with mitral stenosis, and particularly those with 
atrial fibrillation, are at risk from left atrial thrombosis 
and systemic thromboembolism. Prior to the advent of 
anticoagulant therapy, emboli caused one-quarter of all 
deaths.
compliance is in doubt, or oral phenoxymethylpenicillin 
(250 mg twice daily). Sulfadiazine or erythromycin may 
be used if the patient is allergic to penicillin; sulphona-
mides prevent infection but are not effective in the eradi-
cation of group A streptococci. Further attacks of 
rheumatic fever are unusual after the age of 21, when 
treatment may be stopped. However, it should be 
extended if an attack has occurred in the last 5 years, or 
if the patient lives in an area of high prevalence or has 
an occupation (e.g. teaching) with high exposure to 
streptococcal infection. In those with residual heart 
disease, prophylaxis should continue until 10 years after 
the last episode or 40 years of age, whichever is later. 
Long-term antibiotic prophylaxis prevents another 
attack of acute rheumatic fever but does not protect 
against infective endocarditis.
Chronic rheumatic heart disease
Chronic valvular heart disease develops in at least half 
of those affected by rheumatic fever with carditis. Two-
thirds of cases occur in women. Some episodes of rheu-
matic fever pass unrecognised and it is only possible to 
elicit a history of rheumatic fever or chorea in about half 
of all patients with chronic rheumatic heart disease.
The mitral valve is affected in more than 90% of cases; 
the aortic valve is the next most frequently involved, 
followed by the tricuspid and then the pulmonary valve. 
Isolated mitral stenosis accounts for about 25% of all 
cases, and an additional 40% have mixed mitral stenosis 
and regurgitation. Valve disease may be symptomatic 
during fulminant forms of acute rheumatic fever but 
may remain asymptomatic for many years.
Pathology
The main pathological process in chronic rheumatic 
heart disease is progressive fibrosis. The heart valves are 
predominantly affected but involvement of the pericar-
dium and myocardium may contribute to heart failure 
and conduction disorders. Fusion of the mitral valve 
commissures and shortening of the chordae tendineae 
may lead to mitral stenosis with or without regurgita-
tion. Similar changes in the aortic and tricuspid valves 
produce distortion and rigidity of the cusps, leading to 
stenosis and regurgitation. Once a valve has been 
damaged, the altered haemodynamic stresses perpetu-
ate and extend the damage, even in the absence of a 
continuing rheumatic process.
Mitral valve disease
Mitral stenosis
Aetiology and pathophysiology
Mitral stenosis is almost always rheumatic in origin, 
although in older people it can be caused by heavy cal-
cification of the mitral valve apparatus. There is also a 
rare form of congenital mitral stenosis.
In rheumatic mitral stenosis, the mitral valve orifice 
is slowly diminished by progressive fibrosis, calcifica-
tion of the valve leaflets, and fusion of the cusps and 
subvalvular apparatus. The flow of blood from LA to 
LV is restricted and left atrial pressure rises, leading 
to pulmonary venous congestion and breathlessness. 
There is dilatation and hypertrophy of the LA, and left 
Symptoms
• Breathlessness (pulmonary congestion)
• Fatigue (low cardiac output)
• Oedema, ascites (right heart failure)
• Palpitation (atrial fibrillation)
• Haemoptysis (pulmonary congestion, pulmonary embolism)
• Cough (pulmonary congestion)
• Chest pain (pulmonary hypertension)
• Thromboembolic complications (e.g. stroke, ischaemic limb)
Signs
• Atrial fibrillation
• Mitral facies
• Auscultation
Loud first heart sound, opening snap
Mid-diastolic murmur
• Crepitations, pulmonary oedema, effusions (raised pulmonary 
capillary pressure)
• RV heave, loud P2 (pulmonary hypertension)
18.98  Clinical features (and their causes) in 
mitral stenosis
Diseases of the heart valves
18
617
The physical signs of mitral stenosis are often found 
before symptoms develop and their recognition is of 
particular importance in pregnancy. The forces that 
open and close the mitral valve increase as left atrial 
pressure rises. The first heart sound (S1) is therefore 
loud and can be palpable (tapping apex beat). An 
opening snap may be audible and moves closer to the 
second sound (S2) as the stenosis becomes more severe 
and left atrial pressure rises. However, the first heart 
sound and opening snap may be inaudible if the valve 
is heavily calcified.
Turbulent flow produces the characteristic low-
pitched mid-diastolic murmur and sometimes a thrill 
(Fig. 18.87). The murmur is accentuated by exercise and 
during atrial systole (pre-systolic accentuation). Early in 
the disease, a pre-systolic murmur may be the only aus-
cultatory abnormality but, in patients with symptoms, 
the murmur extends from the opening snap to the first 
heart sound. Coexisting mitral regurgitation causes a 
pansystolic murmur that radiates towards the axilla.
Pulmonary hypertension may ultimately lead to right 
ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation with secondary 
tricuspid regurgitation, which causes a systolic murmur 
and giant ‘v waves’ in the venous pulse.
Investigations
The ECG may show either atrial fibrillation or bifid P 
waves (P mitrale) associated with left atrial hypertrophy 
(Box 18.99). A typical chest X-ray is shown in Figure 18.9 
(p. 535). Doppler echocardiography provides the defini-
tive evaluation of mitral stenosis (see Fig. 18.87). Cardiac 
catheterisation is used to assess coexisting conditions.
ECG
• Right ventricular 
hypertrophy: tall R waves 
in V1–V3
• P mitrale or atrial fibrillation
Chest X-ray
• Enlarged LA and 
appendage
• Signs of pulmonary venous 
congestion
Echo
• Thickened immobile cusps
• Reduced valve area
• Enlarged LA
• Reduced rate of diastolic 
filling of LV
Doppler
• Pressure gradient across 
mitral valve
• Pulmonary artery pressure
• Left ventricular function
Cardiac catheterisation
• Coronary artery disease
• Pulmonary artery pressure
• Mitral stenosis and 
regurgitation
18.99  Investigations in mitral stenosis
Fig. 18.87  Mitral stenosis: murmur and the diastolic pressure gradient between LA and LV. (Mean gradient is reflected by the area between 
LA and LV in diastole.) The first heart sound is loud, and there is an opening snap (OS) and mid-diastolic murmur (MDM) with pre-systolic accentuation. 
 A Echocardiogram showing reduced opening of the mitral valve in diastole.  B Colour Doppler showing turbulent flow. 
A2P2
Systole
LV
75
50
0
Roll patient towards left to
hear murmur best
(low-pitched, use bell of
stethoscope at apex)
100
25
LA
MDM
OS
Stenosed 
mitral valve
Increased
pulmonary
artery pressure
Dilated left
atrium
A
B
Loud
Loud
Right ventricular
hypertrophy
Normal left
ventricle
Diastolic
gradient
across valve
mmHg
Cardiovascular disease
18
618
regurgitation causes a rapid rise in left atrial pressure 
(because left atrial compliance is normal) and marked 
symptomatic deterioration.
Mitral valve prolapse
This is also known as ‘floppy’ mitral valve and is one of 
the more common causes of mild mitral regurgitation 
(Fig. 18.88). It is caused by congenital anomalies or 
degenerative myxomatous changes, and is sometimes a 
feature of connective tissue disorders such as Marfan’s 
syndrome (p. 603).
In its mildest forms, the valve remains competent but 
bulges back into the atrium during systole, causing a 
mid-systolic click but no murmur. In the presence of a 
regurgitant valve, the click is followed by a late systolic 
murmur, which lengthens as the regurgitation becomes 
more severe. A click is not always audible and the physi-
cal signs may vary with both posture and respiration. 
Progressive elongation of the chordae tendineae leads to 
increasing mitral regurgitation, and if chordal rupture 
occurs, regurgitation suddenly becomes severe. This is 
rare before the fifth or sixth decade of life.
Mitral valve prolapse is associated with a variety of 
typically benign arrhythmias, atypical chest pain and a 
very small risk of embolic stroke or TIA. Nevertheless, 
the overall long-term prognosis is good.
Other causes of mitral regurgitation
Mitral valve function depends on the chordae tendineae 
and their papillary muscles; dilatation of the LV distorts 
the geometry of these and may cause mitral regurgita-
tion (see Box 18.101). Dilated cardiomyopathy and 
heart failure from coronary artery disease are common 
causes of so-called ‘functional’ mitral regurgitation. 
Endocarditis is an important cause of acute mitral 
regurgitation.
Clinical features
Symptoms depend on how suddenly the regurgitation 
develops (Box 18.102). Chronic mitral regurgitation pro-
duces a symptom complex that is similar to that of mitral 
stenosis, but sudden-onset mitral regurgitation usually 
presents with acute pulmonary oedema.
The regurgitant jet causes an apical systolic murmur 
(see Fig. 18.88), which radiates into the axilla and may 
be accompanied by a thrill. Increased forward flow 
through the mitral valve causes a loud third heart sound 
Management
Patients with minor symptoms should be treated medi-
cally. Intervention by balloon valvuloplasty, mitral val-
votomy or mitral valve replacement should be considered 
if the patient remains symptomatic despite medical 
treatment or if pulmonary hypertension develops.
Medical management
This consists of anticoagulation to reduce the risk of 
systemic embolism, ventricular rate control (digoxin, 
β-blockers or rate-limiting calcium antagonists) in atrial 
fibrillation, and diuretic therapy to control pulmonary 
congestion. Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective 
endocarditis is no longer routinely recommended.
Mitral balloon valvuloplasty and valve replacement
Valvuloplasty is the treatment of choice if specific crite-
ria are fulfilled (Box 18.100 and Fig. 18.67, p. 587), 
although surgical closed or open mitral valvotomy is an 
acceptable alternative. Patients who have undergone 
mitral valvuloplasty or valvotomy should be followed 
up at 1–2-yearly intervals because re-stenosis may occur. 
Clinical symptoms and signs are a guide to the severity 
of mitral re-stenosis but Doppler echocardiography pro-
vides a more accurate assessment.
Valve replacement is indicated if there is substantial 
mitral reflux or if the valve is rigid and calcified (p. 629).
• Mitral valve prolapse
• Dilatation of the LV and mitral valve ring (e.g. coronary artery 
disease, cardiomyopathy)
• Damage to valve cusps and chordae (e.g. rheumatic heart 
disease, endocarditis)
• Ischaemia or infarction of the papillary muscle
• Myocardial infarction
18.101  Causes of mitral regurgitation
• Significant symptoms
• Isolated mitral stenosis
• No (or trivial) mitral regurgitation
• Mobile, non-calcified valve/subvalve apparatus on echo
• LA free of thrombus
18.100  Criteria for mitral valvuloplasty*
*For comprehensive guidelines on valvular heart disease, see www.acc.org
Symptoms
• Dyspnoea (pulmonary venous congestion)
• Fatigue (low cardiac output)
• Palpitation (atrial fibrillation, increased stroke volume)
• Oedema, ascites (right heart failure)
Signs
• Atrial fibrillation/flutter
• Cardiomegaly: displaced hyperdynamic apex beat
• Apical pansystolic murmur ± thrill
• Soft S1, apical S3
• Signs of pulmonary venous congestion (crepitations, 
pulmonary oedema, effusions)
• Signs of pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure
18.102  Clinical features (and their causes) in 
mitral regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation
Aetiology and pathophysiology
Rheumatic disease is the principal cause in countries 
where rheumatic fever is common, but elsewhere, 
including in the UK, other causes are more important 
(Box 18.101). Mitral regurgitation may also follow mitral 
valvotomy or valvuloplasty.
Chronic mitral regurgitation causes gradual dilata-
tion of the LA with little increase in pressure and there-
fore relatively few symptoms. Nevertheless, the LV 
dilates slowly and the left ventricular diastolic and left 
atrial pressures gradually increase as a result of chronic 
volume overload of the LV. In contrast, acute mitral 
Diseases of the heart valves
18
619
Fig. 18.88  Mitral regurgitation: murmur and systolic wave in left atrial pressure. The first sound is normal or soft and merges with a 
pansystolic murmur (PSM) extending to the second heart sound. A third heart sound occurs with severe regurgitation.  A A transoesophageal 
echocardiogram shows mitral valve prolapse, with one leaflet bulging towards the LA (arrow).  B This results in a jet of mitral regurgitation on colour 
Doppler (arrow). 
1
A2P2
Systole
LV
Systolic 
wave in LA
LA
Dilated left
atrium
Dilated left
ventricle
Soft
S3
PSM
Pansystolic murmur heard best at apex
and left sternal edge (diaphragm),
radiates to axilla
LA
LV
A
B
0
25
50
75
100
mmHg
1
and even a short mid-diastolic murmur. The apex beat 
feels active and rocking due to left ventricular volume 
overload and is usually displaced to the left as a result 
of left ventricular dilatation.
Investigations
Atrial fibrillation is common, as a consequence of atrial 
dilatation. At cardiac catheterisation (Box 18.103), the 
severity of mitral regurgitation can be assessed by left 
ventriculography and by the size of the v (systolic) 
waves in the left atrial or pulmonary artery wedge pres-
sure trace.
Management
Mitral regurgitation of moderate severity can be treated 
medically (Box 18.104). In all patients with mitral regur-
gitation, high afterload may worsen the degree of regur-
gitation, and hypertension should be treated with 
vasodilators, such as ACE inhibitors. Patients should be 
reviewed at regular intervals because worsening symp-
toms, progressive cardiomegaly or echocardiographic 
evidence of deteriorating left ventricular function are 
indications for mitral valve replacement or repair. Mitral 
ECG
• Left atrial hypertrophy (if not in atrial fibrillation)
• Left ventricular hypertrophy
Chest X-ray
• Enlarged LA
• Enlarged LV
• Pulmonary venous congestion
• Pulmonary oedema (if acute)
Echo
• Dilated LA, LV
• Dynamic LV (unless myocardial dysfunction predominates)
• Structural abnormalities of mitral valve (e.g. prolapse)
Doppler
• Detects and quantifies regurgitation
Cardiac catheterisation
• Dilated LA, dilated LV, mitral regurgitation
• Pulmonary hypertension
• Coexisting coronary artery disease
18.103  Investigations in mitral regurgitation
Cardiovascular disease
18
620
Clinical features
Aortic stenosis is commonly picked up in asymptomatic 
patients at routine clinical examination but the three 
cardinal symptoms are angina, breathlessness and 
syncope (Box 18.106). Angina arises because of the 
increased demands of the hypertrophied LV working 
against the high-pressure outflow tract obstruction, 
leading to a mismatch between oxygen demand and 
supply, but may also be due to coexisting coronary 
artery disease, especially in old age, when it affects over 
50% of patients. Exertional breathlessness suggests 
cardiac decompensation as a consequence of the exces-
sive pressure overload placed on the LV. Syncope 
usually occurs on exertion when cardiac output fails to 
rise to meet demand, leading to a fall in BP.
The characteristic clinical signs of severe aortic steno-
sis are shown in Box 18.106. A harsh ejection systolic 
murmur radiates to the neck, with a soft second heart 
sound, particularly in those with calcific valves. The 
murmur is often likened to a saw cutting wood and may 
(especially in older patients) have a musical quality like 
the ‘mew’ of a seagull (Fig. 18.89). The severity of aortic 
stenosis may be difficult to gauge clinically, as older 
patients with a non-compliant ‘stiff’ arterial system may 
have an apparently normal carotid upstroke in the pres-
ence of severe aortic stenosis. Milder degrees of stenosis 
may be difficult to distinguish from aortic sclerosis, in 
which the valve is thickened or calcified but not 
obstructed. A careful examination should be made for 
other valve lesions, particularly in rheumatic heart 
disease, when there is frequently concomitant mitral 
valve disease.
valve repair is used to treat mitral valve prolapse and 
offers many advantages when compared to mitral valve 
replacement, such that it is now advocated for severe 
regurgitation, even in asymptomatic patients, because 
results are excellent and early repair prevents irreversi-
ble left ventricular damage. Mitral regurgitation often 
accompanies the ventricular dilatation and dysfunction 
that are concomitants of coronary artery disease. If such 
patients are to undergo coronary bypass graft surgery, 
it is common practice to repair the valve and restore 
mitral valve function by inserting an annuloplasty ring 
to overcome annular dilatation and to bring the valve 
leaflets closer together. It can be difficult, however, to 
determine whether it is the ventricular dilatation or the 
mitral regurgitation that is the predominant problem. If 
ventricular dilatation is the underlying cause of mitral 
regurgitation, then mitral valve repair or replacement 
may actually worsen ventricular function, as the ventri-
cle can no longer empty into the low-pressure LA.
Aortic valve disease
Aortic stenosis
Aetiology and pathophysiology
The likely aetiology depends on the age of the patient 
(Box 18.105). In congenital aortic stenosis, obstruction is 
present from birth or becomes apparent in infancy. With 
bicuspid aortic valves, obstruction may take years to 
develop as the valve becomes fibrotic and calcified. The 
aortic valve is the second most frequently affected by 
rheumatic fever and, commonly, both the aortic and 
mitral valves are involved. In older people, a structur-
ally normal tricuspid aortic valve may be affected by 
fibrosis and calcification, in a process that is histologi-
cally similar to that of atherosclerosis affecting the 
arterial wall. Haemodynamically significant stenosis 
develops slowly, typically occurring at 30–60 years in 
those with rheumatic disease, 50–60 in those with bicus-
pid aortic valves and 70–90 in those with degenerative 
calcific disease.
Cardiac output is initially maintained at the cost of a 
steadily increasing pressure gradient across the aortic 
valve. The LV becomes increasingly hypertrophied and 
coronary blood flow may then be inadequate; patients 
may therefore develop angina, even in the absence of 
concomitant coronary disease. The fixed outflow 
obstruction limits the increase in cardiac output required 
on exercise. Eventually, the LV can no longer overcome 
the outflow tract obstruction and pulmonary oedema 
supervenes. In contrast to patients with mitral stenosis, 
which tends to progress very slowly, those with aortic 
stenosis typically remain asymptomatic for many years 
but deteriorate rapidly when symptoms develop, and 
death usually ensues within 3–5 years of these.
Infants, children, adolescents
• Congenital aortic stenosis
• Congenital subvalvular aortic stenosis
• Congenital supravalvular aortic stenosis
Young adults to middle-aged
• Calcification and fibrosis of congenitally bicuspid aortic valve
• Rheumatic aortic stenosis
Middle-aged to elderly
• Senile degenerative aortic stenosis
• Calcification of bicuspid valve
• Rheumatic aortic stenosis
18.105  Causes of aortic stenosis
• Diuretics
• Vasodilators, e.g. ACE inhibitors
• Digoxin if atrial fibrillation is present
• Anticoagulants if atrial fibrillation is present
18.104  Medical management of 
mitral regurgitation
Symptoms
• Mild or moderate stenosis: 
usually asymptomatic
• Exertional dyspnoea
• Angina
• Exertional syncope
• Sudden death
• Episodes of acute 
pulmonary oedema
Signs
• Ejection systolic murmur
• Slow-rising carotid pulse
• Thrusting apex beat (LV 
pressure overload)
• Narrow pulse pressure
• Signs of pulmonary venous 
congestion (e.g. 
crepitations)
18.106  Clinical features of aortic stenosis
Diseases of the heart valves
18
621
Echocardiography demonstrates restricted valve open-
ing (Fig. 18.91) and Doppler assessment permits calcula-
tion of the systolic gradient across the aortic valve, from 
which the severity of stenosis can be assessed (see Fig. 
18.11, p. 536). In patients with an impaired LV, velocities 
across the aortic valve may be diminished because of a 
reduced stroke volume, while when aortic regurgitation 
is present, velocities are increased because of an 
increased stroke volume. In these circumstances, aortic 
valve area calculated from Doppler measurements is a 
more accurate assessment of severity. CT and MRI are 
useful in assessing the degree of valve calcification and 
stenosis, respectively, but are rarely necessary.
Management
Irrespective of the severity of valve stenosis, patients 
with asymptomatic aortic stenosis have a good immedi-
ate prognosis and conservative management is appro-
priate. Such patients should be kept under review, as the 
development of angina, syncope, symptoms of low 
cardiac output or heart failure has a poor prognosis and 
is an indication for prompt surgery. In practice, patients 
with moderate or severe stenosis are evaluated every 
1–2 years with Doppler echocardiography to detect pro-
gression in severity; this is more rapid in older patients 
with heavily calcified valves.
Patients with symptomatic severe aortic stenosis 
should have prompt aortic valve replacement. Old age 
Investigations
In advanced cases, ECG features of hypertrophy (Box 
18.107) are often gross (Fig. 18.90), and down-sloping 
ST segments and T inversion (‘strain pattern’) are seen 
in leads reflecting the LV. Nevertheless, especially in old 
age, the ECG can be normal, despite severe stenosis. 
Fig. 18.89  Aortic stenosis. Pressure traces show the systolic gradient between LV and aorta. The ‘diamond-shaped’ murmur is heard best with the 
diaphragm in the aortic outflow and also at the apex. An ejection click (EC) may be present in young patients with a bicuspid aortic valve but not in older 
patients with calcified valves. Aortic stenosis may lead to left ventricular hypertrophy with a fourth sound at the apex and post-stenotic dilatation of the 
aortic arch. Figure 18.11 (p. 536) shows the typical Doppler signal with aortic stenosis. 
Aorta
LV
Peak-to-peak
systolic gradient
EC
4
1
1
A2 P2
EC
Diminished
pulse pressure
Soft
P2
A2
Ejection systolic murmur
radiates to right upper sternal
edge, suprasternal notch
and carotids
Murmur also heard
at apex
Systolic
pressure gradient
0
50
100
150
mmHg
Left ventricular
hypertrophy
Stenosed
aortic valve
Post-stenotic
dilatation of
aortic arch
ECG
• Left ventricular hypertrophy (usually)
• Left bundle branch block
Chest X-ray
• May be normal; sometimes enlarged LV and dilated 
ascending aorta on PA view, calcified valve on lateral view
Echo
• Calcified valve with restricted opening, hypertrophied LV (see 
Fig. 18.91)
Doppler
• Measurement of severity of stenosis
• Detection of associated aortic regurgitation
Cardiac catheterisation
• Mainly to identify associated coronary artery disease
• May be used to measure gradient between LV and aorta
18.107  Investigations in aortic stenosis
Cardiovascular disease
18
622
is not a contraindication to valve replacement and 
results are very good in experienced centres, even for 
those in their eighties (Box 18.108). Delay exposes the 
patient to the risk of sudden death or irreversible 
deterioration in ventricular function. Some patients with 
severe aortic stenosis deny symptoms, and if this could 
be due to a sedentary lifestyle, a careful exercise test may 
reveal symptoms on modest exertion. Aortic balloon 
Fig. 18.90  Left ventricular hypertrophy. QRS complexes in limb leads 
have increased amplitude with a very large R wave in V6 and S wave in V2. 
There is ST depression and T-wave inversion in leads II, III, aVF, V5 and V6: 
a ‘left ventricular strain’ pattern. 
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
III
aVF
V3
V6
II
I
• Incidence: the most common form of valve disease affecting 
the very old.
• Symptoms: a common cause of syncope, angina and heart 
failure in the very old.
• Signs: because of increasing stiffening in the central 
arteries, low pulse pressure and a slow rising pulse may not 
be present.
• Surgery: can be successful in those aged 80 yrs or more in 
the absence of comorbidity, but with a higher operative 
mortality. The prognosis without surgery is poor once 
symptoms have developed.
• Valve replacement type: a biological valve is often 
preferable to a mechanical one because this obviates the 
need for anticoagulation, and the durability of biological 
valves usually exceeds the patient’s anticipated life 
expectancy.
18.108  Aortic stenosis in old age
Fig. 18.91  Two-dimensional echocardiogram comparing a 
normal subject with a patient with calcific aortic stenosis. 
 A Normal subject in diastole; the aortic leaflets are closed and thin, and 
a point of coaptation is seen (arrow).  B Calcific aortic stenosis in diastole; 
the aortic leaflets are thick and calcified (arrow).  C Normal in systole; the 
aortic leaflets are open (arrows).  D Calcific aortic stenosis in systole; the 
thickened leaflets have barely moved (arrows). From Newby and Grubb 
2005 – see p. 641.
A
C
D
B
Diseases of the heart valves
18
623
Congenital
• Bicuspid valve or disproportionate cusps
Acquired
• Rheumatic disease
• Infective endocarditis
• Trauma
• Aortic dilatation (Marfan’s syndrome, aneurysm, dissection, 
syphilis, ankylosing spondylitis)
18.109  Causes of aortic regurgitation
valvuloplasty is useful in congenital aortic stenosis but 
is of no value in older patients with calcific aortic 
stenosis.
Anticoagulants are only required in patients who 
have atrial fibrillation or those who have had a valve 
replacement with a mechanical prosthesis.
Aortic regurgitation
Aetiology and pathophysiology
This condition is due to disease of the aortic valve cusps 
or dilatation of the aortic root (Box 18.109). The LV 
dilates and hypertrophies to compensate for the regur-
gitation. The stroke volume of the LV may eventually be 
doubled or trebled, and the major arteries are then 
conspicuously pulsatile. As the disease progresses, left 
ventricular diastolic pressure rises and breathlessness 
develops.
Clinical features
Until the onset of breathlessness, the only symptom may 
be an awareness of the heart beat (Box 18.110), particu-
larly when lying on the left side, which results from the 
Fig. 18.92  Aortic regurgitation. The early diastolic murmur is best heard at the left sternal edge and may be accompanied by an ejection systolic 
(‘to and fro’) murmur. The aortic arch and LV may become dilated.  A Doppler echocardiogram with the regurgitant jet (arrows). Inset (Colour Doppler 
echo) From Newby and Grubb 2005 – see p. 641. 
1
A2 P2
Aorta
LV
150
100
50
0
mmHg
Increased
pulse
pressure
Lean patient forward with
breath held in expiration
to hear early diastolic
murmur best
Dilated
aorta
Aortic
valve
Dilated left
ventricle
Colour jet of aortic
regurgitation
Symptoms
Mild to moderate aortic regurgitation
• Often asymptomatic
• Awareness of heart beat, ‘palpitations’
Severe aortic regurgitation
• Breathlessness
• Angina
Signs
Pulses
• Large-volume or ‘collapsing’ pulse
• Low diastolic and increased pulse pressure
• Bounding peripheral pulses
• Capillary pulsation in nail beds: Quincke’s sign
• Femoral bruit (‘pistol shot’): Duroziez’s sign
• Head nodding with pulse: de Musset’s sign
Murmurs
• Early diastolic murmur
• Systolic murmur (increased stroke volume)
• Austin Flint murmur (soft mid-diastolic)
Other signs
• Displaced, heaving apex beat (volume overload)
• Pre-systolic impulse
• Fourth heart sound
• Crepitations (pulmonary venous congestion)
18.110  Clinical features of aortic regurgitation
increased stroke volume. Paroxysmal nocturnal dys­
pnoea is sometimes the first symptom, and peripheral 
oedema or angina may occur. The characteristic murmur 
is best heard to the left of the sternum during held expi-
ration (Fig. 18.92); a thrill is rare. A systolic murmur due 
to the increased stroke volume is common and does not 
Cardiovascular disease
18
624
necessarily indicate stenosis. The regurgitant jet causes 
fluttering of the mitral valve and, if severe, causes partial 
closure of the anterior mitral leaflet, leading to func-
tional mitral stenosis and a soft mid-diastolic (Austin 
Flint) murmur.
In acute severe regurgitation (e.g. perforation of 
aortic cusp in endocarditis), there may be no time for 
compensatory left ventricular hypertrophy and dilata-
tion to develop and the features of heart failure may 
predominate. In this situation, the classical signs of 
aortic regurgitation may be masked by tachycardia and 
an abrupt rise in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; 
thus, the pulse pressure may be near normal and the 
diastolic murmur may be short or even absent.
Investigations
Regurgitation is detected by Doppler echocardiography 
(Box 18.111). In severe acute aortic regurgitation, the 
rapid rise in left ventricular diastolic pressure may cause 
premature mitral valve closure. Cardiac catheterisation 
and aortography can help in assessing the severity of 
regurgitation, and dilatation of the aorta and the pres-
ence of coexisting coronary artery disease. MRI is useful 
in assessing the degree and extent of aortic dilatation.
ECG
• Initially normal, later left ventricular hypertrophy and T-wave 
inversion
Chest X-ray
• Cardiac dilatation, maybe aortic dilatation
• Features of left heart failure
Echo
• Dilated LV
• Hyperdynamic LV
• Doppler detects reflux
• Fluttering anterior mitral 
leaflet
Cardiac catheterisation (may not be required)
• Dilated LV
• Aortic regurgitation
• Dilated aortic root
18.111  Investigations in aortic regurgitation
aortic regurgitation (e.g. Marfan’s syndrome), aortic root 
replacement is usually necessary.
Tricuspid valve disease
Tricuspid stenosis
Aetiology
Tricuspid stenosis is usually rheumatic in origin and is 
rare in developed countries. Tricuspid disease occurs in 
fewer than 5% of patients with rheumatic heart disease 
and then nearly always in association with mitral and 
aortic valve disease. Tricuspid stenosis and regurgita-
tion are features of the carcinoid syndrome (p. 784).
Clinical features and investigations
Although the symptoms of mitral and aortic valve 
disease predominate, tricuspid stenosis may cause 
symptoms of right heart failure, including hepatic dis-
comfort and peripheral oedema.
The main clinical feature is a raised JVP with a promi-
nent a wave, and a slow y descent due to the loss of 
normal rapid right ventricular filling (p. 527). There is 
also a mid-diastolic murmur, best heard at the lower left 
or right sternal edge. This is generally higher-pitched 
than the murmur of mitral stenosis and is increased by 
inspiration. Right heart failure causes hepatomegaly 
with pre-systolic pulsation (large a wave), ascites and 
peripheral oedema. On Doppler echocardiography, the 
valve has similar appearances to those of rheumatic 
mitral stenosis.
Management
In patients who require surgery to other valves, either 
the tricuspid valve is replaced or valvotomy is per-
formed at surgery. Balloon valvuloplasty can be used to 
treat rare cases of isolated tricuspid stenosis.
Tricuspid regurgitation
Aetiology, clinical features  
and investigations
Tricuspid regurgitation is common, and is most fre-
quently ‘functional’ as a result of right ventricular dilata-
tion (Box 18.112).
Symptoms are usually non-specific, with tiredness 
related to reduced forward flow, and oedema and 
hepatic enlargement due to venous congestion. The 
most prominent sign is a ‘giant’ v wave in the jugular 
venous pulse (a cv wave replaces the normal x descent). 
Other features include a pansystolic murmur at the left 
Primary
• Rheumatic heart disease
• Endocarditis, particularly in injection drug-users
• Ebstein’s congenital anomaly (see Box 18.123, p. 635)
Secondary
• Right ventricular dilatation due to chronic left heart failure 
(‘functional tricuspid regurgitation’)
• Right ventricular infarction
• Pulmonary hypertension (e.g. cor pulmonale)
18.112  Causes of tricuspid regurgitation
Management
Treatment may be required for underlying conditions, 
such as endocarditis or syphilis. Aortic valve replace-
ment is indicated if aortic regurgitation causes symp-
toms, and this may need to be combined with aortic root 
replacement and coronary bypass surgery. Those with 
chronic aortic regurgitation can remain asymptomatic 
for many years because compensatory ventricular dila-
tation and hypertrophy occur, but should be advised to 
report the development of any symptoms of breathless-
ness or angina. Asymptomatic patients should also 
be followed up annually with echocardiography for evi-
dence of increasing ventricular size. If this occurs or if 
the end-systolic dimension increases to 55 mm or more, 
then aortic valve replacement should be undertaken. 
Systolic BP should be controlled with vasodilating 
drugs, such as nifedipine or ACE inhibitors. There is 
conflicting evidence regarding the need for aortic valve 
replacement in asymptomatic patients with severe aortic 
regurgitation. When aortic root dilatation is the cause of 
Diseases of the heart valves
18
625
sternal edge and a pulsatile liver. Echocardiography 
may reveal dilatation of the RV. If the valve has been 
affected by rheumatic disease, the leaflets will appear 
thickened and, in endocarditis, vegetations may be seen. 
Ebstein’s anomaly (see Box 18.123, p. 635) is a congenital 
abnormality in which the tricuspid valve is displaced 
towards the right ventricular apex, with consequent 
enlargement of the RA. It is commonly associated with 
tricuspid regurgitation.
Management
Tricuspid regurgitation due to right ventricular dilata-
tion often improves when the cause of right ventricular 
overload is corrected, with diuretic and vasodilator 
treatment of congestive cardiac failure. Patients with a 
normal pulmonary artery pressure tolerate isolated tri-
cuspid reflux well, and valves damaged by endocarditis 
do not usually need to be replaced. Patients undergoing 
mitral valve replacement, who have tricuspid regurgita-
tion due to marked dilatation of the tricuspid annulus, 
benefit from valve repair with an annuloplasty ring to 
bring the leaflets closer together. Those with rheumatic 
damage may require tricuspid valve replacement.
Pulmonary valve disease
Pulmonary stenosis
This can occur in the carcinoid syndrome but is 
usually congenital, in which case it may be isolated or 
associated with other abnormalities, such as Fallot’s 
tetralogy (p. 634).
The principal finding on examination is an ejection 
systolic murmur, loudest at the left upper sternum and 
radiating towards the left shoulder. There may be a 
thrill, best felt when the patient leans forward and 
breathes out. The murmur is often preceded by an ejec-
tion sound (click). Delay in right ventricular ejection 
may cause wide splitting of the second heart sound. 
Severe pulmonary stenosis is characterised by a loud 
harsh murmur, an inaudible pulmonary closure sound 
(P2), an increased right ventricular heave, prominent a 
waves in the jugular pulse, ECG evidence of right ven-
tricular hypertrophy, and post-stenotic dilatation in the 
pulmonary artery on the chest X-ray. Doppler echocar-
diography is the definitive investigation.
Mild to moderate isolated pulmonary stenosis is rela-
tively common and does not usually progress or require 
treatment. Severe pulmonary stenosis (resting gradient 
> 50 mmHg with a normal cardiac output) is treated by 
percutaneous pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty or, if 
this is not available, by surgical valvotomy. Long-term 
results are very good. Post-operative pulmonary regur-
gitation is common but benign.
Pulmonary regurgitation
This is rare in isolation and is usually associated with 
pulmonary artery dilatation due to pulmonary hyper-
tension. It may complicate mitral stenosis, producing an 
early diastolic decrescendo murmur at the left sternal 
edge that is difficult to distinguish from aortic regurgita-
tion (Graham Steell murmur). The pulmonary hyperten-
sion may be secondary to other disease of the left side 
of the heart, primary pulmonary vascular disease or 
Eisenmenger’s syndrome (p. 631). Trivial pulmonary 
regurgitation is a frequent finding in normal individuals 
and has no clinical significance.
Infective endocarditis
This is caused by microbial infection of a heart valve 
(native or prosthetic), the lining of a cardiac chamber or 
blood vessel, or a congenital anomaly (e.g. septal defect). 
The causative organism is usually a bacterium, but may 
be a rickettsia, chlamydia or fungus.
Pathophysiology
Infective endocarditis typically occurs at sites of pre-
existing endocardial damage, but infection with particu-
larly virulent or aggressive organisms (e.g. Staphylococcus 
aureus) can cause endocarditis in a previously normal 
heart; staphylococcal endocarditis of the tricuspid valve 
is a common complication of intravenous drug misuse. 
Many acquired and congenital cardiac lesions are vul-
nerable to endocarditis, particularly areas of endocardial 
damage caused by a high-pressure jet of blood, such as 
ventricular septal defect, mitral regurgitation and aortic 
regurgitation, many of which are haemodynamically 
insignificant. In contrast, the risk of endocarditis at 
the site of haemodynamically important low-pressure 
lesions, such as a large atrial septal defect, is minimal.
Infection tends to occur at sites of endothelial damage 
because they attract deposits of platelets and fibrin that 
are vulnerable to colonisation by blood-borne organ-
isms. The avascular valve tissue and presence of fibrin 
and platelet aggregates help to protect proliferating 
organisms from host defence mechanisms. When the 
infection is established, vegetations composed of organ-
isms, fibrin and platelets grow and may become large 
enough to cause obstruction or embolism. Adjacent 
tissues are destroyed and abscesses may form. Valve 
regurgitation may develop or increase if the affected 
valve is damaged by tissue distortion, cusp perforation 
or disruption of chordae. Extracardiac manifestations, 
such as vasculitis and skin lesions, are due to emboli or 
immune complex deposition. Mycotic aneurysms may 
develop in arteries at the site of infected emboli. At 
autopsy, infarction of the spleen and kidneys and, some-
times, an immune glomerulonephritis are found.
Microbiology
Over three-quarters of cases are caused by streptococci 
or staphylococci. The viridans group of streptococci 
(Streptococcus mitis, Strep. sanguis) are commensals in the 
upper respiratory tract that may enter the blood stream 
on chewing or teeth-brushing, or at the time of dental 
treatment, and are common causes of subacute endocar-
ditis (Box 18.113). Other organisms, including Enterococ-
cus faecalis, E. faecium and Strep. bovis, may enter the 
blood from the bowel or urinary tract. Strep. milleri and 
Strep. bovis endocarditis is associated with large-bowel 
neoplasms.
Staph. aureus has now overtaken streptococci as the 
most common cause of acute endocarditis. It originates 
from skin infections, abscesses or vascular access sites 
(e.g. intravenous and central lines), or from intravenous 
drug use. It is highly virulent and invasive, usually pro-
ducing florid vegetations, rapid valve destruction and 
abscess formation. Other causes of acute endocarditis 
include Strep. pneumoniae and Strep. pyogenes.
Cardiovascular disease
18
626
Incidence
The incidence of infective endocarditis in community-
based studies ranges from 5 to 15 cases per 100 000 per 
annum. More than 50% of patients are over 60 years of 
age (Box 18.114). In a large British study, the underlying 
condition was rheumatic heart disease in 24% of patients, 
congenital heart disease in 19%, and other cardiac abnor-
malities (e.g. calcified aortic valve, floppy mitral valve) 
in 25%. The remaining 32% were not thought to have a 
pre-existing cardiac abnormality.
Clinical features
Endocarditis can take either an acute or a more insidious 
‘subacute’ form. However, there is considerable overlap 
because the clinical pattern is influenced not only by 
the organism, but also by the site of infection, prior 
antibiotic therapy and the presence of a valve or shunt 
prosthesis. The subacute form may abruptly develop 
acute life-threatening complications, such as valve dis-
ruption or emboli.
Subacute endocarditis
This should be suspected when a patient with congenital 
or valvular heart disease develops a persistent fever, 
complains of unusual tiredness, night sweats or weight 
loss, or develops new signs of valve dysfunction or heart 
failure. Less often, it presents as an embolic stroke or 
peripheral arterial embolism. Other features (Fig. 18.93) 
include purpura and petechial haemorrhages in the skin 
and mucous membranes, and splinter haemorrhages 
under the fingernails or toe nails. Osler’s nodes are 
painful tender swellings at the fingertips that are prob-
ably the product of vasculitis; they are rare. Digital club-
bing is a late sign. The spleen is frequently palpable; in 
Coxiella infections, the spleen and the liver may be con-
siderably enlarged. Microscopic haematuria is common. 
The finding of any of these features in a patient with 
persistent fever or malaise is an indication for 
re-examination to detect hitherto unrecognised heart 
disease.
Acute endocarditis
This presents as a severe febrile illness with prominent 
and changing heart murmurs and petechiae. Clinical 
stigmata of chronic endocarditis are usually absent. 
Embolic events are common, and cardiac or renal failure 
may develop rapidly. Abscesses may be detected on 
echocardiography. Partially treated acute endocarditis 
behaves like subacute endocarditis.
Post-operative endocarditis
This may present as an unexplained fever in a patient 
who has had heart valve surgery. The infection usually 
involves the valve ring and may resemble subacute or 
Post-operative endocarditis after cardiac surgery may 
affect native or prosthetic heart valves or other pros-
thetic materials. The most common organism is a 
coagulase-negative staphylococcus (Staph. epidermidis), a 
normal skin commensal. There is frequently a history of 
wound infection with the same organism. Staph. epider-
midis occasionally causes endocarditis in patients who 
have not had cardiac surgery, and its presence in blood 
cultures may be erroneously dismissed as contamina-
tion. Another coagulase-negative staphylococcus, Staph. 
lugdenensis, causes a rapidly destructive acute endocar-
ditis that is associated with previously normal valves 
and multiple emboli. Unless accurately identified, it may 
also be overlooked as a contaminant.
In Q fever endocarditis due to Coxiella burnetii, the 
patient often has a history of contact with farm animals. 
The aortic valve is usually affected and there may also 
be hepatitis, pneumonia and purpura. Life-long anti­
biotic therapy may be required.
Gram-negative bacteria of the so-called HACEK 
group (Haemophilus spp., Actinobacillus actinomycetem-
comitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella spp. and 
Kingella kingae) are slow-growing, fastidious organisms 
that are only revealed after prolonged culture and may 
be resistant to penicillin.
Brucella is associated with a history of contact with 
goats or cattle and often affects the aortic valve.
Yeasts and fungi (Candida, Aspergillus) may attack 
previously normal or prosthetic valves, particularly in 
immunocompromised patients or those with indwelling 
intravenous lines. Abscesses and emboli are common, 
therapy is difficult (surgery is often required) and mor-
tality is high. Concomitant bacterial infection may be 
present.
Pathogen
Of native 
valve
(n = 280)
In IV drug 
users
(n = 87)
Of prosthetic valve
Early
(n = 15)
Late
(n = 72)
Staphylococci
124 (44%)
60 (69%)
10 (67%)
33 (46%)
Staph. aureus
106 (38%)
60 (69%)
3 (20%)
15 (21%)
Coagulase-
negative
18 (6%)
0
7 (47%)
18 (25%)
Streptococci
86 (31%)
7 (8%)
0
25 (35%)
Oral
59 (21%)
3 (3%)
0
19 (26%)
Others 
(non-
enterococcal)
27 (10%)
4 (5%)
0
6 (8%)
Enterococcus 
spp.
21 (8%)
2 (2%)
1 (7%)
5 (7%)
HACEK group 
(see text)
12 (4%)
0
0
1 (1%)
Polymicrobial
6 (2%)
8 (9%)
0
1 (1%)
Other 
bacteria
12 (4%)
4 (5%)
0
2 (3%)
Fungi
3 (1%)
2 (2%)
0
0
Negative 
blood culture
16 (6%)
4 (5%)
4 (27%)
5 (7%)
18.113  Microbiology of infective endocarditis
Adapted from Moreillon P, Que YA. Lancet 2004; 363:139–149.
• Symptoms and signs: may be non-specific, e.g. confusion, 
weight loss, malaise and weakness, and the diagnosis may 
not be suspected.
• Common causative organisms: often enterococci (from the 
urinary tract) and Strep. bovis (from a colonic source).
• Morbidity and mortality: much higher.
18.114  Endocarditis in old age
Diseases of the heart valves
18
627
acute endocarditis, depending on the virulence of the 
organism. Morbidity and mortality are high and redo 
surgery is often required. The range of organisms is 
similar to that seen in native valve disease, but when 
endocarditis occurs during the first few weeks after 
surgery, it is usually due to infection with a coagulase-
negative staphylococcus that was introduced during 
the peri-operative period. A clinical diagnosis of endo-
carditis can be made on the presence of two major, 
one major and three minor, or five minor criteria 
(Box 18.115).
Investigations
Blood culture is the crucial investigation because it may 
identify the infection and guide antibiotic therapy. Three 
to six sets of blood cultures should be taken prior to 
commencing therapy and should not wait for episodes 
of pyrexia. The first two specimens will detect bacterae-
mia in 90% of culture-positive cases. Aseptic technique 
is essential and the risk of contaminants should be mini-
mised by sampling from different venepuncture sites. 
An in-dwelling line should not be used to take cultures. 
Aerobic and anaerobic cultures are required.
Echocardiography is key for detecting and following 
the progress of vegetations, for assessing valve damage 
Major criteria
Positive blood culture
• Typical organism from two cultures
• Persistent positive blood cultures taken > 12 hrs apart
• Three or more positive cultures taken over > 1 hr
Endocardial involvement
• Positive echocardiographic findings of vegetations
• New valvular regurgitation
Minor criteria
• Predisposing valvular or cardiac abnormality
• Intravenous drug misuse
• Pyrexia ≥ 38°C
• Embolic phenomenon
• Vasculitic phenomenon
• Blood cultures suggestive: organism grown but not achieving 
major criteria
• Suggestive echocardiographic findings
Definite endocarditis = two major, or one major and three 
minor, or five minor
Possible endocarditis = one major and one minor, or three 
minor
18.115  Diagnosis of infective endocarditis 
(modified Duke criteria)
Fig. 18.93  Clinical features which may be present in endocarditis. Insets (Petechial rash, nail-fold infarct) From Newby and Grubb 2005 – see p. 641. 
Roth's spots in fundi
(rare, <  5%)
Splinter haemorrhages
(10%)
Osler's nodes
(5%)
Digital clubbing
(10%, long-standing
endocarditis only)
Petechial rash
(40–50%, may be transient)
Haematuria
(60–70%)
Splenomegaly
(30–40%, long-standing
endocarditis only)
Loss of
pulses
Subconjunctival haemorrhages
(2–5%)
Cerebral emboli
(15%)
Poor dentition
Systemic emboli
(7%)
Nail-fold infarct
Petechial haemorrhages on
mucous membranes and fundi
(20–30%)
'Varying' murmurs
(90% new or changed murmur)
Conduction disorder
(10–20%)
Cardiac failure
(40–50%)
Cardiovascular disease
18
628
In those with penicillin allergy, a prosthetic valve or 
suspected meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus (MRSA) 
infection, triple therapy with vancomycin, gentamicin 
and oral rifampicin should be considered. Following 
identification of the causal organism, determination of 
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for the 
organism is essential to guide antibiotic therapy.
A 2-week treatment regimen may be sufficient for 
fully sensitive strains of Strep. viridans and Strep. bovis, 
provided specific conditions are met (Box 18.117). For the 
empirical treatment of bacterial endocarditis, penicillin 
plus gentamicin is the regimen of choice for most patients; 
when staphylococcal infection is suspected, however, 
vancomycin plus gentamicin is recommended.
Cardiac surgery (débridement of infected material 
and valve replacement) is advisable in a substantial pro-
portion of patients, particularly those with Staph. aureus 
and fungal infections (Box 18.118). Antimicrobial therapy 
must be started before surgery.
Prevention
Until recently, antibiotic prophylaxis was routinely 
given to people at risk of infective endocarditis undergo-
ing interventional procedures. However, as this has 
not been proven to be effective and the link between 
and for detecting abscess formation. Vegetations as 
small as 2–4 mm can be detected by transthoracic 
echocardiography, and even smaller ones (1–1.5 mm) 
can be visualised by transoesophageal echocardiogra-
phy (TOE), which is particularly valuable for identifying 
abscess formation and investigating patients with pros-
thetic heart valves. Vegetations may be difficult to dis-
tinguish in the presence of an abnormal valve; the 
sensitivity of transthoracic echo is approximately 65% 
but that of TOE is more than 90%. Failure to detect veg-
etations does not exclude the diagnosis.
Elevation of the ESR, a normocytic normochromic 
anaemia, and leucocytosis are common but not invari-
able. Measurement of serum CRP is more reliable than 
the ESR in monitoring progress. Proteinuria may occur 
and microscopic haematuria is usually present.
The ECG may show the development of AV block 
(due to aortic root abscess formation) and occasionally 
infarction due to emboli. The chest X-ray may show 
evidence of cardiac failure and cardiomegaly.
Management
The case fatality of bacterial endocarditis is approxi-
mately 20% and even higher in those with prosthetic 
valve endocarditis and those infected with antibiotic-
resistant organisms. A multidisciplinary approach, with 
cooperation between the physician, surgeon and micro-
biologist, increases the chance of a successful outcome. 
Any source of infection should be removed as soon as 
possible; for example, a tooth with an apical abscess 
should be extracted.
Empirical treatment depends on the mode of presen-
tation, the suspected organism, and whether the patient 
has a prosthetic valve or penicillin allergy (Box 18.116). 
If the presentation is acute, flucloxacillin and gentamicin 
are recommended, while for a subacute or indolent pres-
entation, benzyl penicillin and gentamicin are preferred. 
• Native valve infection
• MIC ≤ 0.1 mg/L
• No adverse prognostic factors (e.g. heart failure, aortic 
regurgitation, conduction defect)
• No evidence of thromboembolic disease
• No vegetations > 5 mm diameter
• Clinical response within 7 days
18.117  Conditions for the short-course treatment 
of Strep. viridans/bovis endocarditis
Duration
Organism
Antimicrobial
Dose
Native valve
Prosthetic valve
Viridans streptococci and Strep. bovis
MIC ≤ 0.1 mg/L
Benzyl penicillin IV
and gentamicin IV
1.2 g 6 times daily
1 mg/kg 2–3 times daily
4 wks1
6 wks
2 wks
2 wks
MIC > 0.1 to < 0.5 mg/L
Benzyl penicillin IV
and gentamicin IV
1.2 g 6 times daily
1 mg/kg 2–3 times daily
4 wks
6 wks
2 wks
4–6 wks
MIC ≥ 0.5 mg/L
Benzyl penicillin IV
and gentamicin IV
1.2 g 6 times daily
1 mg/kg 2–3 times daily
4 wks
6 wks
4 wks
4–6 wks
Enterococci
Ampicillin-sensitive
Ampicillin IV
and gentamicin IV2
2 g 6 times daily
1 mg/kg 2–3 times daily
4 wks
6 wks
4 wks
6 wks
Ampicillin-resistant
Vancomycin IV
and gentamicin IV2
1 g twice daily
1 mg/kg 2–3 times daily
4 wk
6 wks
4 wks
6 wks
Staphylococci
Penicillin-sensitive
Benzyl penicillin IV
1.2 g 6 times daily
4 wks
6 wks
Penicillin-resistant
Flucloxacillin IV
2 g 6 times daily (< 85 kg 
6-hourly)
4 wks
6 wks3
Meticillin-sensitive
Penicillin-resistant
Vancomycin IV and
1 g twice daily
4 wks
6 wks3
Meticillin-resistant
gentamicin IV
1 mg/kg 3 times daily
4 wks
6 wks3
1When conditions in Box 18.117 are met, 2 wks of benzyl penicillin. 2ln high-level gentamicin resistance, consider streptomycin. 3Consider additional rifampicin 
300–600 mg twice daily orally for 2 wks. (MIC = minimum inhibitory concentration)
18.116  Antimicrobial treatment of common causative organisms in infective endocarditis
Congenital heart disease
18
629
episodes of infective endocarditis and interventional 
procedures has not been demonstrated, antibiotic 
prophylaxis is no longer offered routinely for defined 
interventional procedures.
Valve replacement surgery
Diseased heart valves can be replaced with mechanical 
or biological prostheses. The three most commonly used 
types of mechanical prosthesis are the ball and cage, 
tilting single disc and tilting bi-leaflet valves. All gener-
ate prosthetic sounds or clicks on auscultation. Pig or 
allograft valves mounted on a supporting stent are the 
most commonly used biological valves. They generate 
normal heart sounds. All prosthetic valves used in the 
aortic position produce a systolic flow murmur.
All mechanical valves require long-term anticoagula-
tion because they can cause systemic thromboembolism 
or may develop valve thrombosis or obstruction (Box 
18.119); the prosthetic clicks may become inaudible if the 
valve malfunctions. Biological valves have the advan-
tage of not requiring anticoagulants to maintain proper 
function; however, many patients undergoing valve 
replacement surgery, especially mitral valve replace-
ment, will have atrial fibrillation that requires anticoagu-
lation anyway. Biological valves are less durable than 
mechanical valves and may degenerate 7 or more years 
after implantation, particularly when used in the mitral 
position. They are more durable in the aortic position 
and in older patients, so are particularly appropriate for 
patients over 65 undergoing aortic valve replacement.
Symptoms or signs of unexplained heart failure in a 
patient with a prosthetic heart valve may be due to valve 
dysfunction, and urgent assessment is required. Biologi-
cal valve dysfunction is usually associated with the 
development of a regurgitant murmur.
• Heart failure due to valve damage
• Failure of antibiotic therapy (persistent/uncontrolled infection)
• Large vegetations on left-sided heart valves with evidence or 
‘high risk’ of systemic emboli
• Abscess formation
N.B. Patients with prosthetic valve endocarditis or fungal endocarditis often 
require cardiac surgery.
18.118  Indications for cardiac surgery in 
infective endocarditis
life. Defects that are well tolerated, such as atrial septal 
defect, may cause no symptoms until adult life or may 
be detected incidentally on routine examination or chest 
X-ray. Congenital defects that were previously fatal in 
childhood can now be corrected, or at least partially, so 
that survival to adult life is the norm. Such patients 
remain well for many years but subsequently re-present 
in later life with related problems such as arrhythmia or 
ventricular dysfunction (Box 18.120).
The fetal circulation
Understanding the fetal circulation helps clarify how 
some forms of congenital heart disease occur. The fetus 
has only a small flow of blood through the lungs, as it 
does not breathe in utero. The fetal circulation allows 
oxygenated blood from the placenta to pass directly to 
the left side of the heart through the foramen ovale 
without having to flow through the lungs, and also from 
the pulmonary artery into the aorta via the ductus arte-
riosus (Fig. 18.94).
Congenital defects may arise if the changes from fetal 
circulation to the extrauterine circulation are incom-
plete. Atrial septal defects occur at the site of the foramen 
ovale. A patent ductus arteriosus may remain if it fails 
to close after birth. Failure of the aorta to develop at the 
point of the aortic isthmus and where the ductus arterio-
sus attaches can lead to coarctation of the aorta.
In fetal development, the heart develops as a single 
tube which folds back on itself and then divides into two 
separate circulations. Failure of septation can lead to 
some forms of atrial and ventricular septal defect. Failure 
of alignment of the great vessels with the ventricles con-
tributes to transposition of the great arteries, tetralogy 
of Fallot and truncus arteriosus.
Aetiology and incidence
The incidence of haemodynamically significant congeni-
tal cardiac abnormalities is about 0.8% of live births 
(Box 18.121). Maternal infection or exposure to drugs or 
toxins may cause congenital heart disease. Maternal 
rubella infection is associated with persistent ductus 
arteriosus, pulmonary valvular and/or artery stenosis, 
and atrial septal defect. Maternal alcohol misuse is asso-
ciated with septal defects, and maternal lupus erythema-
tosus with congenital complete heart block. Genetic or 
chromosomal abnormalities, such as Down’s syndrome, 
may cause septal defects, and gene defects have also 
Birth and neonatal period
• Cyanosis
• Heart failure
Infancy and childhood
• Cyanosis
• Heart failure
• Arrhythmia
• Murmur
• Failure to thrive
Adolescence and adulthood
• Heart failure
• Murmur
• Arrhythmia
• Cyanosis due to shunt 
reversal (Eisenmenger’s 
syndrome)
• Hypertension (coarctation)
• Late consequences of 
previous cardiac surgery, 
e.g. arrhythmia, heart 
failure
18.120  Presentation of congenital heart disease 
throughout life
Mechanical valves
Target INR
Ball and cage (e.g. Starr–Edwards)
Tilting disc (e.g. Bjork–Shiley)
3.5
Bi-leaflet (e.g. St Jude)
3.0
Biological valves with atrial fibrillation
2.5
18.119  Prosthetic heart valves: optimal 
anticoagulant control
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Congenital heart disease usually manifests in childhood 
but may pass unrecognised and not present until adult 
Cardiovascular disease
18
630
been identified as leading to specific abnormalities, such 
as Marfan’s syndrome (p. 603) and DiGeorge’s (deletion 
in chromosome 22q) syndrome.
Clinical features
Symptoms may be absent, or the child may be breathless 
or fail to attain normal growth and development. Some 
defects are not compatible with extrauterine life, or 
are so only for a short time. Clinical signs vary with 
the anatomical lesion. Murmurs, thrills or signs of car-
diomegaly may be present. In coarctation of the aorta, 
radiofemoral delay may be noted (Fig. 18.95) and some 
female patients have the features of Turner’s syndrome 
(p. 765). Features of other congenital conditions, such 
as Marfan’s syndrome or Down’s syndrome, may also 
be apparent. Cerebrovascular accidents and cerebral 
abscesses may complicate severe cyanotic congenital 
disease.
Early diagnosis is important because many types of 
congenital heart disease are amenable to surgery, but 
Lesion
% of all congenital 
heart defects
Ventricular septal defect
30
Atrial septal defect
10
Patent ductus arteriosus
10
Pulmonary stenosis
7
Coarctation of aorta
7
Aortic stenosis
6
Tetralogy of Fallot
6
Complete transposition of great arteries
4
Others
20
18.121  Incidence and relative frequency of 
congenital cardiac malformations
Fig. 18.94  Changes in the circulation at birth.  A In the fetus, oxygenated blood comes through the umbilical vein where it enters the inferior vena 
cava via the ductus venosus (red). The oxygenated blood streams from the RA through the open foramen ovale to the LA and via the LV into the aorta. 
Venous blood from the superior vena cava (blue) crosses under the main blood stream into the RA and then, partly mixed with oxygenated blood (purple), 
into the RV and pulmonary artery. The pulmonary vasculature has a high resistance and so little blood passes to the lungs; most blood passes through the 
ductus arteriosus to the descending aorta. The aortic isthmus is a constriction in the aorta that lies in the aortic arch before the junction with the ductus 
arteriosus and limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to the descending aorta. This configuration means that less oxygen-rich blood is supplied to organ 
systems that take up their function mainly after birth, e.g. the kidneys and intestinal tract.  B At birth, the lungs expand with air and pulmonary vascular 
resistance falls, so that blood now flows to the lungs and back to the LA. The left atrial pressure rises above right atrial pressure and the flap valve of the 
foramen ovale closes. The umbilical arteries and the ductus venosus close. In the next few days, the ductus arteriosus closes under the influence of 
hormonal changes (particularly prostaglandins) and the aortic isthmus expands (IVC = inferior vena cava; LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; PA = 
pulmonary artery; PV = pulmonary vein; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle; SVC = superior vena cava). Adapted from Drews 1995 – see p. 641.
Ascending aorta
LA
SVC
Open
foramen
ovale
RA
IVC
Ductus
venosus
Umbilical
vein
Umbilical
arteries
RV
Head and
neck vessels
Aortic isthmus
Ductus
arteriosus
Main
pulmonary
artery
Descending
aorta
LV
Renal artery
Iliac artery
Umbilical
arteries close
Intestinal
arteries
Involution
of isthmus
Ductus
venosus
closes
Closed
ductus
arteriosus
PA
PV
Closed
foramen
ovale
A
B
Fig. 18.95  Radiofemoral delay. The difference in pulse pressures is 
shown. 
Radial
Femoral
Congenital heart disease
18
631
this opportunity is lost if secondary changes, such as 
irreversible pulmonary hypertension, occur.
Central cyanosis and digital clubbing
Central cyanosis of cardiac origin occurs when desatu-
rated blood enters the systemic circulation without 
passing through the lungs (i.e. a right-to-left shunt). In 
the neonate, the most common cause is transposition of 
the great arteries, in which the aorta arises from the RV 
and the pulmonary artery from the LV in association 
with a ventricular septal defect. In older children, 
cyanosis is usually the consequence of a ventricular 
septal defect combined with severe pulmonary stenosis 
(tetralogy of Fallot) or with pulmonary vascular 
disease (Eisenmenger’s syndrome). Prolonged cyanosis 
is associated with finger and toe clubbing (p. 526).
Growth retardation and learning difficulties
These may occur with large left-to-right shunts at ven-
tricular or great arterial level, and also with other defects, 
especially if they form part of a genetic syndrome. Major 
intellectual impairment is uncommon in children with 
isolated congenital heart disease; however, minor learn-
ing difficulties can occur and may complicate cardiac 
surgery if cerebral perfusion is compromised.
Syncope
In the presence of increased pulmonary vascular resist-
ance or severe left or right ventricular outflow obstruc-
tion, exercise may provoke syncope as systemic vascular 
resistance falls but pulmonary vascular resistance rises, 
worsening right-to-left shunting and cerebral oxy­
genation. Syncope can also occur because of associated 
arrhythmias.
Pulmonary hypertension and  
Eisenmenger’s syndrome
Persistently raised pulmonary flow (e.g. with left-to-
right shunt) causes increased pulmonary resistance fol-
lowed by pulmonary hypertension. Progressive changes, 
including obliteration of distal vessels, occur and are 
irreversible. Central cyanosis appears and digital club-
bing develops. The chest X-ray shows enlarged central 
pulmonary arteries and peripheral ‘pruning’ of the pul-
monary vessels. The ECG shows right ventricular hyper-
trophy. If severe pulmonary hypertension develops, a 
left-to-right shunt may reverse, resulting in right-to-left 
shunt and marked cyanosis (Eisenmenger’s syndrome), 
which may be more apparent in the feet and toes than 
in the upper part of the body: differential cyanosis. This 
is more common with large ventricular septal defects or 
persistent ductus arteriosus than with atrial septal 
defects. Patients with Eisenmenger’s syndrome are at 
particular risk from abrupt changes in afterload that 
exacerbate right-to-left shunting, such as vasodilatation, 
anaesthesia and pregnancy.
Pregnancy
During pregnancy, there is a 50% increase in plasma 
volume, a 40% increase in whole blood volume and a 
similar increase in cardiac output, so problems may arise 
in women with congenital heart disease (Box 18.122). 
Many with palliated or untreated disease will tolerate 
pregnancy well, however. Pregnancy is particularly haz-
ardous in the presence of conditions associated with 
cyanosis or severe pulmonary hypertension; maternal 
mortality in patients with Eisenmenger’s syndrome is 
more than 50%.
Persistent ductus arteriosus
Aetiology
During fetal life, before the lungs begin to function, most 
of the blood from the pulmonary artery passes through 
the ductus arteriosus into the aorta (see Fig. 18.94). Nor-
mally, the ductus closes soon after birth but sometimes 
fails to do so. Persistence of the ductus is associated with 
other abnormalities and is more common in females.
Since the pressure in the aorta is higher than that in 
the pulmonary artery, there will be a continuous arterio-
venous shunt, the volume of which depends on the size 
of the ductus. As much as 50% of the left ventricular 
output is recirculated through the lungs, with a conse-
quent increase in the work of the heart (Fig. 18.96).
Clinical features
With small shunts there may be no symptoms for years 
but, when the ductus is large, growth and development 
may be retarded. Usually, there is no disability in infancy 
• Obstructive lesions (e.g. severe aortic stenosis): poorly 
tolerated and associated with significant maternal morbidity 
and mortality.
• Cyanotic conditions (e.g. Eisenmenger’s syndrome): 
especially poorly tolerated and pregnancy should be avoided.
• Surgically corrected disease: patients often tolerate 
pregnancy well.
• Children of patients with congenital heart disease: 2–5% 
will be born with cardiac abnormalities, especially if the 
mother is affected.
18.122  Pregnancy in women with 
congenital heart disease
Fig. 18.96  Persistent ductus arteriosus. There is a connection 
between the aorta and the pulmonary artery with left-to-right shunting. 
Aorta
RA
   PA
(dilated)
LA
(dilated)
LV
(dilated)
RV
Ductus
arteriosus
Cardiovascular disease
18
632
Fig. 18.95). A systolic murmur is usually heard posteri-
orly, over the coarctation. There may also be an ejection 
click and systolic murmur in the aortic area due to a 
bicuspid aortic valve. As a result of the aortic narrowing, 
collaterals form; they mainly involve the periscapular, 
internal mammary and intercostal arteries, and may 
result in localised bruits.
The chest X-ray in early childhood is often normal but 
later may show changes in the contour of the aorta 
(indentation of the descending aorta, ‘3 sign’) and notch-
ing of the under-surfaces of the ribs from collaterals. 
MRI is the best imaging method. (Fig. 18.97). The ECG 
may show evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy, 
which can be confirmed by echocardiography.
Management
In untreated cases, death may occur from left ventricular 
failure, dissection of the aorta or cerebral haemorrhage. 
Surgical correction is advisable in all but the mildest 
cases. If this is carried out sufficiently early in child-
hood, persistent hypertension can be avoided. Patients 
repaired in late childhood or adult life often remain 
hypertensive or develop recurrent hypertension later 
on. Recurrence of stenosis may occur as the child grows 
and this may be managed by balloon dilatation and 
sometimes stenting. The latter may be used as the 
primary treatment. Coexistent bicuspid aortic valve, 
which occurs in over 50% of cases, may lead to progres-
sive aortic stenosis or regurgitation, and also requires 
long-term follow-up.
Atrial septal defect
Aetiology
Atrial septal defect is one of the most common congeni-
tal heart defects and occurs twice as frequently in 
females. Most are ‘ostium secundum’ defects, involving 
the fossa ovalis that, in utero, was the foramen ovale (see 
Fig. 18.94). ‘Ostium primum’ defects result from a defect 
but cardiac failure may eventually ensue, dyspnoea 
being the first symptom. A continuous ‘machinery’ 
murmur is heard with late systolic accentuation, maximal 
in the second left intercostal space below the clavicle (see 
Fig. 18.96). It is frequently accompanied by a thrill. 
Pulses are increased in volume.
A large left-to-right shunt in infancy may cause a 
considerable rise in pulmonary artery pressure and 
sometimes this leads to progressive pulmonary vascular 
damage. Enlargement of the pulmonary artery may be 
detected radiologically. The ECG is usually normal.
Persistent ductus with reversed shunting
If pulmonary vascular resistance increases, pulmonary 
artery pressure may rise until it equals or exceeds 
aortic pressure. The shunt through the defect may then 
reverse, causing Eisenmenger’s syndrome. The murmur 
becomes quieter, may be confined to systole or may 
disappear. The ECG shows evidence of right ventricular 
hypertrophy.
Management
A patent ductus is closed at cardiac catheterisation with 
an implantable occlusive device. Closure should be 
undertaken in infancy if the shunt is significant and 
pulmonary resistance not elevated, but this may be 
delayed until later childhood in those with smaller 
shunts, for whom closure remains advisable to reduce 
the risk of endocarditis.
Pharmacological treatment in the neonatal period
When the ductus is structurally intact, a prostaglandin 
synthetase inhibitor (indometacin or ibuprofen) may be 
used in the first week of life to induce closure. However, 
in the presence of a congenital defect with impaired lung 
perfusion (e.g. severe pulmonary stenosis and left-to-
right shunt through the ductus), it may be advisable 
to improve oxygenation by keeping the ductus open 
with prostaglandin treatment. Unfortunately, these 
treatments do not work if the ductus is intrinsically 
abnormal.
Coarctation of the aorta
Aetiology
Narrowing of the aorta occurs in the region where the 
ductus arteriosus joins the aorta, i.e. at the isthmus just 
below the origin of the left subclavian artery (see Fig. 
18.94). The condition is twice as common in males and 
occurs in 1 in 4000 children. It is associated with other 
abnormalities, most frequently bicuspid aortic valve and 
‘berry’ aneurysms of the cerebral circulation (p. 1246). 
Acquired coarctation of the aorta is rare but may follow 
trauma or occur as a complication of a progressive 
arteritis (Takayasu’s disease, p. 1116).
Clinical features and investigations
Aortic coarctation is an important cause of cardiac 
failure in the newborn but symptoms are often absent 
when it is detected in older children or adults. Head-
aches may occur from hypertension proximal to the 
coarctation, and occasionally weakness or cramps in the 
legs may result from decreased circulation in the lower 
part of the body. The BP is raised in the upper body but 
normal or low in the legs. The femoral pulses are weak 
and delayed in comparison with the radial pulse (see 
Fig. 18.97  MRI scan of coarctation of the aorta. The aorta is 
severely narrowed just beyond the arch at the start of the descending aorta 
(arrow A). Extensive collaterals have developed; a large internal mammary 
artery (arrow B) and several intercostal arteries (arrows C) are shown. 
Unusually, in this case, there is also a coarctation of the abdominal aorta 
(arrow D). 
A
B
C
D
Congenital heart disease
18
633
in the atrioventricular septum and are associated with a 
‘cleft mitral valve’ (split anterior leaflet).
Since the normal RV is more compliant than the LV, 
a large volume of blood shunts through the defect from 
the LA to the RA, and then to the RV and pulmonary 
arteries (Fig. 18.98). As a result, there is gradual enlarge-
ment of the right side of the heart and of the pulmonary 
arteries. Pulmonary hypertension and shunt reversal 
sometimes complicate atrial septal defect, but are less 
common and tend to occur later in life than with other 
types of left-to-right shunt.
Clinical features and investigations
Most children are asymptomatic for many years and the 
condition is often detected at routine clinical examina-
tion or following a chest X-ray. Dyspnoea, chest infec-
tions, cardiac failure and arrhythmias, especially atrial 
fibrillation, are other possible manifestations. The char-
acteristic physical signs are the result of the volume 
overload of the RV:
•	 wide, fixed splitting of the second heart sound: 
wide because of delay in right ventricular ejection 
(increased stroke volume and right bundle branch 
block) and fixed because the septal defect equalises 
left and right atrial pressures throughout the 
respiratory cycle
•	 a systolic flow murmur over the pulmonary valve.
In children with a large shunt, there may be a diastolic 
flow murmur over the tricuspid valve. Unlike a mitral 
flow murmur, this is usually high-pitched.
The chest X-ray typically shows enlargement of the 
heart and the pulmonary artery, as well as pulmonary 
plethora. The ECG usually shows incomplete right 
bundle branch block because right ventricular depolari-
sation is delayed as a result of ventricular dilatation 
(with a ‘primum’ defect, there is also left axis deviation). 
Echocardiography can directly demonstrate the defect 
and typically shows RV dilatation, RV hypertrophy and 
pulmonary artery dilatation. The precise size and loca-
tion of the defect can be shown by transoesophageal 
echocardiography (Fig. 18.99).
Management
Atrial septal defects in which pulmonary flow is 
increased 50% above systemic flow (i.e. flow ratio of 
1.5 : 1) are often large enough to be clinically recognisa-
ble and should be closed surgically. Closure can also be 
accomplished at cardiac catheterisation using implant-
able closure devices (Fig. 18.100). The long-term progno-
sis thereafter is excellent, unless pulmonary hypertension 
has developed. Severe pulmonary hypertension and 
shunt reversal are both contraindications to surgery.
Ventricular septal defect
Aetiology
Congenital ventricular septal defect occurs as a result of 
incomplete septation of the ventricles. Embryologically, 
the interventricular septum has a membranous and a 
muscular portion, and the latter is further divided into 
inflow, trabecular and outflow portions. Most congenital 
defects are ‘perimembranous’, i.e. at the junction of the 
membranous and muscular portions.
Fig. 18.98  Atrial septal defect. Blood flows across the atrial septum 
(arrow) from left to right. The murmur is produced by increased flow 
velocity across the pulmonary valve, as a result of left-to-right shunting 
and a large stroke volume. The density of shading is proportional to 
velocity of blood flow. 
RA
PA
(dilated)
Aorta
LA
LV
RV
(dilated)
Fig. 18.99  Transoesophageal echocardiogram of an atrial septal 
defect. The defect is clearly seen (arrow) between the LA above and RA 
below. Doppler colour-flow imaging shows flow (blue) across the defect. 
Fig. 18.100  Percutaneous close of atrial septal defect. The closure 
device is delivered across the inter-atrial septum and a disc deployed on 
either side to seal the defect.
LV
RV
RA
Percutaneous
sheath across
atrial septal
defect
IVC
Cardiovascular disease
18
634
medically with digoxin and diuretics. Persisting failure 
is an indication for surgical repair of the defect. Percu-
taneous closure devices are under development.
Doppler echocardiography helps to predict the small 
septal defects that are likely to close spontaneously. 
Eisenmenger’s syndrome is avoided by monitoring for 
signs of rising pulmonary resistance (serial ECG and 
echocardiography) and carrying out surgical repair, 
when appropriate. Surgical closure is contraindicated 
in fully developed Eisenmenger’s syndrome when 
heart–lung transplantation may be the only effective 
treatment.
Except in Eisenmenger’s syndrome, long-term prog-
nosis is very good in congenital ventricular septal defect. 
Many patients with Eisenmenger’s syndrome die in the 
second or third decade of life, but a few survive to the 
fifth decade without transplantation.
Tetralogy of Fallot
The RV outflow obstruction is most often subvalvular 
(infundibular) but may be valvular, supravalvular or a 
combination of these (Fig. 18.102). The ventricular septal 
defect is usually large and similar in aperture to the 
aortic orifice. The combination results in elevated right 
ventricular pressure and right-to-left shunting of cyan-
otic blood across the ventricular septal defect.
Aetiology
The embryological cause is abnormal development of 
the bulbar septum that separates the ascending aorta 
from the pulmonary artery, and which normally aligns 
and fuses with the outflow part of the interventricular 
septum. The defect occurs in about 1 in 2000 births and 
is the most common cause of cyanosis in infancy after 
the first year of life.
Ventricular septal defects are the most common con-
genital cardiac defect, occurring once in 500 live births. 
The defect may be isolated or part of complex congenital 
heart disease. Acquired ventricular septal defect may 
result from rupture as a complication of acute MI or, 
rarely, from trauma.
Clinical features
Flow from the high-pressure LV to the low-pressure RV 
during systole produces a pansystolic murmur, usually 
heard best at the left sternal edge but radiating all over 
the precordium (Fig. 18.101). A small defect often pro-
duces a loud murmur (maladie de Roger) in the absence 
of other haemodynamic disturbance. Conversely, a large 
defect produces a softer murmur, particularly if pres-
sure in the RV is elevated. This may be found immedi-
ately after birth, while pulmonary vascular resistance 
remains high, or when the shunt is reversed in Eisen-
menger’s syndrome.
Congenital ventricular septal defect may present as 
cardiac failure in infants, as a murmur with only minor 
haemodynamic disturbance in older children or adults, 
or, rarely, as Eisenmenger’s syndrome. In a proportion 
of infants, the murmur gets quieter or disappears due to 
spontaneous closure of the defect.
If cardiac failure complicates a large defect, it is 
usually absent in the immediate postnatal period and 
only becomes apparent in the first 4–6 weeks of life. 
In addition to the murmur, there is prominent paraster-
nal pulsation, tachypnoea and indrawing of the lower 
ribs on inspiration. The chest X-ray shows pulmonary 
plethora and the ECG shows bilateral ventricular 
hypertrophy.
Management and prognosis
Small ventricular septal defects require no specific treat-
ment. Cardiac failure in infancy is initially treated 
Fig. 18.101  Ventricular septal defect. In this example, a large 
left-to-right shunt (arrows) has resulted in chamber enlargement. 
RA
PA
(dilated)
Aorta
LA
(dilated)
LV
(dilated)
RV
(dilated)
Fig. 18.102  Tetralogy of Fallot. The tetralogy comprises (1) pulmonary 
stenosis, (2) overriding of the ventricular septal defect by the aorta, (3) a 
ventricular septal defect and (4) right ventricular hypertrophy. 
RA
PA
Aorta
LA
LV
RV
(4) Right
ventricular
hypertrophy
(3) Ventricular
septal defect
(1) Pulmonary
stenosis
(valvular)
(2) Overriding
aorta
Pulmonary stenosis
(infundibular)
Congenital heart disease
18
635
Clinical features
Children are usually cyanosed but this may not be the 
case in the neonate because it is only when right ven-
tricular pressure rises to equal or exceed left ventricular 
pressure that a large right-to-left shunt develops. The 
subvalvular component of the RV outflow obstruction is 
dynamic and may increase suddenly under adrenergic 
stimulation. The affected child suddenly becomes 
increasingly cyanosed, often after feeding or a crying 
attack, and may become apnoeic and unconscious. These 
attacks are called ‘Fallot’s spells’. In older children, Fal-
lot’s spells are uncommon but cyanosis becomes increas-
ingly apparent, with stunting of growth, digital clubbing 
and polycythaemia. Some children characteristically 
obtain relief by squatting after exertion, which increases 
the afterload of the left heart and reduces the right-to-left 
shunting: Fallot’s sign. The natural history before the 
development of surgical correction was variable but 
most patients died in infancy or childhood.
On examination, the most characteristic feature is the 
combination of cyanosis with a loud ejection systolic 
murmur in the pulmonary area (as for pulmonary steno-
sis). However, cyanosis may be absent in the newborn 
or in patients with only mild right ventricular outflow 
obstruction (‘acyanotic tetralogy of Fallot’).
Investigations and management
The ECG shows right ventricular hypertrophy and the 
chest X-ray shows an abnormally small pulmonary 
artery and a ‘boot-shaped’ heart. Echocardiography is 
diagnostic and demonstrates that the aorta is not con-
tinuous with the anterior ventricular septum.
The definitive management is total correction of the 
defect by surgical relief of the pulmonary stenosis and 
closure of the ventricular septal defect. Primary surgical 
correction may be undertaken prior to the age of 5 years. 
If the pulmonary arteries are too hypoplastic, then pal-
liation in the form of a Blalock–Taussig shunt may be 
performed, with an anastomosis created between the 
pulmonary artery and subclavian artery. This improves 
pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary artery develop-
ment, and may facilitate later definitive correction.
The prognosis after total correction is good, espe-
cially if the operation is performed in childhood. 
Follow-up is needed to identify residual shunting, 
recurrent pulmonary stenosis and arrhythmias. An 
implantable defibrillator is sometimes recommended 
in adulthood.
Other causes of cyanotic 
congenital heart disease
There are other causes of cyanotic congenital heart 
disease (Box 18.123) and echocardiography is usually 
the definitive diagnostic procedure, supplemented, if 
necessary, by cardiac catheterisation.
Grown-up congenital heart disease
There are increasing numbers of children who have had 
surgical correction of congenital defects and who may 
have further problems as adults. The transition period 
between paed­iatric and adult care needs to be managed 
in a carefully planned manner, addressing many diverse 
aspects of care (Box 18.124). Those who have undergone 
correction of coarctation of the aorta may develop 
Defect
Features
Tricuspid atresia
Absent tricuspid orifice, hypoplastic 
RV, RA-to-LA shunt, ventricular septal 
defect shunt, other anomalies
Surgical correction may be possible
Transposition of the 
great vessels
Aorta arises from the morphological 
RV, pulmonary artery from LV
Shunt via atria, ductus and possibly 
ventricular septal defect
Palliation by balloon atrial 
septostomy/enlargement
Surgical correction possible
Pulmonary atresia
Pulmonary valve atretic and 
pulmonary artery hypoplastic
RA-to-LA shunt, pulmonary flow via 
ductus
Palliation by balloon atrial septostomy
Surgical correction may be possible
Ebstein’s anomaly
Tricuspid valve is dysplastic and 
displaced into RV, RV ‘atrialised’
Tricuspid regurgitation and RA-to-LA 
shunt
Wide spectrum of severity
Arrhythmias
Surgical repair possible but 
significant risk
18.123  Other causes of cyanotic 
congenital heart disease
• Patients: a heterogeneous population with residual 
disease and sequelae that vary according to the underlying 
lesion and in severity; each patient must be assessed 
individually.
• Management plan: should be agreed with the patient and 
include a ‘cardiac destination’.
• Risks of surgery: non-cardiac surgery, e.g. for associated 
congenital abnormalities, carries increased risks and needs 
to be planned, with careful pre-operative assessment. Risks 
include thrombosis, embolism from synthetic shunts or 
patches, and volume overload from fluid shifts. Operative 
approaches should address cosmetic concerns, e.g. 
abdominal generator implantation may be less unsightly.
• Exercise: patients with mild or repaired defects can 
undertake moderately vigorous exercise but those with 
complex defects, cyanosis, ventricular dysfunction or 
arrhythmias require specialist evaluation and individualised 
advice regarding exercise.
• Genetics: 10–15% have a genetic basis and this should be 
assessed to understand the impact it may have for the 
patient’s own future children. A family history, genetic 
evaluation of syndromic versus non-syndromic disorders and, 
sometimes, cytogenetics are required.
• Education and employment: may be adversely affected and 
occupational activity levels need to be assessed.
• End of life: some adolescents with complex disorders may 
misperceive and think they have been cured; transition to 
adult services may be the first time they receive information 
about mortality. Expectations on life expectancy need to be 
managed and adolescents are often willing to engage with 
this and play a role in decision-making.
18.124  Congenital heart disease in adolescence
Cardiovascular disease
18
636
•	 Chronic persistent myocarditis is characterised by 
focal myocardial infiltrates and can cause chest pain 
and arrhythmia without necessarily causing 
ventricular dysfunction.
In myocarditis, ECG changes are common but non-
specific. Biochemical markers of myocardial injury (e.g. 
troponin I and T, creatine kinase) may be elevated in the 
early phases. Echocardiography may reveal left ven-
tricular dysfunction that is sometimes regional (due to 
focal myocarditis), and cardiac MRI may show diagnos-
tic patterns of myocardial inflammation or infiltration. 
Endomyocardial biopsy is sometimes used to confirm 
the diagnosis.
Management and prognosis
In most patients, myocarditis is self-limiting and the 
immediate prognosis is good. However, death may 
occur due to a ventricular arrhythmia or rapidly pro-
gressive heart failure. Myocarditis has been reported as 
a cause of sudden and unexpected death in young ath-
letes. Some forms of myocarditis may lead to chronic 
low-grade myocarditis or dilated cardiomyopathy (see 
below); for example, in Chagas’ disease (p. 360), the 
patient frequently recovers from the acute infection but 
goes on to develop a chronic dilated cardiomyopathy 
10 or 20 years later.
Specific antimicrobial therapy may be used if a 
causative organism has been identified; this is rare, 
however, and in most cases only supportive therapy is 
available. Treatment for cardiac failure or arrhythmias 
may be required and patients should be advised to avoid 
intense physical exertion because there is some evidence 
that this can induce potentially fatal ventricular arrhyth-
mias. There is no evidence for any benefit from treat-
ment with corticosteroids and immunosuppressive 
agents. Rarely cardiac transplantation or temporary cir-
culatory support with a mechanical ventricular assist 
device is required.
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathies are diseases of the myocardium, and 
are classified according to their structural and functional 
presentation (Fig. 18.103). They can be inherited or have 
infective, toxic or idiopathic aetiologies.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
This is characterised by dilatation and impaired contrac-
tion of the LV and often the RV. Left ventricular mass is 
increased but wall thickness is normal or reduced (see 
Fig. 18.103). Dilatation of the valve rings can lead to 
‘functional’ mitral and tricuspid incompetence. Histo-
logical changes are variable but include myofibrillary 
loss, interstitial fibrosis and T-cell infiltrates. The dif-
ferential diagnosis includes ventricular dysfunction due 
to coronary artery disease, and a diagnosis of dilated 
cardiomyopathy should only be made when this has 
been excluded.
The pathogenesis is not clear but dilated cardio­
myopathy probably encompasses a heterogenous group 
of conditions. Alcohol may be an important cause in 
some patients. At least 25% of cases are inherited as an 
autosomal dominant trait and a variety of single-gene 
mutations have been identified. Most of these mutations 
hypertension in adult life. Those with transposition of 
the great arteries who have had a ‘Mustard’ repair, 
where blood is redirected at atrial level, leaving the RV 
connected to the aorta, may develop right ventricular 
failure in adult life. The RV is unsuited for function at 
systemic pressures and may begin to dilate and fail 
when patients are in their twenties or thirties.
Those who have had surgery involving the atria may 
develop atrial arrhythmias, and those who have ven-
tricular scars may develop ventricular arrhythmias and 
need consideration for implantation of an implantable 
cardiac defibrillator. Such patients require careful 
follow-up from the teenage years throughout adult life, 
so that problems can be identified early and appropriate 
medical or surgical treatment instituted. The manage-
ment of patients with grown-up congenital heart disease 
(‘GUCH’) is complex and has developed as a cardiologi-
cal subspecialty.
DISEASES OF THE MYOCARDIUM
Although the myocardium is involved in most types 
of heart disease, the terms ‘myocarditis’ and ‘cardio­
myopathy’ are usually reserved for conditions that pri-
marily affect the heart muscle.
Myocarditis
This is an acute inflammatory condition that can have 
an infectious, toxic or autoimmune aetiology. Myocardi-
tis can complicate many infections in which inflamma-
tion may be due directly to infection of the myocardium 
or the effects of circulating toxins. Viral infections are 
the most common causes, such as Coxsackie (35 cases 
per 1000 infections) and influenza A and B (25 cases 
per 1000 infections) viruses. Myocarditis may occur 
several weeks after the initial viral symptoms and 
susceptibility is increased by corticosteroid treatment, 
immunosuppression, radiation, previous myocardial 
damage and exercise. Some bacterial and protozoal 
infections may be complicated by myocarditis; for 
example, approximately 5% of patients with Lyme 
disease (Borrelia burgdorferi, p. 334) develop myopericar-
ditis, which is often associated with AV block. Toxic 
aetiologies include drugs, which may directly injure 
the myocardium (e.g. cocaine, lithium and anti-cancer 
drugs, such as doxorubicin) or which may cause a 
hypersensitivity reaction and associated myocarditis 
(e.g. penicillins and sulphonamides, lead and carbon 
monoxide). Occasionally, autoimmune conditions, such 
as systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthri-
tis, are associated with myocarditis.
Clinical features and investigations
Myocarditis can be classified by four distinct clinical 
presentations:
•	 Fulminant myocarditis follows a viral prodrome or 
influenza-like illness, and results in severe heart 
failure or cardiogenic shock.
•	 Acute myocarditis presents over a longer period with 
heart failure; it can lead to dilated cardiomyopathy.
•	 Chronic active myocarditis is rare and associated with 
chronic myocardial inflammation.
Diseases of the myocardium
18
637
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
This is the most common form of cardiomyopathy, with 
a prevalence of approximately 100 per 100 000. It is char-
acterised by inappropriate and elaborate left ventricular 
hypertrophy with malalignment of the myocardial fibres 
and myocardial fibrosis. The hypertrophy may be 
generalised or confined largely to the interventricular 
septum (asymmetric septal hypertrophy, see Fig. 18.103) 
or other regions (e.g. apical hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy, a variant which is common in the Far East).
Heart failure may develop because the stiff non-
compliant ventricles impede diastolic filling. Septal 
hypertrophy may also cause dynamic left ventricular 
outflow tract obstruction (hypertrophic obstructive car-
diomyopathy, HOCM) and mitral regurgitation due to 
abnormal systolic anterior motion of the anterior mitral 
valve leaflet. Effort-related symptoms (angina and 
breathlessness), arrhythmia and sudden death are the 
dominant clinical presentations.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetic disorder, 
usually with autosomal dominant transmission, a high 
degree of penetrance and variable expression. In most 
patients, it is due to a single point mutation in one of the 
genes that encode sarcomeric contractile proteins. There 
are three common groups of mutation with different 
phenotypes. Beta-myosin heavy chain mutations are 
associated with elaborate ventricular hypertrophy. Tro-
ponin mutations are associated with little, and some-
times even no, hypertrophy but marked myocardial 
fibre disarray, an abnormal vascular response (e.g. 
exercise-induced hypotension) and a high risk of sudden 
death. Myosin-binding protein C mutations tend to 
affect proteins in the cytoskeleton of the myocyte (e.g. 
dystrophin, lamin A and C, emerin and metavinculin) 
and many are associated with minor skeletal muscle 
abnormalities. Most of the X-linked inherited skeletal 
muscular dystrophies (e.g. Becker and Duchenne, 
p. 1228) are associated with cardiomyopathy. Finally, 
a late autoimmune reaction to viral myocarditis is 
thought to be the cause in a substantial subgroup of 
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy; a similar mecha-
nism is thought to be responsible for the heart muscle 
disease that occurs in up to 10% of patients with 
advanced HIV infection.
In North America and Europe, symptomatic dilated 
cardiomyopathy has an incidence of 20 per 100 000 and 
a prevalence of 38 per 100 000. Men are affected more 
than twice as often as women. Most patients present 
with heart failure or are found to have the condition 
during routine investigation. Arrhythmia, thrombo­
embolism and sudden death may occur at any stage; 
sporadic chest pain is a surprisingly frequent symptom. 
The ECG usually shows non-specific changes but 
echocardiography and cardiac MRI are useful in estab-
lishing the diagnosis. Treatment is aimed at controlling 
the resulting heart failure. Although some patients 
remain well for many years, the prognosis is variable 
and cardiac transplantation may be indicated. Patients 
with dilated cardiomyopathy and moderate or severe 
heart failure may be at risk of sudden arrhythmic death. 
This risk is substantially reduced by rigorous medical 
therapy with β-blockers and angiotensin receptor 
antagonists. Some patients may be considered for 
implantation of a cardiac defibrillator and/or cardiac 
resynchronisation therapy (p. 579).
Fig. 18.103  Types of cardiomyopathy.  A Normal heart.  B Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: asymmetric septal hypertrophy (ASH) with systolic anterior 
motion of the mitral valve (SAM), causing mitral reflux and dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.  C Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: concentric 
hypertrophy.  D Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: apical hypertrophy.  E Dilated cardiomyopathy.  F Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
 G Obliterative cardiomyopathy.  H Restrictive cardiomyopathy. 
SAM
ASH
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Cardiovascular disease
18
638
clinical risk factors for sudden death (see Box 18.126). 
Digoxin and vasodilators may increase outflow tract 
obstruction and should be avoided.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy
In this condition, patches of the right ventricular myo-
cardium are replaced with fibrous and fatty tissue (see 
Fig. 18.102). It is inherited as an autosomal dominant 
trait and has a prevalence of approximately 10 per 
100 000. The dominant clinical problems are ventricular 
arrhythmias, sudden death and right-sided cardiac 
failure. The ECG typically shows a slightly broadened 
QRS complex and inverted T waves in the right precor-
dial leads. MRI is a useful diagnostic tool and is used, 
along with the 12-lead ECG and ambulatory ECG moni-
toring, to screen the first-degree relatives of affected 
individuals. Patients at high risk of sudden death can be 
offered an implantable cardiac defibrillator.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
In this rare condition, ventricular filling is impaired 
because the ventricles are ‘stiff’ (see Fig. 18.102). This 
leads to high atrial pressures with atrial hypertrophy, 
dilatation and, later, atrial fibrillation. Amyloidosis is 
the most common cause in the UK, although other forms 
of infiltration (e.g. glycogen storage diseases), idiopathic 
perimyocyte fibrosis and a familial form of restrictive 
cardiomyopathy do occur. Diagnosis can be very diffi-
cult and requires complex Doppler echocardiography, 
CT or MRI, and endomyocardial biopsy. Treatment is 
symptomatic but the prognosis is usually poor and 
transplantation may be indicated.
Obliterative cardiomyopathy
This is a rare form of restrictive cardiomyopathy, involv-
ing the endocardium of one or both ventricles; it is char-
acterised by thrombosis and fibrosis, with gradual 
obliteration of the ventricular cavities (e.g. endomyo­
cardial fibroelastosis, see Fig. 18.103). The mitral and 
tricuspid valves become regurgitant. Heart failure and 
pulmonary and systemic embolism are prominent fea-
tures. It can sometimes be associated with eosinophilia 
(e.g. eosinophilic leukaemia, Churg–Strauss syndrome, 
p. 1118). In tropical countries, the disease can be respon-
sible for up to 10% of cardiac deaths. Mortality is high: 
50% at 2 years. Anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy 
are used, and diuretics may help symptoms of heart 
failure. Surgery (tricuspid and/or mitral valve replace-
ment with decortication of the endocardium) may be 
helpful in selected cases.
Specific diseases of heart muscle
Many forms of specific heart muscle disease produce a 
clinical picture that is indistinguishable from dilated car-
diomyopathy (e.g. connective tissue disorders, sarcoid­
osis, haemochromatosis, alcoholic heart muscle disease, 
Box 18.127). In contrast, amyloidosis and eosinophilic 
heart disease produce symptoms and signs similar 
to those found in restrictive or obliterative cardio­
myopathy, whereas the heart disease associated with 
Friedreich’s ataxia (p. 1199) can mimic hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.
present late in life and are often associated with hyper-
tension and arrhythmia.
Symptoms and signs are similar to those of aortic 
stenosis, except that, in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
the character of the arterial pulse is jerky (Box 18.125).
The ECG is abnormal and shows features of left ven-
tricular hypertrophy with a wide variety of often bizarre 
abnormalities (e.g. pseudo-infarct pattern, deep T-wave 
inversion). Echocardiography is diagnostic, although 
the diagnosis may be difficult when another cause of left 
ventricular hypertrophy is present (e.g. physical training 
– athletes’ heart, hypertension) but the degree of hyper-
trophy is greater than expected. Genetic testing may 
facilitate diagnosis and, in some cases, is helpful in 
screening relatives of affected individuals.
The natural history is variable but clinical deteriora-
tion is often slow. The annual mortality from sudden 
death is 2–3% among adults and 4–6% in children and 
adolescents (Box 18.126). Sudden death typically occurs 
during or just after vigorous physical activity; indeed, 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common 
cause of sudden death in young athletes. Ventricular 
arrhythmias may be responsible for many of these.
Beta-blockers, rate-limiting calcium antagonists (e.g. 
verapamil) and disopyramide can help to relieve symp-
toms and sometimes prevent syncopal attacks; however, 
there is no pharmacological treatment that is definitely 
known to improve prognosis. Arrhythmias are common 
and often respond to treatment with amiodarone. 
Outflow tract obstruction can be improved by partial 
surgical resection (myectomy) or by iatrogenic infarction 
of the basal septum (septal ablation) using a catheter-
delivered alcohol solution. An implantable cardiac 
defibrillator should be considered in patients with 
Symptoms
• Angina on effort
• Dyspnoea on effort
• Syncope on effort
• Sudden death
Signs
• Jerky pulse*
• Palpable left ventricular hypertrophy
• Double impulse at the apex (palpable fourth heart sound due 
to left atrial hypertrophy)
• Mid-systolic murmur at the base*
• Pansystolic murmur (due to mitral regurgitation) at the apex
*Signs of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction may be augmented by 
standing up (reduced venous return), inotropes and vasodilators (e.g. 
sublingual nitrate).
18.125  Clinical features of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy
• A history of previous cardiac arrest or sustained ventricular 
tachycardia
• Recurrent syncope
• An adverse genotype and/or family history
• Exercise-induced hypotension
• Non-sustained ventricular tachycardia on ambulatory ECG 
monitoring
• Marked increase in left ventricular wall thickness
18.126  Risk factors for sudden death in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Diseases of the pericardium
18
639
Acute pericarditis
Aetiology
Pericardial inflammation may be due to a number of 
pathologies (Box 18.128) but sometimes remains unex-
plained. Pericarditis and myocarditis often coexist, and 
all forms of pericarditis may produce a pericardial effu-
sion (see below) that, depending on the aetiology, may 
be fibrinous, serous, haemorrhagic or purulent.
A fibrinous exudate may eventually lead to varying 
degrees of adhesion formation, whereas serous pericar-
ditis often produces a large effusion of turbid, straw-
coloured fluid with a high protein content.
A haemorrhagic effusion is often due to malignant 
disease, particularly carcinoma of the breast or bron-
chus, and lymphoma.
Purulent pericarditis is rare and may occur as a com-
plication of septicaemia, by direct spread from an 
intrathoracic infection, or from a penetrating injury.
Clinical features
The characteristic pain of pericarditis is retrosternal, 
radiates to the shoulders and neck, and is typically 
aggravated by deep breathing, movement, a change of 
position, exercise and swallowing. A low-grade fever is 
common. A pericardial friction rub is a high-pitched 
superficial scratching or crunching noise, produced by 
movement of the inflamed pericardium, and is diagnos-
tic of pericarditis; it is usually heard in systole but may 
also be audible in diastole and frequently has a ‘to-and-
fro’ quality.
Investigations and management
The ECG shows ST elevation with upward concavity 
(Fig. 18.104) over the affected area, which may be 
widespread. PR interval depression is a very specific 
indicator of acute pericarditis. Later, there may be 
T-wave inversion, particularly if there is a degree of 
myocarditis.
The pain is usually relieved by aspirin (600 mg 
6 times daily) but a more potent anti-inflammatory 
agent, such as indometacin (25 mg 3 times daily), 
may be required. Colchicine or corticosteroids may 
suppress symptoms but there is no evidence that they 
accelerate cure.
In viral pericarditis, recovery usually occurs within a 
few days or weeks but there may be recurrences (chronic 
relapsing pericarditis). Purulent pericarditis requires 
Treatment and prognosis are determined by the 
underlying disorder. Abstention from alcohol may lead 
to a dramatic improvement in patients with alcoholic 
heart muscle disease.
Cardiac tumours
Primary cardiac tumours are rare (< 0.2% of autopsies) 
but the heart and mediastinum may be the sites of metas-
tases. Most primary tumours are benign (75%) and, of 
these, the majority are myxomas. The remainder are 
fibromas, lipomas, fibroelastomas and haemangiomas.
Atrial myxoma
Myxomas most commonly arise in the LA as single 
or multiple polypoid tumours, attached by a pedicle to 
the interatrial septum. They are usually gelatinous but 
may be solid and even calcified, with superimposed 
thrombus.
On examination, the first heart sound is usually loud, 
and there may be a murmur of mitral regurgitation with 
a variable diastolic sound (tumour ‘plop’) due to pro-
lapse of the mass through the mitral valve. The tumour 
can be detected incidentally on echocardiography, or 
following investigation of pyrexia, syncope, arrhyth-
mias or emboli. Occasionally, the condition presents 
with malaise and features suggestive of a connective 
tissue disorder, including a raised ESR.
Treatment is by surgical excision. If the pedicle is 
removed, fewer than 5% of tumours recur.
DISEASES OF THE PERICARDIUM
The normal pericardial sac contains about 50 mL of 
fluid, similar to lymph, which lubricates the surface of 
the heart. The pericardium limits distension of the heart, 
contributes to the haemodynamic interdependence of 
the ventricles, and acts as a barrier to infection. Never-
theless, congenital absence of the pericardium does not 
result in significant clinical or functional limitations.
Infections
• Viral, e.g. Coxsackie A and B, influenza, HIV
• Bacterial, e.g. diphtheria, Borrelia burgdorferi
• Protozoal, e.g. trypanosomiasis
Endocrine and metabolic disorders
• Diabetes, hypo- and hyperthyroidism, acromegaly, carcinoid 
syndrome, phaeochromocytoma, inherited storage diseases
Connective tissue diseases
• Systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
polyarteritis nodosa
Infiltrative disorders
• Haemochromatosis, haemosiderosis, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis
Toxins
• Doxorubicin, alcohol, cocaine, irradiation
Neuromuscular disorders
• Dystrophia myotonica, Friedreich’s ataxia
18.127  Specific diseases of heart muscle
Common
• Viral (e.g. Coxsackie B but 
often not identified)
• Acute MI
Less common
• Uraemia
• Malignant disease
• Trauma (e.g. blunt chest 
injury)
• Connective tissue disease 
(e.g. systemic lupus 
erythematosus)
Rare (in UK)
• Bacterial infection
• Rheumatic fever
• Tuberculosis
18.128  Aetiology of acute pericarditis
Cardiovascular disease
18
640
Pericardial aspiration (pericardiocentesis)
Aspiration of a pericardial effusion is indicated for 
diagnostic purposes or for the treatment of cardiac 
tamponade. A needle is inserted under echocardio-
graphic guidance medial to the cardiac apex or below 
the xiphoid process, directed upwards towards the 
left shoulder. The route of choice will depend on the 
experience of the operator, the shape of the patient and 
the position of the effusion. A few millilitres of fluid 
aspirated through the needle may be sufficient for diag-
nostic purposes but pericardial drainage is needed for 
symptom relief.
Complications of pericardiocentesis include arrhyth-
mias, damage to a coronary artery, and bleeding with 
exacerbation of tamponade as a result of injury to the 
RV. When tamponade is due to cardiac rupture or aortic 
dissection, pericardial aspiration may precipitate further 
potentially fatal bleeding and, in these situations, emer-
gency surgery is the treatment of choice. A viscous, locu-
lated or recurrent effusion may also require formal 
surgical drainage.
Tuberculous pericarditis
Tuberculous pericarditis may complicate pulmonary 
tuberculosis but may also be the first manifestation of 
the infection. In Africa, a tuberculous pericardial effu-
sion is a common feature of AIDS (p. 405).
The condition typically presents with chronic malaise, 
weight loss and a low-grade fever. An effusion usually 
develops and the pericardium may become thick 
and unyielding, leading to pericardial constriction or 
tamponade. An associated pleural effusion is often 
present.
The diagnosis may be confirmed by aspiration of the 
fluid and direct examination or culture for tubercle 
bacilli. Treatment requires specific antituberculous 
chemotherapy (p. 693); in addition, a 3-month course of 
prednisolone (initial dose 60 mg a day, tapering down 
rapidly) improves outcome.
treatment with antimicrobial therapy, pericardiocentesis 
and, if necessary, surgical drainage.
Pericardial effusion
If a pericardial effusion develops, there is sometimes a 
sensation of retrosternal oppression. An effusion is dif-
ficult to detect clinically. The heart sounds may become 
quieter, although a friction rub is not always abolished.
The QRS voltages on the ECG are often reduced in 
the presence of a large effusion. The QRS complexes may 
alternate in amplitude due to a to-and-fro motion of the 
heart within the fluid-filled pericardial sac (electrical 
alternans). The chest X-ray may show an increased size 
of the cardiac silhouette and, when there is a large effu-
sion, this has a globular appearance. Echocardiography 
is the definitive investigation and is used to monitor 
the size of the effusion and its effect on cardiac function 
(Fig. 18.105).
Cardiac tamponade
This term is used to describe acute heart failure due to 
compression of the heart by a large or rapidly develop-
ing effusion, and is described in detail on page 545. 
Typical physical findings are of a markedly raised JVP, 
hypotension, pulsus paradoxus (p. 532) and oliguria. 
Atypical presentations may occur when the effusion is 
loculated as a result of previous pericarditis or cardiac 
surgery.
Fig. 18.104  ECG in viral pericarditis. Widespread ST elevation (leads 
I, II, aVL and V1–V6) is shown. The upward concave shape of the ST 
segments (see leads II and V6) and the unusual distribution of changes 
(involving anterior and inferior leads) help to distinguish pericarditis from 
acute MI. 
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
III
aVF
V3
V6
II
I
Fig. 18.105  Pericardial effusion: echocardiogram (apical view). 
Short axis view of the heart showing a large circumferential pericardial 
effusion (arrows). (LV = left ventricle) 
LV
LV
18
641
Further information and acknowledgements
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.acc.org American College of Cardiology (ACC): free access 
to guidelines for the evaluation and management of many 
cardiac conditions.
www.americanheart.org American Heart Association (AHA): 
free access to all the ACC/AHA/ESC guidelines, AHA 
scientific statements and fact sheets for patients.
www.escardio.org European Society of Cardiology (ESC): free 
access to guidelines for the diagnosis and management of many 
cardiac conditions, and to educational modules.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 526 insets (Splinter haemorrhage, jugular venous pulse, 
malar flush, tendon xanthomas), Fig. 18.91, 18.92 inset 
(Doppler echo), 18.93 insets (Petechial rash, nail-fold infarct) 
Newby D, Grubb N. Cardiology: an illustrated colour 
text. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2005; copyright 
Elsevier.
Figs 18.19, 18.70 Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines 
Network (SIGN) 93; Feb 2007; pp. 42 (annex 1) and 47 
(annex 4).
Figs 18.34, 18.35 Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines.
Fig. 18.61 Stary HC, et al. Circulation 1995; 92:1355–1374. 
© 1995 American Heart Association.
Fig. 18.62 Joint British Societies Cardiovascular Risk 
Prediction Chart, reproduced with permission from the 
University of Manchester.
Figs 18.84, 18.85 From NICE Clinical Guideline 127, 
Hypertension; August 2011.
Fig. 18.86 inset (Erythema marginatum) Savin JA, Hunter JAA, 
Hepburn NC. Skin signs in clinical medicine. London: 
Mosby–Wolfe; 1997; copyright Elsevier.
Fig. 18.94 Adapted from Drews U. Colour atlas of 
embryology. Stuttgart: Georg Thieme; 1995 (Fig. 6.9,  
p. 299).
Chronic constrictive pericarditis
Constrictive pericarditis is due to progressive thicken-
ing, fibrosis and calcification of the pericardium. In 
effect, the heart is encased in a solid shell and cannot 
fill properly. The calcification may extend into the 
myocardium, so there may also be impaired myocardial 
contraction. The condition often follows an attack of 
tuberculous pericarditis but can also complicate haemo-
pericardium, viral pericarditis, rheumatoid arthritis and 
purulent pericarditis. It is often impossible to identify 
the original insult.
Clinical features and management
The symptoms and signs of systemic venous congestion 
are the hallmarks of constrictive pericarditis. Atrial 
fibrillation is common and there is often dramatic ascites 
and hepatomegaly (Box 18.129). Breathlessness is not a 
prominent symptom because the lungs are seldom 
congested.
The condition is sometimes overlooked but should be 
suspected in any patient with unexplained right heart 
failure and a small heart. A chest X-ray, which may 
show pericardial calcification (Fig. 18.106), and echocar-
diography often help to establish the diagnosis. CT scan-
ning is useful for imaging the pericardial calcification.
Constrictive pericarditis is often difficult to distin-
guish from restrictive cardiomyopathy and the final 
diagnosis may depend on complex echo–Doppler 
studies and cardiac catheterisation. Surgical resection of 
the diseased pericardium can lead to a dramatic improve-
ment but carries a high morbidity with disappointing 
results in up to 50% of patients.
Fig. 18.106  Lateral chest X-ray from a patient with severe heart 
failure due to chronic constrictive pericarditis. There is heavy 
calcification of the pericardium. 
• Fatigue
• Rapid, low-volume pulse
• Elevated JVP with a rapid y 
descent
• Kussmaul’s sign (a 
paradoxical rise in the JVP 
during inspiration)
• Loud early third heart 
sound or ‘pericardial 
knock’
• Hepatomegaly
• Ascites
• Peripheral oedema
• Pulsus paradoxus 
(excessive fall in BP during 
inspiration): present in 
some cases
18.129  Clinical features of constrictive 
pericarditis
This page intentionally left blank
643
19 
Clinical examination of the respiratory 
system 644
Functional anatomy and physiology 646
Investigation of respiratory disease 649
Imaging 649
Endoscopic examination 651
Immunological and serological tests 652
Microbiological investigations 652
Respiratory function testing 652
Presenting problems in respiratory  
disease 654
Cough 654
Breathlessness 655
Chest pain 658
Haemoptysis 658
The incidental pulmonary nodule 660
Pleural effusion 661
Respiratory failure 663
Obstructive pulmonary diseases 666
Asthma 666
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 673
Bronchiectasis 678
Cystic fibrosis 680
Infections of the respiratory system 681
Upper respiratory tract infection 681
Pneumonia 682
Tuberculosis 688
Respiratory diseases caused by fungi 697
Respiratory disease
Pulmonary vascular disease 721
Venous thromboembolism 721
Pulmonary hypertension 724
Diseases of the upper airway 725
Diseases of the nasopharynx 725
Sleep-disordered breathing 725
Laryngeal disorders 727
Tracheal disorders 728
Pleural disease 728
Pneumothorax 728
Diseases of the diaphragm and chest  
wall 731
Disorders of the diaphragm 731
Deformities of the chest wall 731
P.T. Reid
J.A. Innes
Tumours of the bronchus and lung 699
Primary tumours of the lung 699
Secondary tumours of the lung 704
Tumours of the mediastinum 705
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary 
diseases 706
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease 706
Lung diseases due to systemic inflammatory 
disease 711
Pulmonary eosinophilia and vasculitides 713
Lung diseases due to irradiation and  
drugs 714
Rare interstitial lung diseases 714
Occupational and environmental lung 
disease 715
Occupational airway disease 715
Pneumoconiosis 716
Asbestos-related lung and pleural  
diseases 718
Lung diseases due to organic dusts 719
Occupational lung cancer 720
Occupational pneumonia 720
Respiratory disease
644
2
1
4
5
6
9
10
8
7
6
9
3
Hands
Digital clubbing
Tar staining
Peripheral cyanosis
Signs of occupation
CO2 retention flap
Radial pulse
Rate
Rhythm
Jugular venous pulse
Elevated
Pulsatile
Face, mouth and eyes
Pursed lips
Central cyanosis
Anaemia
Horner’s syndrome
(Ch. 26)
Thorax
(see opposite)
–
Palpation
From the front:
  Trachea central
  Cricosternal distance
  Cardiac apex displaced
  Expansion
From behind:
  Cervical lymphadenopathy
  Expansion
Leg oedema
Cor pulmonale
Venous thrombosis
• Respiratory rate
• Cachexia, fever, rash
• Sputum (see below)
• Fetor
Observation
Finger clubbing
Blood pressure
Arterial paradox
Auscultation
Breath sounds:
normal, bronchial, louder or softer
Added sounds:
wheezes, crackles, rubs
Spoken voice (vocal resonance):
absent (effusion), increased
(consolidation)
Whispered voice:
whispering pectoriloquy
Percussion
Resonant or dull
‘Stony dull’ (effusion)
Inspection
Deformity
(e.g. pectus excavatum)
Scars
Intercostal indrawing
Symmetry of expansion
Hyperinflation
Paradoxical rib movement
(low flat diaphragm)
Idiopathic kyphoscoliosis
• Locale
    Oxygen delivery (mask, cannulae)
    Nebulisers
    Inhalers
Serous/frothy/pink
 Pulmonary oedema
Mucopurulent
 Bronchial or pneumonic
 infection
Purulent
 Bronchial or pneumonic
 infection
Blood-stained
 Cancer, tuberculosis,
 bronchiectasis,
 pulmonary embolism
Sputum
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Clinical examination of the respiratory system
645
Insets (Upper lobe collapse) http://3.bp.blogspot.com; (Pneumothorax) http://chestatlas.com; (Pleural effusion) www.ispub.com – see p. 731. 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Use of accessory
muscles
Hyperinflated
‘barrel’ chest
Auscultation
  Reduced breath
  sounds – wheeze
Pursed lip breathing
Central cyanosis
Prolonged expiration
Reduced cricosternal
distance
Intercostal
indrawing
during
inspiration
Cardiac apex not
palpable
Loss of cardiac
dullness on
percussion
Inward movement
of lower ribs
on inspiration
(low flat diaphragm)
Also: raised JVP, peripheral oedema if cor pulmonale
Heart sounds
loudest in
epigastrium
Pulmonary fibrosis
Small lungs
Reduced
expansion
Dull percussion at bases
(high diaphragm)
Central cyanosis
Tachypnoea
Auscultation
  Fine inspiratory
  crackles at
  bases
See also Fig. 19.57
Also: finger clubbing common in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; raised JVP
and peripheral oedema if cor pulmonale
Right middle lobe pneumonia
Right upper lobe collapse
Right pneumothorax
Large right pleural effusion
Inspection
   Tachypnoea
   Central cyanosis (if severe)
Palpation
   ↓Expansion on R
Percussion
   Dull R mid-zone and axilla
Auscultation
   Bronchial breath sounds
   and ↑vocal resonance over
   consolidation and whispering
 pectoriloquy
   Pleural rub if pleurisy
Inspection
  ↓Volume R upper zone
Palpation
  Trachea deviated to R
  ↓Expansion R upper zone
Percussion
  Dull R upper zone
Auscultation
  ↓Breath sounds with
 central obstruction
Inspection
  Tachypnoea (pain, deflation
  reflex)
Palpation
  ↓Expansion R side
Percussion
  Resonant or hyper-resonant
  on R
Auscultation
  Absent breath sounds on R
Tension pneumothorax also
causes
 
Deviation of trachea to
 
opposite side
   Tachycardia and
 
hypotension 
Inspection
   Tachypnoea
Palpation
   ↓Expansion on R
   Trachea and apex may be
   moved to L
Percussion
   Stony dull
   R mid- and lower zones
Auscultation
   Absent breath sounds and
   vocal resonance R base
   Bronchial breathing or
    crackles above effusion
Obscures R heart border
on X-ray
X-ray
  Deviated trachea (to R)
  Elevated horizontal fissure
  ↓Volume R hemithorax
  Central (hilar) mass may
 be seen
Respiratory disease
19
646
surface of the chest wall and the lung respectively, and 
are normally in close apposition. Inspiration involves 
downward contraction of the dome-shaped diaphragm 
(innervated by the phrenic nerves originating from C3, 
4 and 5) and upward, outward movement of the ribs 
on the costovertebral joints, caused by contraction of 
the external intercostal muscles (innervated by intercos-
tal nerves originating from the thoracic spinal cord). 
Expiration is largely passive, driven by elastic recoil 
of the lungs.
The conducting airways from the nose to the alveoli 
connect the external environment with the extensive, 
thin and vulnerable alveolar surface. As air is inhaled 
through the upper airways, it is filtered in the nose, 
heated to body temperature and fully saturated with 
water vapour; partial recovery of this heat and moisture 
occurs on expiration. Total airway cross-section is small-
est in the glottis and trachea, making the central airway 
particularly vulnerable to obstruction by foreign bodies 
and tumours. Normal breath sounds originate mainly 
from the rapid turbulent airflow in the larynx, trachea 
and main bronchi.
The multitude of small airways within the lung 
parenchyma has a very large combined cross-sectional 
area (over 300 cm2 in the third-generation respiratory 
bronchioles), resulting in very slow flow rates. Airflow 
is normally silent here, and gas transport occurs largely 
by diffusion in the final generations. Major bronchial 
and pulmonary divisions are shown in Figure 19.1.
The acinus (Fig. 19.2) is the gas exchange unit of the 
lung and comprises branching respiratory bronchioles 
Respiratory disease is responsible for a major burden of 
morbidity and untimely death, with conditions such as 
tuberculosis, pandemic influenza and pneumonia the 
most important in world health terms. The increasing 
prevalence of allergy, asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) contributes to the overall 
burden of chronic disease in the community. By 2025, 
the number of cigarette smokers worldwide is antici-
pated to increase to 1.5 billion, ensuring a growing 
burden of tobacco-related respiratory conditions.
Respiratory disease covers a breadth of pathologies, 
including infectious, inflammatory, neoplastic and 
degenerative processes. The practice of respiratory 
medi­cine thus requires collaboration with a range of 
disciplines. Recent advances have improved the lives of 
many patients with obstructive lung disease, cystic 
fibrosis, obstructive sleep apnoea and pulmonary hyper-
tension, but the outlook remains poor for lung and other 
respiratory cancers, and for some of the fibrosing lung 
conditions.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
The lungs occupy the upper two-thirds of the bony 
thorax, bounded medially by the spine, the heart and the 
mediastinum and inferiorly by the diaphragm. During 
breathing, free movement of the lung surface relative to 
the chest wall is facilitated by sliding contact between 
the parietal and visceral pleura, which cover the inner 
Fig. 19.1  The major bronchial divisions 
and the fissures, lobes and segments 
of the lungs. The angle of the oblique 
fissure means that the left upper lobe is 
largely anterior to the lower lobe. On the 
right, the transverse fissure separates the 
upper from the anteriorly placed middle lobe, 
which is matched by the lingular segment on 
the left side. The site of a lobe determines 
whether physical signs are mainly anterior or 
posterior. Each lobe is composed of two or 
more bronchopulmonary segments that are 
supplied by the main branches of each lobar 
bronchus.
Bronchopulmonary segments:
Right Upper lobe: (1) Anterior, (2) Posterior, 
(3) Apical. Middle lobe: (1) Lateral, 
(2) Medial. Lower lobe: (1) Apical, 
(2) Posterior basal, (3) Lateral basal,  
(4) Anterior basal, (5) Medial basal.
Left Upper lobe: (1) Anterior, (2) Apical, 
(3) Posterior, (4) Lingular. Lower lobe: 
(1) Apical, (2) Posterior basal, (3) Lateral 
basal, (4) Anterior basal. 
Upper
lobe
Middle
lobe
2
1
3
2
1
4
3
2
5
1
Lower
lobe
Upper
lobe
Lower
lobe
Middle
lobe
3
2
1
2
1
1
4
2
3
T
r
a
ns
ver
se fi
ssure
RIGHT
LEFT
Upper
lobe
Lower
lobe
2
1
1
4
2
3
3
4
O
bli
que fissure
Upper
lobe
2
1
3
4
3
2
Lower
lobe
4
1
Anterior
5
Lateral aspects of lungs
Spine
Spine
Major bronchial subdivisions
Functional anatomy and physiology 
19
647
breath passes to the basal regions, which also receive the 
greatest blood flow as a result of gravity. Elastin fibres 
in alveolar walls maintain small airway patency by 
radial traction on the airway walls. Even in health, 
however, these small airways narrow during expiration 
because they are surrounded by alveoli at higher pres-
sure, but are prevented from collapsing by radial elastic 
traction. The volume that can be exhaled is thus limited 
purely by the capacity of the expiratory muscles to 
distort the chest wall inwards. In emphysema, loss of 
alveolar walls leaves the small airways unsupported, 
and their collapse on expiration causes air trapping and 
high end-expiratory volume (p. 673).
Control of breathing
The respiratory motor neurons in the posterior medulla 
oblongata are the origin of the respiratory cycle. Their 
activity is modulated by multiple external inputs in 
health and in disease (see Fig. 19.10, p. 657):
•	 Central chemoreceptors in the ventrolateral  
medulla sense the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) and are indirectly stimulated by a rise in 
arterial PCO2.
•	 The carotid bodies sense hypoxaemia but are 
mainly activated by arterial PO2 values below 8 KPa 
(60 mmHg). They are also sensitised to hypoxia by 
raised arterial PCO2.
•	 Muscle spindles in the respiratory muscles sense 
changes in mechanical load.
and clusters of alveoli. Here the air makes close contact 
with the blood in the pulmonary capillaries (gas-to-
blood distance < 0.4 µm), and oxygen uptake and CO2 
excretion occur. The alveoli are lined with flattened epi-
thelial cells (type I pneumocytes) and a few, more cuboi-
dal, type II pneumocytes. The latter produce surfactant, 
which is a mixture of phospholipids that reduces surface 
tension and counteracts the tendency of alveoli to col-
lapse under surface tension. Type II pneumocytes can 
divide to reconstitute type I pneumocytes after lung 
injury.
Lung mechanics
Healthy alveolar walls contain a fine network of elastin 
and collagen fibres (see Fig. 19.2). The volume of the 
lungs at the end of a tidal (‘normal’) breath out is called 
the functional residual capacity (FRC). At this volume, 
the inward elastic recoil of the lungs (resulting from 
elastin fibres and surface tension in the alveolar lining 
fluid) is balanced by the resistance of the chest wall to 
inward distortion from its resting shape, causing nega-
tive pressure in the pleural space. Elastin fibres allow 
the lung to be easily distended at physiological lung 
volumes, but collagen fibres cause increasing stiffness 
as full inflation is approached so that, in health, the 
maximum inspiratory volume is limited by the lung 
(rather than the chest wall). Within the lung, the weight 
of tissue compresses the dependent regions and distends 
the uppermost parts, so a greater portion of an inhaled 
Fig. 19.2  Functional anatomy of the lung.  A The tapering, branching bronchus is armoured against compression by plates of cartilage. The more 
distal bronchioles are collapsible, but held patent by surrounding elastic tissue.  B The unit of lung supplied by a terminal bronchiole is called an acinus. 
The bronchiolar wall contains smooth muscle and elastin fibres. The latter also run through the alveolar walls. Gas exchange occurs in the alveoli, which 
are connected to each other by the pores of Kohn.  C Vascular anatomy of an acinus. Both the pulmonary artery (carrying desaturated blood) and the 
bronchial artery (systemic supply to airway tissue) run along the bronchus. The venous drainage to the left atrium follows the interlobular septa. From 
www.Netter.com – see p. 731.
Cartilage
plates
Smooth
muscle
Terminal
bronchiole
Bronchial
artery
Pulmonary
artery
Pulmonary
vein
Interlobular
septum
Alveolar
capillaries
Respiratory
bronchiole
Alveoli
Pores of Kohn
Elastin
fibres
Bronchus
Bronchiole
Terminal
bronchiole
Respiratory
bronchiole
Alveoli
A
B
C
Respiratory disease
19
648
mucociliary transport is also a feature of several rare 
diseases, including Kartagener’s syndrome, Young’s 
syndrome and ciliary dysmotility syndrome, which are 
cha­racterised by repeated sino-pulmonary infections 
and bronchiectasis.
Airway secretions contain an array of antimicrobial 
peptides (such as defensins, immunoglobulin A (IgA) 
and lysozyme), antiproteinases and antioxidants. Many 
assist with the opsonisation and killing of bacteria, and 
the regulation of the powerful proteolytic enzymes 
secreted by inflammatory cells. In particular, α1-
antiproteinase (A1Pi) regulates neutrophil elastase, and 
deficiency of this may be associated with premature 
emphysema.
•	 Vagal sensory fibres from the lung may be 
stimulated by stretch, by inhaled toxins or by 
disease processes in the interstitium.
•	 Cortical (volitional) and limbic (emotional) 
influences can override the automatic control of 
breathing.
Ventilation/perfusion matching and 
the pulmonary circulation
To achieve optimal gas exchange within the lungs, the 
regional distribution of ventilation and perfusion must 
be matched. At segmental and subsegmental level, 
hypoxia constricts pulmonary arterioles and airway CO2 
dilates bronchi, helping to maintain good regional 
matching of ventilation and perfusion. Lung disease 
may create regions of relative underventilation or under-
perfusion, which disturb this regional matching, causing 
respiratory failure (p. 663). In addition to causing 
ventilation–perfusion mismatch, diseases that destroy 
capillaries or thicken the alveolar capillary membrane 
(e.g. emphysema or fibrosis) can impair gas diffusion 
directly.
The pulmonary circulation in health operates at low 
pressure (approximately 24/9 mmHg), and can accom-
modate large increases in flow with minimal rise in pres-
sure, such as during exercise. Pulmonary hypertension 
occurs when vessels are destroyed by emphysema, 
obstructed by thrombus, involved in interstitial inflam-
mation or thickened by pulmonary vascular disease. The 
right ventricle responds by hypertrophy, with right axis 
deviation and P pulmonale on the ECG. Pulmonary 
hypertension with hypoxia and hypercapnia is associ-
ated with generalised salt and water retention (‘cor pul-
monale’), with elevation of the jugular venous pressure 
(JVP) and peripheral oedema. This is thought to result 
mainly from a failure of the hypoxic and hypercapnic 
kidney to excrete sufficient salt and water.
Lung defences
Upper airway defences
Large airborne particles are trapped by nasal hairs, and 
smaller particles settling on the mucosa are cleared 
towards the oropharynx by the columnar ciliated epithe-
lium which covers the turbinates and septum (Fig. 19.3). 
During cough, expiratory muscle effort against a closed 
glottis results in high intrathoracic pressure, which is 
then released explosively. The flexible posterior tracheal 
wall is pushed inwards by the high surrounding pres-
sure, which reduces tracheal cross-section and thus max-
imises the airspeed to achieve effective expectoration. 
The larynx also acts as a sphincter, protecting the airway 
during swallowing and vomiting.
Lower airway defences
The sterility, structure and function of the lower airways 
are maintained by close cooperation between the innate 
and adaptive immune responses (pp. 72 and 76).
The innate response in the lungs is characterised 
by a number of non-specific defence mechanisms. 
Inhaled particulate matter is trapped in airway mucus 
and cleared by the mucociliary escalator. Cigarette 
smoke increases mucus secretion but reduces mucocili-
ary clearance and predisposes towards lower respira-
tory tract infections, including pneumonia. Defective 
Fig. 19.3  The mucociliary escalator. Scanning electron micrograph of 
the respiratory epithelium showing large numbers of cilia (C) overlaid by 
the mucus ‘raft’ (M). 
M
C
M
C
• Reserve capacity: a significant reduction in function can 
occur with ageing with only minimal effect on normal 
breathing, but the ability to combat acute disease is reduced.
• Decline in FEV1: the FEV1/FVC (forced expiratory volume/
forced vital capacity, p. 652) ratio falls by around 0.2% per 
year from 70% at the age of 40–45 years, due to a decline 
in elastic recoil in the small airways with age. Smoking 
accelerates this decline threefold on average. Symptoms 
usually occur only when FEV1 drops below 50% of predicted.
• Increasing ventilation–perfusion mismatch: the reduction 
in elastic recoil causes a tendency for the small airways to 
collapse during expiration, particularly in dependent areas of 
the lungs, thus reducing ventilation.
• Reduced ventilatory responses to hypoxia and 
hypercapnia: older people may be less tachypnoeic for any 
given fall in PaO2 or rise in PaCO2.
• Impaired defences against infection: due to reduced 
numbers of glandular epithelial cells, which lead to a 
reduction in protective mucus.
• Decline in maximum oxygen uptake: due to a combination 
of impairments in muscle, and the respiratory and 
cardiovascular systems. This leads to a reduction in 
cardiorespiratory reserve and exercise capacity.
• Loss of chest wall compliance: due to reduced 
intervertebral disc spaces and ossification of the costal 
cartilages; respiratory muscle strength and endurance also 
decline. These changes only become important in the 
presence of other respiratory disease.
19.1  Respiratory function in old age
Investigation of respiratory disease
19
649
Macrophages engulf microbes, organic dusts and 
other particulate matter. They are unable to digest inor-
ganic agents, such as asbestos or silica, which lead to 
their death and the release of powerful proteolytic 
enzymes that cause parenchymal damage. Neutrophil 
numbers in the airway are low, but the pulmonary cir-
culation contains a marginated pool that may be 
recruited rapidly in response to bacterial infection. This 
may explain the prominence of lung injury in sepsis 
syndromes and trauma.
Adaptive immunity is characterised by the specificity 
of the response and the development of memory. Lung 
dendritic cells facilitate antigen presentation to T and B 
lymphocytes.
INVESTIGATION OF RESPIRATORY 
DISEASE
A detailed history, thorough examination and basic 
haem­atological and biochemical tests usually indicate 
the likely diagnosis and differential. A number of other 
investigations are normally required to confirm the 
diagnosis and/or monitor disease activity.
Imaging
The ‘plain’ chest X-ray
This is performed on the majority of patients suspected 
of having chest disease. A postero-anterior (PA) film 
provides information on the lung fields, heart, mediasti-
num, vascular structures and thoracic cage (Fig. 19.4). 
Additional information may be obtained from a lateral 
film, particularly if pathology is suspected behind the 
heart shadow or deep in the diaphragmatic sulci. An 
approach to interpreting the chest X-ray is given in Box 
19.2, and common abnormalities are listed in Box 19.3.
Fig. 19.4  The normal chest X-ray. 
The lung markings consist of branching 
and tapering lines radiating out from the 
hila. Where airways and vessels turn 
towards the film, they can appear as 
open or filled circles (see upper pole of 
right hilum). The scapulae may overlie 
the lung fields; trace the edge  
of bony structures to avoid mistaking 
them for pleural or pulmonary shadows. 
To check for hyperinflation, count the 
ribs; if more than 10 are visible 
posteriorly above the diaphragm, the 
lungs are hyperinflated. From Innes 2009 
– see p. 731.
Lung apex
Right hilum
Right atrial
border
Right
costophrenic
angle
Right hemidiaphragm
Right cardiophrenic angle
Gastric air bubble
Left hemidiaphragm
(normally lower than right)
Medial border
of scapula
Aortic arch
Left hilum
Left ventricular
border
Cardiac apex
Trachea
Clavicular heads symmetrical
either side of spine – no rotation
Name, date, 
orientation
Films are postero-anterior (PA) unless  
marked AP to denote that they are  
antero-posterior
Lung fields
Equal translucency?
Check horizontal fissure from right  
hilum to sixth rib at the anterior  
axillary line
Masses? Consolidation? Cavitation?
Lung apices
Check behind the clavicles: Masses? 
Consolidation? Cavitation?
Trachea
Central? (Midway between the clavicular 
heads)
Paratracheal mass? Goitre?
Heart
Normal shape?
Cardiothoracic ratio (should be < half 
the intrathoracic diameter)
Retrocardiac mass?
Hila
Left should be higher than right
Shape? (Should be concave laterally;  
if convex, consider mass or 
lymphadenopathy)
Density?
Diaphragm
Right should be higher than left
Hyperinflation? (No more than 10 ribs  
should be visible posteriorly above the 
diaphragm)
Costophrenic 
angles
Acute and well defined? (Pleural fluid or 
thickening, if not)
Soft tissues
Breast shadows in females
Chest wall for masses or subcutaneous 
emphysema
Bones
Ribs, vertebrae, scapulae and clavicles
Any fracture visible at bone margins or 
lucencies?
19.2  How to interpret a chest X-ray
Respiratory disease
19
650
Fig. 19.5  Radiological features of lobar collapse caused by 
bronchial obstruction. The dotted line in the drawings represents the 
normal position of the diaphragm. The dark pink area represents the extent 
of shadowing seen on the X-ray. 
Left 
upper 
lobe
Lingula
Left 
lower 
lobe
Right 
upper 
lobe
Right 
middle
lobe
Right 
lower 
lobe
Pulmonary and pleural shadowing
• Consolidation: infection, infarction, inflammation, and rarely 
bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma
• Lobar collapse: mucus plugging, tumour, compression by 
lymph nodes
• Solitary nodule: see page 660
• Multiple nodules: miliary tuberculosis (TB), dust inhalation, 
metastatic malignancy, healed varicella pneumonia, 
rheumatoid disease
• Ring shadows, tramlines and tubular shadows: 
bronchiectasis
• Cavitating lesions: tumour, abscess, infarct, pneumonia 
(Staphylococcus/Klebsiella), granulomatosis with polyangiitis
• Reticular, nodular and reticulonodular shadows: diffuse 
parenchymal lung disease, infection
• Pleural abnormalities: fluid, plaques, tumour
Increased translucency
• Bullae
• Pneumothorax
• Oligaemia
Hilar abnormalities
• Unilateral hilar enlargement: TB, bronchial carcinoma, 
lymphoma
• Bilateral hilar enlargement: sarcoid, lymphoma, TB, 
silicosis
Other abnormalities
• Hiatus hernia
• Surgical emphysema
19.3  Common chest X-ray abnormalities
Increased shadowing may represent accumulation of 
fluid, lobar collapse or consolidation. Uncomplicated 
consolidation should not change the position of the 
mediastinum and the presence of an air bronchogram 
means that proximal bronchi are patent. Collapse 
(implying obstruction of the lobar bronchus) is accom-
panied by loss of volume and displacement of the medi-
astinum towards the affected side (Fig. 19.5).
The presence of ring shadows (thickened bronchi 
seen end-on), tramline shadows (thickened bronchi side-
on) or tubular shadows (bronchi filled with secretions) 
suggests bronchiectasis, but computed tomography is a 
much more sensitive test than plain X-ray in bron-
chiectasis. The presence of pleural fluid is suggested by 
a dense basal shadow, which, in the erect patient, 
ascends towards the axilla (p. 645). In large pulmonary 
embolism, relative oligaemia may cause a lung field to 
appear abnormally dark.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) provides detailed images 
of the pulmonary parenchyma, mediastinum, pleura 
and bony structures. The displayed range of densities 
can be adjusted to highlight different structures, such as 
the lung parenchyma, the mediastinal vascular struc-
tures or bone. Sophisticated software facilitates three-
dimensional reconstruction of the thorax and virtual 
bronchoscopy.
CT is superior to chest radiography in determining 
the position and size of a pulmonary lesion and whether 
calcification or cavitation is present. It is now routinely 
used in the assessment of patients with suspected lung 
Investigation of respiratory disease
19
651
cancer and facilitates guided percutaneous needle 
biopsy. Information on tumour stage may be gained by 
examining the mediastinum, liver and adrenal glands.
High-resolution CT (HRCT) uses thin sections to 
provide detailed images of the pulmonary parenchyma 
and is particularly useful in assessing diffuse parenchy-
mal lung disease, identifying bronchiectasis (Fig. 19.30, 
p. 679), and assessing type and extent of emphysema.
Assessment of the pulmonary circulation
CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) has become the 
investigation of choice in the diagnosis of pulmonary 
thromboembolism (see Fig. 19.69, p. 679), when it may 
either confirm the suspected embolism or highlight 
an alternative diagnosis. It has largely replaced the 
radioisotope-based ventilation–perfusion scan, although 
the latter continues to provide useful infor­mation in the 
pre-operative assessment of patients being considered 
for lung resection. In pulmonary hypertension, Doppler 
echocardiographic assessment of tricuspid regurgitant 
jets allows accurate non-invasive measurement of pul-
monary artery pressure in most cases. Right heart cath-
eterisation is still used in the investigation of patients 
with pulmonary hypertension in specialised centres, as 
it permits accurate measurement of response to pulmo-
nary vasodilators.
Positron emission tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanners exploit 
the ability of malignant tissue to absorb and metabo­lise 
glucose avidly. The radiotracer 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose 
(FDG) is infused and rapidly taken up by malignant 
tissue. It is then phosphorylated but cannot be metabo-
lised further, becoming ‘trapped’ in the cell. PET is 
useful in the investigation of pulmonary nodules, and in 
staging mediastinal lymph nodes and distal metastatic 
disease in patients with lung cancer. The negative pre-
dictive value is high; however, the positive predictive 
value is poor. Co-registration of PET and CT (PET-CT) 
enhances localisation and characterisation of metaboli-
cally active deposits (Fig. 19.6). Future advances will 
see the combination of PET and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI).
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is used to assess the pleural space for pleural 
fluid, which appears as a hypoechoic space. It also 
allows direct visualisation of the diaphragm and solid 
organs such as the liver, spleen and kidneys, thereby 
allowing safe pleural aspiration, biopsy and intercostal 
chest drain insertion. Ultrasound can also be used to 
guide needle biopsy of superficial lymph node or chest 
wall masses and provides useful information on the 
shape and movement of the diaphragm. Endobronchial 
ultrasound (EBUS) is described below.
Endoscopic examination
Laryngoscopy
The larynx may be inspected directly with a fibreoptic 
laryngoscope and this is useful in cases of suspected 
vocal cord dysfunction, when paradoxical movement of 
the vocal cords may mimic asthma. Left-sided lung 
tumours may involve the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
paralysing the left vocal cord and leading to a hoarse 
voice and a ‘bovine’ cough.
Bronchoscopy
The trachea and the first 3–4 generations of bronchi may 
be inspected using a flexible bronchoscope. Flexible 
bronchoscopy is usually performed under local anaes-
thesia with sedation, on an outpatient basis. Abnormal 
tissue in the bronchial lumen or wall can be biopsied, 
and bronchial brushings, washings or aspirates can be 
taken for cytological or bacteriological examination. 
Small biopsy specimens of lung tissue, taken by forceps 
passed through the bronchial wall (transbronchial biop-
sies), may be helpful in the diagnosis of bronchocentric 
disorders such as sarcoid, hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
and diffuse malignancy, but are generally too small to 
be of diagnostic value in other diffuse parenchymal pul-
monary disease (p. 706). Transbronchial needle aspira-
tion (TBNA) may be used to sample mediastinal lymph 
nodes and to stage lung cancer.
Rigid bronchoscopy requires general anaesthesia and 
is reserved for specific situations, such as massive haem­
optysis or removal of foreign bodies (see Fig. 19.9, 
p. 655). Endobronchial laser therapy and endobronchial 
stenting may be easier with rigid bronchoscopy.
Assessment of the mediastinum
The sampling of mediastinal lymph nodes is essential in 
the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer and may 
confirm the diagnosis of non-malignant conditions, 
such as tuberculosis or sarcoidosis. Endobronchial 
A
B
C
Fig. 19.6  Computed tomography and positron emission tomography combined to reveal intrathoracic metastases.  A In a patient with 
lung cancer, CT shows some posterior pleural thickening.  B PET scanning reveals FDG uptake in two pleural lesions (arrows).  C The lesions are 
highlighted in yellow in the combined PET/CT image. From http://radiology.rsnajnls.org – see p. 731.
Respiratory disease
19
652
be made. This is particularly important in suspected 
malignancy or in characterising the pathological changes 
in interstitial lung disease. Important causative organ-
isms, such as M. tuberculosis, Pneumocystis jirovecii or 
fungi, may be identified in bronchial washings, brush-
ings or transbronchial biopsies.
Cytological examination of exfoliated cells in pleural 
fluid or bronchial brushings and washings, or of fine 
needle aspirates from lymph nodes or pulmonary 
lesions, can support a diagnosis of malignancy but, if 
this is indeterminate, a larger tissue biopsy is often 
necessary. Differential cell counts in bronchial lavage 
fluid may help to distinguish pulmonary changes due 
to sarcoidosis (p. 709) from those caused by idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis (p. 706) or hypersensitivity pneu­
monitis (p. 719).
Respiratory function testing
Respiratory function tests are used to aid diagnosis, 
assess functional impairment, and monitor treatment or 
progression of disease. Airway narrowing, lung volume 
and gas exchange capacity are quantified and compared 
with normal values adjusted for age, gender, height 
and ethnic origin. In diseases characterised by airway 
narrowing (e.g. asthma, bronchitis and emphysema), 
maximum expiratory flow is limited by dynamic com-
pression of small intrathoracic airways, some of which 
may close completely during expiration, limiting the 
volume that can be expired (‘obstructive’ defect). Hyper-
inflation of the chest results, and can become extreme if 
elastic recoil is also lost due to parenchymal destruction, 
as in emphysema. In contrast, diseases that cause inter-
stitial inflammation and/or fibrosis lead to progressive 
loss of lung volume (‘restrictive’ defect) with normal 
expiratory flow rates. Typical laboratory traces are illus-
trated in Figure 19.7.
Measurement of airway 
obstruction
Airway narrowing is assessed by asking patients to blow 
out as hard and as fast as they can into a peak flow meter 
or a spirometer. Peak flow meters are cheap and conven-
ient for home monitoring of peak expiratory flow (PEF) 
in the detection and monitoring of asthma, but results 
are effort-dependent. More accurate and reproducible 
measures are obtained by inhaling fully, then exhaling 
at maximum effort into a spirometer. The forced expired 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) is the volume exhaled in 
the first second, and the forced vital capacity (FVC) is 
the total volume exhaled. FEV1 is disproportionately 
reduced in airflow obstruction, resulting in FEV1/FVC 
ratios of less than 70%. In this situation, spirometry 
should be repeated following inhaled short-acting β2-
adrenoceptor agonists (e.g. salbutamol); a large improve-
ment in FEV1 (over 400 mL) and variability in peak flow 
over time are features of asthma (p. 668).
To distinguish large airway narrowing (e.g. tracheal 
stenosis or compression) from small airway narrowing, 
flow/volume loops are recorded using spirometry. 
These display flow in relation to lung volume (rather 
than time) during maximum expiration and inspiration, 
and the pattern of flow reveals the site of airflow obstruc-
tion (see Fig. 19.7). 
ultrasound (EBUS), using a specialised bronchoscope, 
allows directed needle aspiration from peribronchial 
nodes and is used increasingly to determine disease 
extent. Lymph nodes down to the main carina can also 
be sampled using a mediastinoscope passed through a 
small incision at the suprasternal notch under general 
anaesthetic. Lymph nodes in the lower mediastinum 
may be biopsied via the oesophagus using endoscopic 
ultrasound (EUS), an oesophageal endoscope equipped 
with an ultrasound transducer and biopsy needle.
Investigation of pleural disease
Core biopsy of the pleura, guided by either ultrasound 
or CT, has largely replaced the traditional ‘blind’ method 
of pleural biopsy using an Abram’s needle. Thoracos-
copy, which involves the insertion of an endoscope 
through the chest wall, facilitates biopsy under direct 
vision and is performed by many surgeons and an 
increasing number of physicians.
Immunological and serological tests
The presence of pneumococcal antigen (revealed by 
counter-immunoelectrophoresis) in sputum, blood or 
urine may be of diagnostic importance in pneumonia. 
Influenza viruses can be detected in throat swab samples 
by fluorescent antibody techniques. In blood, high or 
rising antibody titres to specific organisms (such as 
Legionella, Mycoplasma, Chlamydia or viruses) may even-
tually clinch a diagnosis suspected on clinical grounds 
but early diagnosis of Legionella is best done by urine 
antigen testing. Precipitating antibodies may indicate a 
reaction to fungi such as Aspergillus (p. 697) or to antigens 
involved in hypersensitivity pneumonitis (p. 719). Total 
levels of immunoglobulin E (IgE), and levels of IgE 
directed against specific antigens, can be useful in assess-
ing the contribution of allergy to respiratory disease.
Skin tests
The tuberculin test (p. 695) may be of value in the diag-
nosis of tuberculosis. Skin hypersensitivity tests are 
useful in the investigation of allergic diseases (p. 89).
Microbiological investigations
Sputum, pleural fluid, throat swabs, blood, and bron-
chial washings and aspirates can be examined for 
bacteria, fungi and viruses. In some cases, as when 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is isolated, the information is 
diagnostically conclusive but, in others, the findings 
must be interpreted in conjunction with the results of 
clinical and radiological examination.
The use of hypertonic saline to induce expectoration 
of sputum is useful in facilitating the collection of speci-
mens for microbiology, particularly in patients in whom 
more invasive procedures, such as bronchoscopy, are 
not possible. The technique also allows assessment of 
the inflammatory cell population of the airway, which is 
a useful research tool in many conditions, including 
asthma, COPD and interstitial lung disease.
Histopathology and cytology
Histopathological examination of biopsies of pleura, 
lymph node or lung often allows a ‘tissue diagnosis’ to 
Investigation of respiratory disease
19
653
Lung volumes
Tidal volume and vital capacity (VC – the maximum 
amount of air that can be expelled from the lungs after 
the deepest possible breath) can be measured by spiro­
metry. Total lung capacity (TLC – the total amount of air 
in the lungs after taking the deepest breath possible) can 
be measured by asking the patient to rebreathe an inert 
non-absorbed gas (usually helium) and recording how 
much the test gas is diluted by lung gas. This measures 
the volume of intrathoracic gas that mixes with tidal 
breaths. Alternatively, lung volume may be measured 
by body plethysmography, which determines the 
pressure/volume relationship of the thorax. This method 
measures total intrathoracic gas volume, including 
poorly ventilated areas such as bullae.
Transfer factor
To measure the capacity of the lungs to exchange gas, 
patients inhale a test mixture of 0.3% carbon monoxide, 
which is taken up avidly by haemoglobin in pulmo-
nary capillaries. After a short breath-hold, the rate of 
disappearance of CO into the circulation is calculated 
from a sample of expirate, and expressed as the TLCO or 
carbon monoxide transfer factor. Helium is also 
included in the test breath to allow calculation of the 
volume of lung examined by the test breath. Transfer 
factor expressed per unit lung volume is termed KCO. 
Common respiratory function abnormalities are sum-
marised in Box 19.4.
Fig. 19.7  Respiratory function tests in health and disease.  A Volume/time traces from forced expiration in a normal subject, in COPD and in 
fibrosis. COPD causes slow, prolonged and limited exhalation. In fibrosis, forced expiration results in rapid expulsion of a reduced forced vital capacity 
(FVC). Forced expiratory volume (FEV1) is reduced in both diseases but is disproportionately reduced, compared to FVC, in COPD.  B The same data 
plotted as flow/volume loops. In COPD, collapse of intrathoracic airways limits flow, particularly during mid- and late expiration. The blue trace illustrates 
large airway obstruction, which particularly limits peak flow rates.  C Lung volume measurement. Volume/time graphs during quiet breathing with a single 
maximal breath in and out. COPD causes hyperinflation with increased residual volume. Fibrosis causes a proportional reduction in all lung volumes. 
A
B
C
Volume
Inspiratory capacity
Functional residual capacity
Residual volume
Time
Total lung capacity
Volume
Time
1 sec
Expiration
Inspiration
Volume
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Normal
COPD
Fibrosis
Tracheal
obstruction
Flow
FEV1
Vital capacity
5
5
FVC
Asthma
Chronic 
bronchitis
Emphysema
Pulmonary 
fibrosis
FEV1
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓
VC
↓
↓
↓
↓↓
FEV1/VC
↓
↓
↓
→/↑
TLCO
→
→
↓↓
↓↓
KCO
→/↑
→
↓
→/↓
TLC
→/↑
↑
↑↑
↓
RV
→/↑
↑
↑↑
↓
(RV = residual volume; see text for other abbreviations)
19.4  How to interpret respiratory 
function abnormalities
Arterial blood gases and oximetry
The measurement of hydrogen ion concentration, PaO2 
and PaCO2, and derived bicarbonate concentration in an 
arterial blood sample is essential to assess the degree 
and type of respiratory failure, and for measuring acid–
base status. This is discussed in detail on pages 663 and 
442. Interpretation of results is made easier by blood 
gas diagrams (Fig. 19.8), which indicate whether any 
acidosis or alkalosis is due to acute or chronic respira-
tory derangements of PaCO2, or to metabolic causes. 
Pulse oximeters with finger or ear probes measure the 
Respiratory disease
19
654
occurs in a number of conditions, and it is typically 
induced by changes in air temperature or exposure to 
irritants, such as cigarette smoke or perfumes. The char-
acteristics of cough originating at various levels of the 
respiratory tract are detailed in Box 19.5.
The explosive quality of a normal cough is lost in 
patients with respiratory muscle paralysis or vocal cord 
palsy. Paralysis of a single vocal cord gives rise to 
a prolonged, low-pitched, inefficient ‘bovine’ cough 
accompanied by hoarseness. Coexistence of an inspira-
tory noise (stridor) indicates partial obstruction of a 
major airway (e.g. laryngeal oedema, tracheal tumour, 
scarring, compression or inhaled foreign body) and 
requires urgent investigation and treatment. Sputum 
production is common in patients with acute or chronic 
cough, and its nature and appearance can provide clues 
to the aetiology (p. 644).
Causes of cough
Acute transient cough is most commonly caused by viral 
lower respiratory tract infection, post-nasal drip result-
ing from rhinitis or sinusitis, aspiration of a foreign 
difference in absorbance of light by oxygenated and 
deoxygenated blood to calculate its oxygen saturation 
(SaO2). This allows non-invasive continuous assessment 
of oxygen saturation in patients, which is useful in 
assessing hypoxaemia and its response to therapy.
Exercise tests
Resting measurements may be unhelpful in early disease 
or in patients complaining only of exercise-induced 
symptoms. Exercise testing with spirometry before and 
after can help demonstrate exercise-induced asthma. 
Walk tests include the self-paced 6-minute walk and 
the externally paced incremental ‘shuttle’ test, where 
patients walk at increasing pace between two cones 
10 m apart. These provide simple, repeatable assess-
ments of disability and response to treatment. Cardio­
pulmonary bicycle exercise testing, with measurement 
of metabolic gas exchange, ventilation and ECG changes, 
is useful for quantifying exercise limitation and detect-
ing occult cardiovascular or respiratory limitation in a 
breathless patient.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN 
RESPIRATORY DISEASE
Cough
Cough is the most frequent symptom of respiratory 
disease and is caused by stimulation of sensory nerves 
in the mucosa of the pharynx, larynx, trachea and 
bronchi. Acute sensitisation of the normal cough reflex 
Fig. 19.8  Changes in blood [H+], PaCO2 and plasma [HCO3
−] in 
acid–base disorders. The rectangle indicates normal limits for [H+] and 
PaCO2. The bands represent 95% confidence limits of single disturbances 
in human blood. To determine the likely cause of an acid–base disorder, 
plot the values of [H+] and PaCO2 from an arterial blood gas measurement.. 
The diagram indicates whether any acidosis or alkalosis results primarily 
from a respiratory disorder of PaCO2 or from a metabolic derangement. 
Adapted from Flenley 1971 – see p. 732.
7.6
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
7.5
7.4
7.3
7.2
7.1
7.0
[H+] nmol/L
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
kPa
mmHg
Arterial PaCO2
Chronic respiratory acidosis
Metabolic 
acidosis
Metabolic 
alkalosis
Reference range
95% Confidence limits
[HCO3
–
 ] nmol/L
Acute respiratory acidosis 
10
8
6
4
2
12
0
75
60
45
30
15
90
0
Resp. alkalosis
pH
Origin
Common causes
Clinical features
Pharynx
Post-nasal drip
History of chronic 
rhinitis
Larynx
Laryngitis, tumour, 
whooping cough, 
croup
Voice or swallowing 
altered, harsh or 
painful cough
Paroxysms of cough, 
often associated with 
stridor
Trachea
Tracheitis
Raw retrosternal pain 
with cough
Bronchi
Bronchitis (acute) 
and COPD
Dry or productive, 
worse in mornings
Asthma
Usually dry, worse at 
night
Eosinophilic 
bronchitis
Features similar to 
asthma but AHR 
absent
Bronchial 
carcinoma
Persistent (often with 
haemoptysis)
Lung 
parenchyma
Tuberculosis
Productive (often 
with haemoptysis)
Pneumonia
Bronchiectasis
Dry initially, 
productive later 
Productive, changes 
in posture induce 
sputum production
Pulmonary 
oedema
Often at night (may 
be productive of 
pink, frothy sputum)
Interstitial fibrosis
Dry and distressing
Drug side-effect
ACE inhibitors
Dry cough
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; AHR = airway hyper-reactivity; 
COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
Based on Crompton GK. The respiratory system. In: Munro JF, Campbell 
IW. Macleod’s clinical examination. 10th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2000 (p. 119); copyright Elsevier.
19.5  Cough
Presenting problems in respiratory disease
19
655
•	 causing hypoxia, hypercapnia or acidosis, which 
stimulate chemoreceptors.
In cardiac failure, pulmonary congestion reduces 
lung compliance and can also obstruct the small airways. 
Reduced cardiac output also limits oxygen supply to the 
skeletal muscles during exercise, causing early lactic aci-
daemia and further stimulating breathing via the central 
chemoreceptors.
Breathlessness and the effects of treatment can be 
quantified using a symptom scale. Patients tend to 
report breathlessness in proportion to the sum of the 
above stimuli to breathe. Individual patients differ 
greatly in the intensity of breathlessness reported for a 
given set of circumstances, but breathlessness scores 
during exercise within individuals are reproducible, and 
can be used to monitor the effects of therapy.
Differential diagnosis
Patients with breathlessness present either with chronic 
exertional symptoms or as an emergency with acute 
breathlessness, when symptoms are prominent even at 
rest. The causes can be classified accordingly (Box 19.6).
Chronic exertional breathlessness
The cause of breathlessness is often apparent from a 
careful clinical history. Key questions include:
How is your breathing at rest and overnight?
In COPD, there is a fixed, structural limit to maximum 
ventilation, and a tendency for progressive hyperinfla-
tion during exercise. Breathlessness is mainly apparent 
when walking, and patients usually report minimal 
symptoms at rest and overnight. In contrast, patients 
with significant asthma are often woken from their sleep 
by breathlessness with chest tightness and wheeze.
Orthopnoea, however, is common in COPD, as well 
as in heart disease, because airflow obstruction is made 
worse by cranial displacement of the diaphragm by the 
abdominal contents when recumbent, so many patients 
choose to sleep propped up. It may thus not be a useful 
differentiating symptom, unless there is a clear history 
of previous angina or infarction to suggest cardiac 
disease.
How much can you do on a good day?
Noting ‘breathless on exertion’ is not enough; the 
approximate distance the patient can walk on the level 
should be documented, along with capacity to climb 
body, or throat-clearing secondary to laryngitis or 
pharyngitis. When cough occurs in the context of more 
serious diseases, such as pneumonia, aspiration, conges-
tive heart failure or pulmonary embolism, it is usually 
easy to diagnose from other clinical features.
Patients with chronic cough present more of a 
challenge, especially when physical examination, chest 
X-ray and lung function studies are normal. In this 
context, it is most often explained by cough-variant 
asthma (where cough may be the principal or exclusive 
clinical manifestation), post-nasal drip secondary to 
nasal or sinus disease, or gastro-oesophageal reflux with 
aspiration. Diagnosis of the latter may require ambula-
tory oesophageal pH monitoring or a prolonged trial of 
anti-reflux therapy (p. 865). Between 10% and 15% of 
patients (particularly women) taking angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors develop a drug-
induced chronic cough. Bordetella pertussis infection in 
adults (p. 682) can also result in protracted cough and 
should be suspected in those in close contact with chil-
dren. While most patients with a bronchogenic carci-
noma have an abnormal chest X-ray on presentation, 
fibreoptic bronchoscopy or thoracic CT is advisable in 
most adults (especially smokers) with otherwise unex-
plained cough of recent onset, as this may reveal a small 
endobronchial tumour or unexpected foreign body (Fig. 
19.9). In a small percentage of patients, dry cough may 
be the presenting feature of interstitial lung disease.
Breathlessness
Breathlessness or dyspnoea can be defined as the feeling 
of an uncomfortable need to breathe. It is unusual among 
sensations, as it has no defined receptors, no localised 
representation in the brain, and multiple causes both in 
health (e.g. exercise) and in diseases of the lungs, heart 
or muscles.
Pathophysiology
Stimuli to breathing resulting from disease processes are 
shown in Figure 19.10. Respiratory diseases can stimu-
late breathing and dyspnoea by:
•	 stimulating intrapulmonary sensory nerves (e.g. 
pneumothorax, interstitial inflammation and 
pulmonary embolus)
•	 increasing the mechanical load on the respiratory 
muscles (e.g. airflow obstruction or pulmonary 
fibrosis)
Fig. 19.9  Inhaled foreign body.
 A Chest X-ray showing a 
tooth lodged in a main bronchus. 
 B Bronchoscopic appearance of 
inhaled foreign body (tooth) with a 
covering mucous film. 
A
B
Respiratory disease
19
656
Relentless, progressive breathlessness that is also 
present at rest, often accompanied by a dry cough, sug-
gests interstitial fibrosis. Impaired left ventricular func-
tion can also cause chronic exertional breathlessness, 
cough and wheeze. A history of angina, hypertension or 
myocardial infarction raises the possibility of a cardiac 
cause. This may be confirmed by a displaced apex beat, 
inclines or stairs. Variability within and between days is 
a hallmark of asthma; in mild asthma, the patient may 
be free of symptoms and signs when well. Gradual, pro-
gressive loss of exercise capacity over months and years, 
with consistent disability over days, is typical of COPD. 
When asthma is suspected, the degree of variability is 
best documented by home peak flow monitoring.
Fig. 19.10  Respiratory stimuli contributing to breathlessness. Mechanisms by which disease can stimulate the respiratory motor neurons in the 
medulla. Breathlessness is usually felt in proportion to the sum of these stimuli. Further explanation is given on page 543. ( 

V / Q  = ventilation/perfusion 
match) 
Breathlessness
Limbic drives
(emotion)
Cortical drive
Carotid body
(↓PaO2, ↑PaCO2)
IX
Central
chemoreceptors
(↓CSF pH)
Spinal
afferents
Vagal lung
afferents
Type II respiratory
failure, 
↑PaCO2 + acidosis
Airway obstruction
• Asthma
• Emphysema
Pulmonary
fibrosis
Increased
mechanical
load
Altered V/Q
Hypoxaemia
Pulmonary
embolus
Interstitial disease
• Inflammation
• Infection
• Fibrosis
Deflation
• Pneumothorax
• Collapse
• Effusion
System
Acute dyspnoea
Chronic exertional dyspnoea
Cardiovascular
*Acute pulmonary oedema (p. 543)
Chronic heart failure (p. 543)
Myocardial ischaemia (angina equivalent) (p. 544)
Respiratory
*Acute severe asthma
*Acute exacerbation of COPD
*Pneumothorax
*Pneumonia
*Pulmonary embolus
ARDS
Inhaled foreign body (especially in children)
Lobar collapse
Laryngeal oedema (e.g. anaphylaxis)
*COPD
*Chronic asthma
Bronchial carcinoma
Interstitial lung disease (sarcoidosis, fibrosing alveolitis, 
extrinsic allergic alveolitis, pneumoconiosis)
Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism
Lymphatic carcinomatosis (may cause intolerable 
breathlessness)
Large pleural effusion(s)
Others
Metabolic acidosis (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis, lactic 
acidosis, uraemia, overdose of salicylates, ethylene glycol 
poisoning)
Psychogenic hyperventilation (anxiety or panic-related)
Severe anaemia
Obesity
Deconditioning
*Denotes a common cause. (ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
19.6  Causes of breathlessness
Presenting problems in respiratory disease
19
657
examination will usually suggest a diagnosis which can 
be confirmed by routine investigations, including chest 
X-ray, ECG and arterial blood gases. Specific features 
that aid the diagnosis of the important causes are shown 
in Box 19.8.
History
It is important to establish the rate of onset and severity 
of the breathlessness and whether associated cardiovas-
cular symptoms (chest pain, palpitations, sweating and 
nausea) or respiratory symptoms (cough, wheeze, haem­
optysis, stridor – Fig. 19.11) are present. A previous 
history of repeated episodes of left ventricular failure, 
asthma or exacerbations of COPD is valuable. In 
the severely ill patient, it may be necessary to obtain the 
history from accompanying witnesses. In children, the 
possibility of inhalation of a foreign body (see Fig. 19.9) 
or acute epiglottitis should always be considered.
Clinical assessment
The following should be assessed and documented:
•	 level of consciousness
•	 degree of central cyanosis
•	 evidence of anaphylaxis (urticaria or  
angioedema)
•	 patency of the upper airway
•	 ability to speak (in single words or sentences)
•	 cardiovascular status (heart rate and rhythm,  
blood pressure and degree of peripheral  
perfusion).
Pulmonary oedema is suggested by pink, frothy 
sputum and bi-basal crackles; asthma or COPD by 
wheeze and prolonged expiration; pneumothorax by a 
silent resonant hemithorax; and pulmonary embolus by 
severe breathlessness with normal breath sounds. The 
peak expiratory flow should be measured whenever 
possible. Leg swelling may suggest cardiac failure or, 
if asymmetrical, venous thrombosis. Arterial blood 
gases, a chest X-ray and an ECG should be obtained to 
confirm the clinical diagnosis, and high concentrations 
of oxygen given pending results. Urgent endotracheal 
intubation (p. 194) may become necessary if the con-
scious level declines or if severe respiratory acidosis is 
present.
a raised JVP and cardiac murmurs (although these signs 
can occur in severe cor pulmonale). The chest X-ray may 
show cardiomegaly, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) 
and echocardiogram may provide evidence of left ven-
tricular disease. Measurement of arterial blood gases 
may help, as, in the absence of an intracardiac shunt or 
pulmonary oedema, the PaO2 in cardiac disease is 
normal and the PaCO2 is low or normal.
Did you have breathing problems in 
childhood or at school?
When present, a history of childhood wheeze increases 
the likelihood of asthma, although this history may be 
absent in late-onset asthma. A history of atopic allergy 
also increases the likelihood of asthma.
Do you have other symptoms along with  
your breathlessness?
Digital or perioral paraesthesiae and a feeling that ‘I 
cannot get a deep enough breath in’ are typical features 
of psychogenic hyperventilation, but this cannot be 
diagnosed until investigations have excluded other 
potential causes. Additional symptoms include light-
headedness, central chest discomfort or even carpopedal 
spasm due to acute respiratory alkalosis. These alarming 
symptoms may provoke further anxiety and exacerbate 
hyperventilation. Psychogenic breathlessness rarely dis-
turbs sleep, frequently occurs at rest, may be provoked 
by stressful situations and may even be relieved by exer-
cise. The Nijmegen questionnaire can be used to score 
some of the typical symptoms of hyperventilation (Box 
19.7). Arterial blood gases show normal PO2, low PCO2 
and alkalosis.
Pleuritic chest pain in a patient with chronic breath-
lessness, particularly if it occurs in more than one site 
over time, should raise suspicion of thromboembolic 
disease. Thromboembolism may occasionally present as 
chronic breathlessness with no other specific features, 
and should always be considered before a diagnosis of 
psychogenic hyperventilation is made.
Morning headache is an important symptom in 
patients with breathlessness, as it may signal the onset 
of carbon dioxide retention and respiratory failure. This 
is particularly significant in patients with musculoskel-
etal disease impairing respiratory function (e.g. kypho-
scoliosis or muscular dystrophy).
Acute severe breathlessness
This is one of the most common and dramatic medical 
emergencies. The history and a rapid but careful 
• ‘Inability to take a deep breath’
• Frequent sighing/erratic ventilation at rest
• Short breath-holding time in the absence of severe 
respiratory disease
• Difficulty in performing and/or inconsistent spirometry 
measures
• High score (over 26) on Nijmegen questionnaire
• Induction of symptoms during submaximal hyperventilation
• Resting end-tidal CO2 < 4.5%
• Associated digital paraesthesiae
19.7  Factors suggesting psychogenic 
hyperventilation
Fig. 19.11  CT showing retrosternal multinodular goitre (small 
arrow) causing acute severe breathlessness and stridor due to 
tracheal compression (large arrow). 
R
Respiratory disease
19
658
Chest pain
Chest pain is a frequent manifestation of both cardiac 
(p. 539) and respiratory disease (Box 19.9). Pleurisy, 
a sharp chest pain aggravated by deep breathing or 
coughing, is a common feature of pulmonary infection 
or infarction; it may also occur with malignancy. On 
examination, rib movement may be restricted and a 
pleural rub may be present. Malignant involvement of 
the chest wall or ribs can cause gnawing, continuous 
local pain in the chest wall. Central chest pain suggests 
heart disease but also occurs with tumours affecting the 
mediastinum, oesophageal disease (p. 865) or disease 
of the thoracic aorta (p. 603). Massive pulmonary 
embolus may cause ischaemic cardiac pain, as well as 
severe breathlessness. Tracheitis produces raw upper 
retrosternal pain, exacerbated by the accompanying 
cough. Musculoskeletal chest wall pain is usually 
exacerbated by movement and associated with local 
tenderness.
Haemoptysis
Coughing up blood, irrespective of the amount, is an 
alarming symptom and patients nearly always seek 
medical advice. Care should be taken to establish that 
Condition
History
Signs
CXR
ABG
ECG
Pulmonary 
oedema
Chest pain, palpitations, 
orthopnoea, cardiac 
history*
Central cyanosis, ↑JVP, 
sweating, cool 
extremities, basal 
crackles*
Cardiomegaly, 
oedema/pleural 
effusions*
↓PaO2
↓PaCO2
Sinus tachycardia, 
ischaemia*, 
arrhythmia
Massive 
pulmonary 
embolus
Risk factors, chest pain, 
pleurisy, syncope*, 
dizziness*
Central cyanosis, ↑JVP*, 
absence of signs in the 
lung*, shock 
(tachycardia, 
hypotension)
Often normal
Prominent hilar 
vessels, oligaemic 
lung fields*
↓PaO2
↓PaCO2
Sinus tachycardia, 
RBBB, S1Q3T3 
pattern
↑T(V1–V4)
Acute severe 
asthma
History of asthma, 
asthma medications, 
wheeze*
Tachycardia, pulsus 
paradoxus, cyanosis 
(late), JVP →*, ↓peak 
flow, wheeze*
Hyperinflation only 
(unless complicated 
by pneumothorax)*
↓PaO2
↓PaCO2 (↑PaCO2 
in extremis)
Sinus tachycardia 
(bradycardia in 
extremis)
Acute 
exacerbation 
of COPD
Previous episodes*, 
smoker. If in type II 
respiratory failure, may 
be drowsy
Cyanosis, hyperinflation*, 
signs of CO2 retention 
(flapping tremor, 
bounding pulses)*
Hyperinflation*, 
bullae, complicating 
pneumothorax
↓ or ↓↓PaO2 
↑PaCO2 in type II 
failure ± ↑H+, 
↑HCO3 in chronic 
type II failure
Normal, or signs 
of right ventricular 
strain
Pneumonia
Prodromal illness*, 
fever*, rigors*, pleurisy*
Fever, confusion, pleural 
rub*, consolidation*, 
cyanosis (if severe)
Pneumonic 
consolidation*
↓PaO2
↓PaCO2 (↑ in 
extremis)
Tachycardia
Metabolic 
acidosis
Evidence of diabetes 
mellitus or renal 
disease, aspirin or 
ethylene glycol overdose
Fetor (ketones), 
hyperventilation without 
heart or lung signs*, 
dehydration*, air hunger
Normal
PaO2 normal
↓↓PaCO2, ↑H+
Psychogenic
Previous episodes, 
digital or perioral 
dysaesthesia
No cyanosis, no heart or 
lung signs, carpopedal 
spasm
Normal
PaO2 normal*
↓↓PaCO2, ↓H+*
*Valuable discriminatory feature. (ABG = arterial blood gases; RBBB = right bundle branch block)
19.8  Differential diagnosis of acute breathlessness
it is true haemoptysis and not haematemesis, or gum 
or nose bleeding. Haemoptysis must always be 
assumed to have a serious cause until this is excluded 
(Box 19.10).
Many episodes of haemoptysis remain unexplained, 
even after full investigation, and are likely to be due to 
simple bronchial infection. A history of repeated small 
haemoptysis, or blood-streaking of sputum, is highly 
suggestive of bronchial carcinoma. Fever, night sweats 
and weight loss suggest tuberculosis. Pneumococcal 
pneumonia often causes ‘rusty’-coloured sputum but 
can cause frank haemoptysis, as can all suppurative 
pneumonic infections, including lung abscess (p. 687). 
Bronchiectasis (p. 678) and intracavitary mycetoma 
(p. 698) can cause catastrophic bronchial haemorrhage, 
and in these patients there may be a history of previous 
tuberculosis or pneumonia in early life. Finally, pulmo-
nary thromboembolism is a common cause of haem­
optysis and should always be considered.
Physical examination may reveal additional clues. 
Finger clubbing suggests bronchial carcinoma or bron-
chiectasis; other signs of malignancy, such as cachexia, 
hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy, should also be 
sought. Fever, pleural rub and signs of consolidation 
occur in pneumonia or pulmonary infarction; a minority 
of patients with pulmonary infarction also have unilat-
eral leg swelling or pain suggestive of deep venous 
thrombosis. Rashes, haematuria and digital infarcts 
Presenting problems in respiratory disease
19
659
point to an underlying systemic disease, such as a vas-
culitis, which may be associated with haemoptysis.
Management
In severe acute haemoptysis, the patient should be 
nursed upright (or on the side of the bleeding, if this is 
known), given high-flow oxygen and resuscitated as 
required. Bronchoscopy in the acute phase is difficult 
and often merely shows blood throughout the bronchial 
tree. If radiology shows an obvious central cause, then 
rigid bronchoscopy under general anaesthesia may 
allow intervention to stop bleeding; however, the 
source often cannot be visualised. Intubation with a 
divided endotracheal tube may allow protected ventila-
tion of the unaffected lung to stabilise the patient. Bron-
chial arteriography and embolisation (Fig. 19.12), or 
even emergency surgery, can be life-saving in the acute 
situation.
In the vast majority of cases, however, the haem­
optysis itself is not life-threatening and a logical sequence 
of investigations can be followed:
•	 chest X-ray, which may provide evidence of a 
localised lesion, including tumour (malignant or 
benign), pneumonia, mycetoma or tuberculosis
•	 full blood count (FBC) and clotting screen
•	 bronchoscopy after acute bleeding has settled, 
which may reveal a central bronchial carcinoma 
(not visible on the chest X-ray) and permit biopsy 
and tissue diagnosis
•	 CTPA, which may reveal underlying pulmonary 
thromboembolic disease or alternative causes not 
seen on the chest X-ray (e.g. pulmonary 
arteriovenous malformation or small or hidden 
tumours).
Central
Cardiac
• Myocardial ischaemia 
(angina)
• Myocardial infarction
• Myocarditis
• Pericarditis
• Mitral valve prolapse 
syndrome
Aortic
• Aortic dissection
• Aortic aneurysm
Oesophageal
• Oesophagitis
• Oesophageal spasm
• Mallory–Weiss syndrome
Massive pulmonary embolus
Mediastinal
• Tracheitis
• Malignancy
Anxiety/emotion1
Peripheral
Lungs/pleura
• Pulmonary infarct
• Pneumonia
• Pneumothorax
• Malignancy
• Tuberculosis
• Connective tissue disorders
Musculoskeletal2
• Osteoarthritis
• Rib fracture/injury
• Costochondritis (Tietze’s 
syndrome)
• Intercostal muscle injury
• Epidemic myalgia 
(Bornholm disease)
Neurological
• Prolapsed intervertebral 
disc
• Herpes zoster
• Thoracic outlet syndrome
1May also cause peripheral chest pain. 2Can sometimes cause central chest 
pain.
19.9  Differential diagnosis of chest pain
Bronchial disease
• Carcinoma*
• Bronchiectasis*
• Acute bronchitis*
• Bronchial adenoma
• Foreign body
Parenchymal disease
• Tuberculosis*
• Suppurative pneumonia
• Parasites (e.g. hydatid 
disease, flukes)
• Lung abscess
• Trauma
• Actinomycosis
• Mycetoma
Lung vascular disease
• Pulmonary infarction*
• Goodpasture’s syndrome 
(p. 497)
• Polyarteritis nodosa
• Idiopathic pulmonary 
haemosiderosis
Cardiovascular disease
• Acute left ventricular 
failure*
• Mitral stenosis
• Aortic aneurysm
Blood disorders
• Leukaemia
• Haemophilia
• Anticoagulants
*More common causes.
19.10  Causes of haemoptysis
Fig. 19.12  Bronchial artery angiography. An angiography catheter 
has been passed via the femoral artery and aorta into an abnormally 
dilated right bronchial artery (arrows). Contrast is seen flowing into the 
lung. This patient had post-tuberculous bronchiectasis and presented with 
massive haemoptysis. Bronchial artery embolisation was successfully 
performed. 
Respiratory disease
19
660
biopsy under ultrasound or CT guidance. Needle biopsy 
may be complicated by pneumothorax in around 20% 
of cases and although only 3% require intercostal drain-
age, this technique should only be contemplated in indi-
viduals with an FEV1 of more than 35% predicted. 
Haemorrhage into the lung or pleural space, air embo-
lism and tumour seeding are rare but recognised 
complications.
PET scanning provides useful information about 
nodules of at least 1 cm in diameter, in which the pres-
ence of high metabolic activity is strongly suggestive of 
malignancy, while an inactive ‘cold’ nodule is consistent 
with benign disease. False-positive results may occur 
with some infectious or inflammatory nodules, and 
false-negative results with neuro-endocrine tumours 
and bronchiolo-alveolar cell carcinomas. Detection of 
neuro-endocrine tumours may be improved by the use 
of 68Ga-Dotatoc in place of FDG.
Where tissue biopsy is contraindicated and the lesion 
is too small to be confidently assessed by PET, interval 
thoracic CT scanning may be considered. The period 
between scans is based upon the average tumour dou-
bling time (Box 19.13). Changes may be difficult to assess 
visually and specially adapted computer programs 
allow more detailed topographical assessment. However, 
the risks of radiation exposure inherent in this approach, 
and the fact that further nodules are likely to be detected, 
need to be considered. In some circumstances, if the 
nodule is highly likely to be malignant and the patient 
is fit for surgery, the best option may be to proceed to 
surgical resection.
The incidental pulmonary nodule
The incidental finding of a pulmonary nodule (a rounded 
opacity measuring up to 3 cm in diameter) is common, 
particularly with the widespread use of thoracic 
CT scanning (Fig. 19.13). The differential diagnosis 
is extensive (Box 19.11), and whilst the majority are 
benign, it is important to identify a potentially treatable 
malignancy.
A lesion may be confidently described as benign if it 
appears unchanged over 2 years. If previous images are 
available and this can be established, no further investi-
gation may be necessary. Otherwise, the likelihood of 
malignancy is assessed by considering the characteris-
tics of the patient, including age, smoking history and 
any history of prior malignancy, and the appearance of 
the nodule in terms of its size, margin, density and loca-
tion (Box 19.12). Further investigation is required in the 
majority of cases.
Pulmonary nodules are invariably beyond the vision 
of the bronchoscope and, with the notable exception 
of pulmonary infection (e.g. tuberculosis), bronchos-
copy is usually unrewarding as the yield from blind 
washings is low. Endoscopic bronchoscopic ultrasound 
may overcome this but, for the time being, tissue is 
most commonly obtained using percutaneous needle 
Fig. 19.13  Thoracic CT scan showing a solitary pulmonary 
nodule identified in the right upper lobe (arrow). 
Common causes
• Bronchial carcinoma
• Single metastasis
• Localised pneumonia
• Lung abscess
• Tuberculoma
• Pulmonary infarct
Uncommon causes
• Benign tumours
• Lymphoma
• Arteriovenous malformation
• Hydatid cyst (p. 380)
• Bronchogenic cyst
• Rheumatoid nodule
• Pulmonary sequestration
• Pulmonary haematoma
• Wegener’s granuloma
• ‘Pseudotumour’ – fluid 
collection in a fissure
• Aspergilloma (usually 
surrounded by air ‘halo’)
19.11  Causes of pulmonary nodules
Feature
Risk of malignancy
Patient characteristics
Age
Increases with age and is uncommon  
< age of 40
Smoking history
Increases in proportion to duration and 
amount smoked
Other
Increased by history of lung cancer in 
first-degree relative, and by exposure to 
asbestos, silica, uranium and radon
Characteristics of nodule
Size
Nearly all > 3 cm but fewer than 1% 
< 4 mm are malignant
Margin
Usually smooth in benign lesions
Spiculated suggests malignancy
Calcification or fat
Laminated or central deposition of 
calcification suggests granuloma
‘Popcorn’ pattern is suggestive of 
hamartoma
Fat may suggest hamartoma or lipoid 
granuloma
Location
70% of lung cancers occur in upper  
lobes
Benign lesions are equally distributed 
throughout upper and lower lobes
Note Linear or sheet-like lung opacities are unlikely to represent neoplasms 
and do not require follow-up. Some nodular opacities may be sufficiently 
typical of scarring that follow-up is not warranted.
Adapted from Fleischer Society Statement. Radiology 2005; 237:395–400.
19.12  Clinical and radiographic features 
distinguishing benign from malignant nodules
Presenting problems in respiratory disease
19
661
wall. In fact, fluid surrounds the whole lung at this level, 
but casts a radiological shadow only where the X-ray 
beam passes tangentially across the fluid against the 
lateral chest wall. Around 200 mL of fluid is required 
in order for it to be detectable on a PA chest X-ray. Previ-
ous scarring or adhesions in the pleural space can cause 
localised effusions. Pleural fluid localised below the 
lower lobe (‘subpulmonary effusion’) simulates an ele-
vated hemidiaphragm. Pleural fluid localised within an 
oblique fissure may produce a rounded opacity that may 
be mistaken for a tumour.
Ultrasound is more accurate than plain chest X-ray 
for determining the presence of fluid. A clear hypo­
echoic space is consistent with a transudate and the pres-
ence of moving floating densities suggests an exudate. 
The presence of septation suggests an evolving empyema 
or resolving haemothorax. CT scanning is indicated 
where malignant disease is suspected.
Pleural aspiration and biopsy
In some conditions (e.g. left ventricular failure), it should 
not be necessary to sample fluid unless atypical features 
are present; appropriate treatment should be adminis-
tered and the effusion re-evaluated. However, in most 
other circumstances, diagnostic sampling is required. 
Simple aspiration provides information on the colour 
and texture of fluid and these alone may immediately 
suggest an empyema or chylothorax. The presence of 
blood is consistent with pulmonary infarction or malig-
nancy, but may result from a traumatic tap. Biochemical 
analysis allows classification into transudate and exu-
dates (Box 19.16) and Gram stain may suggest para-
pneumonic effusion. The predominant cell type provides 
useful information and cytological examination is essen-
tial. A low pH suggests infection but may also be 
seen in rheumatoid arthritis, ruptured oesophagus or 
advanced malignancy.
Ultrasound- or CT-guided pleural biopsy provides 
tissue for pathological and microbiological analysis. 
Where necessary, video-assisted thoracoscopy allows 
visualisaton of the pleura and direct guidance of a 
biopsy.
Pleural effusion
The accumulation of serous fluid within the pleural 
space is termed pleural effusion. The accumulation of 
frank pus is termed empyema (p. 662), that of blood is 
haemothorax, and that of chyle is a chylothorax. In 
general, pleural fluid accumulates as a result of either 
increased hydrostatic pressure or decreased osmotic 
pressure (‘transudative’ effusion, as seen in cardiac, liver 
or renal failure), or from increased microvascular pres-
sure due to disease of the pleura or injury in the adjacent 
lung (‘exudative’ effusion). The causes of the majority of 
pleural effusions (Boxes 19.14 and 19.15) are identified 
by a thorough history, examination and relevant 
investigations.
Clinical assessment
Symptoms (pain on inspiration and coughing) and signs 
of pleurisy (a pleural rub) often precede the develop-
ment of an effusion, especially in patients with under­
lying pneumonia, pulmonary infarction or connective 
tissue disease. However, when breathlessness is the 
only symptom, depending on the size and rate of accu-
mulation, the onset may be insidious. The physical signs 
are detailed on page 645.
Investigations
Radiological investigations
The classical appearance of pleural fluid on the erect PA 
chest film is of a curved shadow at the lung base, blunt-
ing the costophrenic angle and ascending towards the 
axilla (p. 645). Fluid appears to track up the lateral chest 
Nodule size (mm)
(average of 
length and width)
No or minimal 
history of smoking/
other risk factors
Smoker/other  
risk factors
≤ 4
No follow-up 
needed2
Follow-up CT at 
12 mths; if 
unchanged, no 
further follow-up
4–6
Follow-up at 
12 mths; if 
unchanged, no 
further follow-up
Initial follow-up CT 
at 6–12 mths, then 
at 18–24 mths if 
no change
6–8
Initial follow-up CT 
at 6–12 mths, then 
at 18–24 mths if 
no change
Initial follow-up CT 
at 3–6 mths, then 
at 9–12 mths if no 
change
> 8
Follow-up CT at 
around 3, 9 and 
24 mths, dynamic 
contrast-enhanced 
CT, PET and/or 
biopsy
As for low-risk 
patient
1Excludes younger patients, and those with unexplained fever or known/
suspected malignant disease.
2Very low risk of malignancy (< 1%). Non-solid (ground glass) or partly solid 
nodules may require longer follow-up to exclude indolent adenocarcinoma.
Adapted from Radiology 2005; 237:395–400.
19.13  Recommendations for follow-up of 
incidental nodules smaller than 8 mm1
Common causes
• Pneumonia (‘para-
pneumonic effusion’)
• Tuberculosis
• Pulmonary infarction*
• Malignant disease
• Cardiac failure*
• Subdiaphragmatic 
disorders (subphrenic 
abscess, pancreatitis etc.)
Uncommon causes
• Hypoproteinaemia* 
(nephrotic syndrome, liver 
failure, malnutrition)
• Connective tissue diseases* 
(particularly systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) and 
rheumatoid arthritis)
• Post-myocardial infarction 
syndrome
• Acute rheumatic fever
• Meigs’ syndrome (ovarian 
tumour plus pleural 
effusion)
• Myxoedema*
• Uraemia*
• Asbestos-related benign 
pleural effusion
*May cause bilateral effusions.
19.14  Causes of pleural effusion
Respiratory disease
19
662
large numbers. An empyema may involve the whole 
pleural space or only part of it (‘loculated’ or ‘encysted’ 
empyema) and is usually unilateral. It is always second-
ary to infection in a neighbouring structure, usually the 
lung, most commonly due to the bacterial pneumonias 
and tuberculosis. Over 40% of patients with community-
acquired pneumonia develop an associated pleural 
effusion (‘para-pneumonic’ effusion) and about 15% of 
these become secondarily infected. Other causes are 
infection of a haemothorax following trauma or surgery, 
oesophageal rupture, and rupture of a subphrenic 
abscess through the diaphragm.
Both pleural surfaces are covered with a thick, 
shaggy, inflammatory exudate. The pus in the pleural 
space is often under considerable pressure, and if the 
condition is not adequately treated, pus may rupture 
into a bronchus, causing a bronchopleural fistula and 
pyopneumothorax, or track through the chest wall with 
the formation of a subcutaneous abscess or sinus, 
so-called empyema necessitans.
Clinical assessment
An empyema should be suspected in patients with pul-
monary infection if there is severe pleuritic chest pain or 
persisting or recurrent pyrexia, despite appropriate anti-
biotic treatment. In other cases, the primary infection 
may be so mild that it passes unrecognised and the first 
definite clinical features are due to the empyema itself. 
Once an empyema has developed, systemic features are 
prominent (Box 19.17).
Cause
Appearance of fluid
Type of fluid
Predominant cells in fluid
Other diagnostic features
Tuberculosis
Serous, usually 
amber-coloured
Exudate
Lymphocytes (occasionally 
polymorphs)
Positive tuberculin test
Isolation of M. tuberculosis from 
pleural fluid (20%)
Positive pleural biopsy (80%)
Raised adenosine deaminase
Malignant disease
Serous, often 
blood-stained
Exudate
Serosal cells and 
lymphocytes
Often clumps of  
malignant cells
Positive pleural biopsy (40%)
Evidence of malignancy elsewhere
Cardiac failure
Serous, straw-coloured
Transudate
Few serosal cells
Other signs of cardiac failure
Response to diuretics
Pulmonary 
infarction
Serous or blood-stained
Exudate (rarely 
transudate)
Red blood cells
Eosinophils
Evidence of pulmonary infarction
Obvious source of embolism
Factors predisposing to venous 
thrombosis
Rheumatoid 
disease
Serous
Turbid if chronic
Exudate
Lymphocytes (occasionally 
polymorphs)
Rheumatoid arthritis: rheumatoid 
factor and anti-CCP antibodies
Cholesterol in chronic effusion; very 
low glucose in pleural fluid
SLE
Serous
Exudate
Lymphocytes and serosal 
cells
Other signs of SLE
Antinuclear factor or anti-DNA 
positive
Acute pancreatitis
Serous or blood-stained
Exudate
No cells predominate
Higher amylase in pleural fluid than 
in serum
Obstruction of 
thoracic duct
Milky
Chyle
None
Chylomicrons
(anti-CCP = anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus)
19.15  Pleural effusion: main causes and features
Exudate is likely if one or more of the following criteria are met:
• Pleural fluid protein : serum protein ratio > 0.5
• Pleural fluid LDH : serum LDH ratio > 0.6
• Pleural fluid LDH > two-thirds of the upper limit of normal 
serum LDH
(LDH = lactate dehydrogenase)
19.16  Light’s criteria for distinguishing 
pleural transudate from exudate
Management
Therapeutic aspiration may be required to palliate 
breathlessness but removing more than 1.5 L at a time 
is associated with a small risk of re-expansion pulmo-
nary oedema. An effusion should never be drained to 
dryness before establishing a diagnosis, as biopsy may 
be precluded until further fluid accumulates. Treatment 
of the underlying cause – for example, heart failure, 
pneumonia, pulmonary embolism or subphrenic abscess 
– will often be followed by resolution of the effusion. 
The management of pleural effusion in pneumonia, 
tuberculosis and malignancy is dealt with below.
Empyema
This is a collection of pus in the pleural space, which 
may be as thin as serous fluid or so thick that it is impos-
sible to aspirate, even through a wide-bore needle. 
Microscopically, neutrophil leucocytes are present in 
Presenting problems in respiratory disease
19
663
can only occur if re-expansion of the compressed lung 
is secured at an early stage by removal of all the pus 
from the pleural space. When the pus is sufficiently 
thin, this is most easily achieved by the insertion of a 
wide-bore intercostal tube into the most dependent part 
of the empyema space. If the initial aspirate reveals 
turbid fluid or frank pus, or if loculations are seen on 
ultrasound, the tube should be put on suction (−5 to 
−10 cm H2O) and flushed regularly with 20 mL normal 
saline. If the organism causing the empyema can be 
identified, the appropriate antibiotic should be given 
for 2–4 weeks. Empirical antibiotic treatment (e.g. intra­
venous co-amoxiclav or cefuroxime with metronidazole) 
should be used if the organism is unknown. Intrapleural 
fibrinolytic therapy is of no benefit.
An empyema can often be aborted if these measures 
are started early, but if the intercostal tube is not provid-
ing adequate drainage – for example, when the pus is 
thick or loculated, surgical intervention is required to 
clear the empyema cavity of pus and break down any 
adhesions. Surgical ‘decortication’ of the lung may also 
be required if gross thickening of the visceral pleura is 
preventing re-expansion of the lung. Surgery is also nec-
essary if a bronchopleural fistula develops.
Despite the widespread availability of antibiotics that 
are effective against pneumonia, empyema remains a 
significant cause of morbidity and mortality.
Respiratory failure
The term ‘respiratory failure’ is used when pulmonary 
gas exchange fails to maintain normal arterial oxygen 
and carbon dioxide levels. Its classification into types I 
and II is defined by the absence or presence of hyper-
capnia (raised PaCO2).
Pathophysiology
When disease impairs ventilation of part of a lung (e.g. 
in asthma or pneumonia), perfusion of that region 
results in hypoxic and CO2-laden blood entering the pul-
monary veins. Increased ventilation of neighbouring 
regions of normal lung can increase CO2 excretion, cor-
recting arterial CO2 to normal, but cannot augment 
oxygen uptake because the haemoglobin flowing 
through these regions is already fully saturated. Admix-
ture of blood from the underventilated and normal 
regions thus results in hypoxia with normocapnia, 
Systemic features
• Pyrexia, usually high and remittent
• Rigors, sweating, malaise and weight loss
• Polymorphonuclear leucocytosis, high CRP
Local features
• Pleural pain; breathlessness; cough and sputum, usually 
because of underlying lung disease; copious purulent sputum 
if empyema ruptures into a bronchus (bronchopleural fistula)
• Clinical signs of pleural effusion
19.17  Clinical features of empyema
Fig. 19.14  Chest X-ray showing a ‘D’-shaped shadow in the left 
mid-zone, consistent with an empyema. In this case, an intercostal 
chest drain has been inserted but the loculated collection of pus remains. 
Fig. 19.15  Pleural ultrasound showing septation. 
Investigations
Chest X-ray appearances may be indistinguishable from 
those of pleural effusion, although pleural adhesions 
may confine the empyema to form a ‘D’-shaped shadow 
against the inside of the chest wall (Fig. 19.14). When air 
is present as well as pus (pyopneumothorax), a horizon-
tal ‘fluid level’ marks the air/liquid interface. Ultrasound 
shows the position of the fluid, the extent of pleural 
thickening and whether fluid is in a single collection or 
multiloculated, containing fibrin and debris (Fig. 19.15). 
CT provides information on the pleura, underlying lung 
parenchyma and patency of the major bronchi.
Ultrasound or CT is used to identify the optimal site 
for aspiration, which is best performed using a wide-
bore needle. If the fluid is thick and turbid pus, empyema 
is confirmed. Other features suggesting empyema are 
a fluid glucose of less than 3.3 mmol/L (60 mg/dL), 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of more than 1000 U/L, 
or a fluid pH of less than 7.0 (H+ over 100 nmol/L). 
However, pH measurement should be avoided if pus is 
thick, as it damages blood gas machines. The pus is 
frequently sterile on culture if antibiotics have already 
been given. The distinction between tuberculous and 
non-tuberculous disease can be difficult and often 
requires pleural biopsy, histology and culture.
Management
An empyema will only heal if infection is eradicated 
and the empyema space is obliterated, allowing apposi-
tion of the visceral and parietal pleural layers. This 
Respiratory disease
19
664
which is called ‘type I respiratory failure’. Diseases 
causing this include all those that impair ventilation 
locally with sparing of other regions (Box 19.18).
Arterial hypoxia with hypercapnia (type II respira-
tory failure) is seen in conditions that cause generalised, 
severe ventilation–perfusion mismatch, leaving insuffi-
cient normal lung to correct PaCO2, or a disease that 
reduces total ventilation. The latter includes not just 
diseases of the lung but also disorders affecting any 
part of the neuromuscular mechanism of ventilation 
(see Box 19.18).
Management of acute  
respiratory failure
Prompt diagnosis and management of the underlying 
cause is crucial. In type I respiratory failure, high con-
centrations of oxygen (40–60% by mask) will usually 
relieve hypoxia by increasing the alveolar PO2 in poorly 
ventilated lung units. Occasionally, however (e.g. severe 
pneumonia affecting several lobes), mechanical ventila-
tion may be needed to relieve hypoxia. Patients who 
need high concentrations of oxygen for more than a few 
hours should receive humidified oxygen.
Acute type II respiratory failure is an emergency 
requiring immediate intervention. It is useful to distin-
guish between patients with high ventilatory drive 
(rapid respiratory rate and accessory muscle recruit-
ment) who cannot move sufficient air, and those with 
reduced or inadequate respiratory effort. In the former, 
particularly if inspiratory stridor is present, acute upper 
airway obstruction from foreign body inhalation or 
laryngeal obstruction (angioedema, carcinoma or vocal 
cord paralysis) must be considered, as the Heimlich 
manœuvre (p. 728), immediate intubation or emergency 
tracheostomy may be life-saving.
More commonly, the problem is in the lungs, with 
severe generalised bronchial obstruction from COPD 
or asthma, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) 
arising from a variety of insults (p. 191), or occasionally 
tension pneumothorax (p. 728). In all such cases, high-
concentration (e.g. 60%) oxygen should be adminis-
tered, pending a rapid examination of the respiratory 
system and measurement of arterial blood gases. Patients 
Type I
Type II
Hypoxia (PaO2 < 8.0 kPa (60 mmHg))
Normal or low PaCO2 (< 6.6 kPa (50 mmHg))
Hypoxia (PaO2 < 8.0 kPa (60 mmHg))
Raised PaCO2 (> 6.6 kPa (50 mmHg))
Acute
Chronic
Acute
Chronic
H+
→
→
↑
→ or ↑
Bicarbonate
→
→
→
↑
Causes
Acute asthma
Pulmonary oedema
Pneumonia
Lobar collapse
Pneumothorax
Pulmonary embolus
ARDS
COPD
Lung fibrosis
Lymphangitis 
carcinomatosa
Right-to-left shunts
Acute severe asthma
Acute exacerbation of COPD
Upper airway obstruction
Acute neuropathies/paralysis
Narcotic drugs
Primary alveolar hypoventilation
Flail chest injury
COPD
Sleep apnoea
Kyphoscoliosis
Myopathies/muscular dystrophy
Ankylosing spondylitis
(ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
19.18  How to interpret blood gas abnormalities in respiratory failure
with the trachea deviated away from a silent and reso-
nant hemithorax are likely to have tension pneumotho-
rax, and air should be aspirated from the pleural space 
and a chest drain inserted as soon as possible. Patients 
with generalised wheeze, scanty breath sounds bilater-
ally or a history of asthma or COPD should be treated 
with nebulised salbutamol 2.5 mg with oxygen, repeated 
until bronchospasm is relieved. Failure to respond to 
initial treatment, declining conscious level and worsen-
ing respiratory acidosis (H+ > 50 nmol/L (pH < 7.3), 
PaCO2 > 6.6 kPa (50 mmHg)) on blood gases are all indi-
cations that supported ventilation is required (p. 193).
A small percentage of patients with severe chronic 
COPD and type II respiratory failure develop abnormal 
tolerance to raised PaCO2 and may become dependent 
on hypoxic drive to breathe. In these patients only, lower 
concentrations of oxygen (24–28% by Venturi mask) 
should be used to avoid precipitating worsening respira-
tory depression (see below). In all cases, regular moni-
toring of arterial blood gases is important to assess 
progress.
Patients with acute type II respiratory failure who 
have reduced drive or conscious level may be suffering 
from sedative poisoning, CO2 narcosis or a primary 
failure of neurological drive (e.g. following intracerebral 
haemorrhage or head injury). History from a witness 
may be invaluable, and reversal of specific drugs with 
(for example) opiate antagonists is occasionally success-
ful, but should not delay intubation and supported 
mechanical ventilation in appropriate cases.
Chronic and ‘acute on chronic’ 
type II respiratory failure
The most common cause of chronic type II respiratory 
failure is severe COPD. Although PaCO2 may be persis­
tently raised, there is no persisting acidaemia because 
the kidneys retain bicarbonate, correcting arterial pH to 
normal. This ‘compensated’ pattern, which may also 
occur in chronic neuromuscular disease or kyphoscolio-
sis, is maintained until there is a further acute illness (see 
Box 19.18), such as an exacerbation of COPD which pre-
cipitates an episode of ‘acute on chronic’ respiratory 
failure, with acidaemia and initial respiratory distress 
Presenting problems in respiratory disease
19
665
Immediate treatment is shown in Box 19.19. Patients 
who are conscious and have adequate respiratory drive 
may benefit from non-invasive ventilation (NIV), which 
has been shown to reduce the need for intubation and 
shorten hospital stay. Patients who are drowsy and have 
low respiratory drive require an urgent decision regard-
ing intubation and ventilation, as this is likely to be the 
only effective treatment, even though weaning off the 
ventilator may be difficult in severe disease. The deci-
sion is challenging, and important factors to consider 
include patient and family wishes, presence of a poten-
tially remediable precipitating condition, prior func-
tional capacity and quality of life. The various types of 
non-invasive (via a face or nasal mask) or invasive 
(via an endotracheal tube) ventilation are detailed on 
pages 193–196.
Respiratory stimulant drugs, such as doxapram, tend 
to cause unacceptable distress due to increased dys­
pnoea, and have been largely superseded by intubation 
and mechanical ventilation in patients with CO2 narco-
sis, as they provide only minor and transient improve-
ments in arterial blood gases.
Home ventilation for chronic  
respiratory failure
NIV is of great value in the long-term treatment of res-
piratory failure due to spinal deformity, neuromuscular 
disease and central alveolar hypoventilation. Some 
patients with advanced lung disease, e.g. cystic fibrosis, 
also benefit from NIV for respiratory failure. In these 
conditions, the onset of type II respiratory failure can 
be very gradual. Morning headache (due to elevated 
PaCO2) and fatigue are common symptoms but, in many 
cases, the diagnosis is only revealed by sleep studies or 
morning blood gas analysis. In the initial stages, ventila-
tion is insufficient for metabolic needs only during sleep, 
when there is a physiological decline in ventilatory 
drive. Over time, however, CO2 retention becomes 
chronic, with renal compensation of acidosis. Treatment 
by home-based NIV overnight is often sufficient to 
restore the daytime PCO2 to normal, and to relieve 
fatigue and headache. In advanced disease (e.g. muscu-
lar dystrophies or cystic fibrosis), daytime NIV may also 
be required.
Lung transplantation
Lung transplantation is an established treatment for 
carefully selected patients with advanced lung disease 
unresponsive 
to 
medical 
treatment 
(Box 
19.20). 
followed by drowsiness and eventually coma. These 
patients have lost their chemo-sensitivity to elevated 
PaCO2, and so they may paradoxically depend on 
hypoxia for respiratory drive, and are at risk of respira-
tory depression if given high concentrations of oxygen 
– for example, during ambulance transfers or in emer-
gency departments. Moreover, in contrast to acute severe 
asthma, some patients with ‘acute on chronic’ type II 
respiratory failure due to COPD may not be distressed, 
despite being critically ill with severe hypoxaemia, 
hypercapnia and acidaemia. While the physical signs of 
CO2 retention (confusion, flapping tremor, bounding 
pulses and so on) can be helpful if present, they may not 
be, so arterial blood gases are mandatory in the assess-
ment of initial severity and response to treatment.
Management
The principal aims of treatment in acute on chronic type 
II respiratory failure are to achieve a safe PaO2 (> 7.0 kPa 
(52 mmHg)) without increasing PaCO2 and acidosis, 
while identifying and treating the precipitating condi-
tion. In these patients, it is not necessary to achieve a 
normal PaO2; even a small increase will often have 
a greatly beneficial effect on tissue oxygen delivery, 
since their PaO2 values are often on the steep part of 
the oxygen saturation curve (p. 184). The risks of wors-
ening hypercapnia and coma must be balanced against 
those of severe hypoxaemia, which include potentially 
fatal arrhythmias or severe cerebral complications. 
Initial assessment
Patient may not appear distressed, despite being critically ill
• Conscious level (response to commands, ability to cough)
• CO2 retention (warm periphery, bounding pulses, flapping 
tremor)
• Airways obstruction (wheeze, prolonged expiration, 
hyperinflation, intercostal indrawing, pursed lips)
• Cor pulmonale (peripheral oedema, raised JVP, 
hepatomegaly, ascites)
• Background functional status and quality of life
• Signs of precipitating cause (see Box 19.17)
Investigations
• Arterial blood gases (severity of hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, 
acidaemia, bicarbonate)
• Chest X-ray
Management
• Maintenance of airway
• Treatment of specific precipitating cause
• Frequent physiotherapy ± pharyngeal suction
• Nebulised bronchodilators
• Controlled oxygen therapy
Start with 24% Venturi mask
Aim for a PaO2 > 7 kPa (52 mmHg) (a PaO2 < 5 
(37 mmHg) is dangerous)
• Antibiotics if evidence of infection
• Diuretics if evidence of fluid overload
Progress
• If PaCO2 continues to rise or a safe PaO2 cannot be achieved 
without severe hypercapnia and acidaemia, mechanical 
ventilatory support may be required
19.19  Assessment and management of ‘acute on 
chronic’ type II respiratory failure
Parenchymal lung disease
• Cystic fibrosis
• Emphysema
• Pulmonary fibrosis
• Obliterative bronchiolitis
• Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis (p. 715)
• Lymphangioleiomyomatosis 
(p. 715)
Pulmonary vascular disease
• Primary pulmonary 
hypertension
• Thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension
• Veno-occlusive disease
• Eisenmenger’s syndrome 
(p. 631)
19.20  Indications for lung transplantation
Respiratory disease
19
666
but variable airflow obstruction within the lung 
that is often reversible, either spontaneously or with 
treatment.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of asthma increased steadily over the 
latter part of the last century, first in the developed and 
then in the developing world (Fig. 19.16). Current esti-
mates suggest that asthma affects 300 million people 
worldwide, with a predicted additional 100 million 
people affected by 2025. The socio-economic impact is 
enormous, as poor control leads to days lost from school 
or work, unscheduled health-care visits and hospital 
admissions.
Although the development and course of the disease, 
and the response to treatment, are influenced by genetic 
determinants, the rapid rise in prevalence implies that 
environmental factors are critically important in the 
development and expression of the disease. To date, 
studies have explored the potential role of indoor and 
outdoor allergens, microbial exposure, diet, vitamins, 
breastfeeding, tobacco smoke, air pollution and obesity 
but no clear consensus has emerged.
Pathophysiology
Airway hyper-reactivity (AHR) – the tendency for 
airways to narrow excessively in response to triggers 
that have little or no effect in normal individuals – is inte-
gral to the diagnosis of asthma and appears to be related, 
although not exclusively, to airway inflammation (Fig. 
19.17). Other factors likely to be important in the behav-
iour of airway smooth muscle include the degree of 
airway narrowing and neurogenic mechanisms.
The relationship between atopy (the propensity to 
produce IgE) and asthma is well established, and in 
many individuals there is a clear relationship between 
sensitisation and allergen exposure, as demonstrated by 
skin prick reactivity or elevated serum specific IgE. 
Common examples of allergens include house dust 
mites, pets such as cats and dogs, pests such as cock-
roaches, and fungi. Inhalation of an allergen into the 
airway is followed by an early and late-phase broncho­
constrictor response (Fig. 19.18). Allergic mechanisms 
Fig. 19.16  World map showing the prevalence of clinical asthma (proportion of population (%)). From WHO – see p. 732; data drawn from 
the European Community Respiratory Health Study (ECRHS) and the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC).
≥10.1
7.6–10.0
5.1–7.5
2.5–5.0
0–2.5
No standardised
data available
Single-lung transplantation may be used for selected 
patients with advanced emphysema or lung fibrosis. 
This is contraindicated in patients with chronic bilateral 
pulmonary infection, such as cystic fibrosis and bron-
chiectasis, because the transplanted lung is vulnerable to 
cross-infection in the context of post-transplant immuno-
suppression and for these individuals bilateral lung 
transplantation is the standard procedure. Combined 
heart–lung transplantation is still occasionally needed 
for patients with advanced congenital heart disease such 
as Eisenmenger’s syndrome, and is preferred by some 
surgeons for the treatment of primary pulmonary hyper-
tension unresponsive to medical therapy.
The prognosis following lung transplantation is 
improving steadily with modern immunosuppressive 
drugs: over 50% 10-year survival in some UK centres. 
However, chronic rejection resulting in obliterative 
bronchiolitis continues to afflict some recipients. Cortico­
steroids are used to manage acute rejection, but drugs 
that inhibit cell-mediated immunity specifically, such as 
ciclosporin, mycophenolate and tacrolimus (p. 94), are 
used to prevent chronic rejection. Azithromycin, statins 
and total lymphoid irradiation are employed to treat 
obliterative bronchiolitis, but late organ failure remains 
a significant problem.
The major factor limiting the availability of lung 
transplantation is the shortage of donor lungs. To 
improve organ availability, techniques to recondition 
the lungs in vitro after removal from the donor are being 
developed.
OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASES
Asthma
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the 
airways, in which many cells and cellular elements play 
a role. The chronic inflammation is associated with 
airway hyper-responsiveness that leads to recurrent epi-
sodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness and 
coughing, particularly at night and in the early morning. 
These episodes are usually associated with widespread 
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
19
667
of an array of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors. 
Examination of the inflammatory cell profile in induced 
sputum samples demonstrates that, although asthma is 
predominantly characterised by airway eosinophilia, 
neutrophilic inflammation predominates in some 
patients, while, in others, scant inflammation is observed: 
so-called ‘pauci-granulocytic’ asthma.
With increasing severity and chronicity of the disease, 
remodelling of the airway may occur, leading to fibrosis 
of the airway wall, fixed narrowing of the airway and a 
reduced response to bronchodilator medication.
Clinical features
Typical symptoms include recurrent episodes of wheez-
ing, chest tightness, breathlessness and cough. Asthma 
is commonly mistaken for a cold or chest infection which 
is taking time to resolve (e.g. longer than 10 days). Clas-
sical precipitants include exercise, particularly in cold 
weather, exposure to airborne allergens or pollutants, 
and viral upper respiratory tract infections. Wheeze 
apart, there is often very little to find on examination. 
An inspection for nasal polyps and eczema should be 
performed. Rarely, a vasculitic rash may suggest Churg–
Strauss syndrome (p. 1118).
Patients with mild intermittent asthma are usually 
asymptomatic between exacerbations. Individuals with 
persistent asthma report ongoing breathlessness and 
wheeze, but these are variable, with symptoms fluctuat-
ing over the course of one day, or from day to day or 
month to month.
Asthma characteristically displays a diurnal pattern, 
with symptoms and lung function being worse in the 
early morning. Particularly when poorly controlled, 
symptoms such as cough and wheeze disturb sleep and 
have led to the term ‘nocturnal asthma’. Cough may be 
the dominant symptom in some patients, and the lack of 
wheeze or breathlessness may lead to a delay in reach-
ing the diagnosis of so-called ‘cough-variant asthma’.
Some patients with asthma have a similar inflamma-
tory response in the upper airway. Careful enquiry 
should be made as to a history of sinusitis, sinus 
headache, a blocked or runny nose, and loss of sense 
of smell.
Although the aetiology of asthma is often elusive, an 
attempt should be made to identify any agents that may 
contribute to the appearance or aggravation of the con-
dition. Particular enquiry should be made about poten-
tial allergens, such as exposure to a pet cat, guinea pig, 
rabbit or horse, pest infestation, exposure to moulds fol-
lowing water damage to a home or building, and any 
potential occupational agents.
In some circumstances, the appearance of asthma is 
triggered by medications. Beta-blockers, even when 
administered topically as eye drops, may induce 
broncho­spasm, as may aspirin and other non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The classical aspirin-
sensitive patient is female and presents in middle age 
with asthma, rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps. Aspirin-
sensitive patients may also report symptoms following 
alcohol (in particular, white wine) and foods containing 
salicylates. Other medications implicated include the 
oral contraceptive pill, cholinergic agents and prosta­
glandin F2α. Betel nuts contain arecoline, which is 
structurally similar to methacholine and can aggravate 
asthma. An important minority of patients develop a 
are also implicated in some cases of occupational 
asthma (p. 715).
In cases of aspirin-sensitive asthma, the ingestion of 
salicylates results in inhibition of the cyclo-oxygenase 
enzymes, preferentially shunting the metabolism of ara-
chidonic acid through the lipoxygenase pathway with 
resultant production of the asthmogenic cysteinyl leuko-
trienes. In exercise-induced asthma, hyperventilation 
results in water loss from the pericellular lining fluid of 
the respiratory mucosa, which, in turn, triggers media-
tor release. Heat loss from the respiratory mucosa may 
also be important.
In persistent asthma, a chronic and complex inflam-
matory response ensues, characterised by an influx of 
numerous inflammatory cells, the transformation and 
participation of airway structural cells, and the secretion 
Fig. 19.17  Airway hyper-reactivity in asthma. This is demonstrated 
by bronchial challenge tests with sequentially increasing concentrations of 
either histamine, methacholine or mannitol. The reactivity of the airways is 
expressed as the concentration or dose of either chemical required to 
produce a specific decrease (usually 20%) in the FEV1 (PC20 or PD20 
respectively). 
40
30
20
10
0
Reduction in FEV1 (%)
Increasing concentration of histamine
Severe asthma
Moderate asthma
Mild asthma
Normal
Fig. 19.18  Changes in peak flow following allergen challenge. 
A similar biphasic response is observed following a variety of different 
challenges. Occasionally, an isolated late response is seen with no early 
reaction. 
Time (hours)
Peak flow (L/min)
400
Early reaction
(type I)
Pre-formed mediator
release
Late reaction
(type Il)
Inflammatory cell
recruitment and
activation
300
200
100
0
500
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
24
Challenge,
e.g. allergen
Respiratory disease
19
668
(see Fig. 19.17). AHR is sensitive but non-specific: it has 
a high negative predictive value but positive results may 
be seen in other conditions, such as COPD, bronchiecta-
sis and cystic fibrosis. When symptoms are predomi-
nantly related to exercise, an exercise challenge may be 
followed by a drop in lung function (Fig. 19.21).
particularly severe form of asthma, and this appears to 
be more common in women. Allergic triggers are less 
important and airway neutrophilia predominates.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of asthma is predominantly clinical and 
based on a characteristic history. Supportive evidence is 
provided by the demonstration of variable airflow 
obstruction, preferably by using spirometry (Box 19.21) 
to measure FEV1 and VC. This identifies the obstructive 
defect, defines its severity, and provides a baseline for 
bronchodilator reversibility (Fig. 19.19). If spirometry is 
not available, a peak flow meter may be used. Patients 
should be instructed to record peak flow readings after 
rising in the morning and before retiring in the evening. 
A diurnal variation in PEF of more than 20% (the lowest 
values typically being recorded in the morning) is con-
sidered diagnostic, and the magnitude of variability pro-
vides some indication of disease severity (Fig. 19.20). A 
trial of corticosteroids (e.g. 30 mg daily for 2 weeks) may 
be useful in establishing the diagnosis, by demonstrat-
ing an improvement in either FEV1 or PEF.
It is not uncommon for patients whose symptoms 
are suggestive of asthma to have normal lung function. 
In these circumstances, the demonstration of AHR by 
challenge tests may be useful to confirm the diagnosis 
Compatible clinical history plus either/or:
• FEV1 ≥ 15%* (and 200 mL) increase following administration 
of a bronchodilator/trial of corticosteroids
• > 20% diurnal variation on ≥ 3 days in a week for 2 weeks 
on PEF diary
• FEV1 ≥ 15% decrease after 6 mins of exercise
19.21  How to make a diagnosis of asthma
*Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) definition accepts an increase of 12%.
Fig. 19.19  Reversibility test. Forced expiratory manœuvres before and 
20 minutes after inhalation of a β2-adrenoceptor agonist. Note the increase 
in FEV1 from 1.0 to 2.5 L. 
7
Time (seconds)
6
0
5
4
3
2
1
Volume
expired (L)
FEV1
FEV1
20 min after
bronchodilator drug
administered
2.5
1
8
Before bronchodilator
drug administered
Fig. 19.20  Serial recordings of peak expiratory flow (PEF) in 
a patient with asthma. Note the sharp overnight fall (morning dip) 
and subsequent rise during the day. Following the introduction of 
corticosteroids, there is an improvement in PEF rate and loss of morning 
dipping. 
500
am
am
Peak flow (L/min)
300
200
100
pm
pm
am
am
pm
pm
am
am
pm
5
1
2
3
4
Time (days)
400
Steroids
commenced
Fig. 19.21  Exercise-induced asthma. Serial recordings of FEV1 in a 
patient with bronchial asthma before and after 6 minutes of strenuous 
exercise. Note initial rise on completion of exercise, followed by sudden fall 
and gradual recovery. Adequate warm-up exercise or pre-treatment with a 
β2-adrenoceptor agonist, nedocromil sodium or a leukotriene antagonist 
can protect against exercise-induced symptoms. 
3.5
Time (minutes)
30
0
25
20
15
10
5
FEV1 (L)
3.0
2.5
2.0
Exercise
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
19
669
relevant antigens, such as a pet, may effect improve-
ment. House dust mite exposure may be minimised by 
replacing carpets with floorboards and using mite-
impermeable bedding. So far, improvements in asthma 
control following such measures have been difficult to 
demonstrate. Many patients are sensitised to several 
ubiquitous aeroallergens, making avoidance strategies 
largely impractical. Measures to reduce fungal exposure 
and eliminate cockroaches may be applicable in specific 
circumstances, and medications known to precipitate or 
aggravate asthma should be avoided. Smoking cessation 
(p. 100) is particularly important, as smoking not only 
encourages sensitisation, but also induces a relative cor-
ticosteroid resistance in the airway.
The stepwise approach to the management 
of asthma (Fig. 19.22)
Step 1: Occasional use of inhaled short-acting 
β2-adrenoreceptor agonist bronchodilators
For patients with mild intermittent asthma (symptoms 
less than once a week for 3 months and fewer than two 
nocturnal episodes per month), it is usually sufficient to 
prescribe an inhaled short-acting β2-agonist, such as 
salbutamol or terbutaline, to be used as required. 
However, many patients (and their physicians) under-
estimate the severity of asthma. A history of a severe 
exacerbation should lead to a step-up in treatment.
A variety of different inhaled devices are available 
and the choice of device should be guided by patient 
preference and competence in its use. The metered-dose 
inhaler remains the most widely prescribed (Fig. 19.23).
Step 2: Introduction of regular preventer therapy
Regular anti-inflammatory therapy (preferably inhaled 
corticosteroids (ICS), such as beclometasone, budeso-
nide (BUD), fluticasone or ciclesonide) should be started 
in addition to inhaled β2-agonists taken on an as-required 
basis for any patient who:
•	 has experienced an exacerbation of asthma in the 
last 2 years (Box 19.23)
•	 uses inhaled β2-agonists three times a week or more
•	 reports symptoms three times a week or more
•	 is awakened by asthma one night per week.
For adults, a reasonable starting dose is 400 µg 
beclometasone dipropionate (BDP) or equivalent per 
day in adults, although higher doses may be required in 
smokers. Alternative but much less effective preventive 
Other investigations
•	 Measurement of allergic status: the presence of atopy 
may be demonstrated by skin prick tests. Similar 
information may be provided by the measurement 
of total and allergen-specific IgE. A full blood 
picture may show the peripheral blood eosinophilia.
•	 Radiological examination: chest X-ray appearances are 
often normal or show hyperinflation of lung fields. 
Lobar collapse may be seen if mucus occludes a 
large bronchus and, if accompanied by the presence 
of flitting infiltrates, may suggest that asthma has 
been complicated by allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis (p. 697). An HRCT scan may be useful 
to detect bronchiectasis.
•	 Assessment of eosinophilic airway inflammation: an 
induced sputum differential eosinophil count of 
greater than 2% or exhaled breath nitric oxide 
concentration (FENO) may support the diagnosis but 
is non-specific.
Management
Setting goals
Asthma is a chronic condition but may be controlled 
with appropriate treatment in the majority of patients. 
The goal of treatment should be to obtain and maintain 
complete control (Box 19.22), but aims may be modified 
according to the circumstances and the patient. Unfor-
tunately, surveys consistently demonstrate that the 
majority of individuals with asthma report suboptimal 
control, perhaps reflecting the poor expectations of 
patients and their clinicians.
Whenever possible, patients should be encouraged to 
take responsibility for managing their own disease. A 
full explanation of the nature of the condition, the 
relationship between symptoms and inflammation, the 
importance of key symptoms such as nocturnal waking, 
the different types of medication, and, if appropriate, 
the use of PEF to guide management decisions, should 
be given. A variety of tools/questionnaires have 
been validated to assist in assessing asthma control. 
Written action plans can be helpful in developing self-
management skills.
Avoidance of aggravating factors
This is particularly important in the management of 
occupational asthma (p. 715) but may also be relevant in 
atopic patients, when removing or reducing exposure to 
Characteristic
Controlled
Partly controlled (any present 
in any week)
Uncontrolled
Daytime symptoms
None (≤ twice/wk)
> twice/wk
≥ 3 features of partly controlled 
asthma present in any wk
Limitations of activities
None
Any
Nocturnal symptoms/awakening
None
Any
Need for rescue/‘reliever’ treatment
None (≤ twice/wk)
> twice/wk
Lung function (PEF or FEV1)
Normal
< 80% predicted or personal 
best (if known) on any day
Exacerbation
None
≥ 1/yr
1 in any wk
 
}
19.22  Levels of asthma control*
*Based on GINA guidelines.
Respiratory disease
19
670
agents include chromones, leukotriene receptor antago-
nists, and theophyllines.
Step 3: Add-on therapy
If a patient remains poorly controlled, despite regular 
use of ICS, a thorough review should be undertaken of 
adherence, inhaler technique and ongoing exposure to 
modifiable aggravating factors. A further increase in the 
dose of ICS may benefit some patients but, in general, 
add-on therapy should be considered in adults taking 
800 µg/day BDP (or equivalent).
Long-acting β2-agonists (LABAs), such as salmeterol 
and formoterol (duration of action of at least 12 hours), 
represent the first choice of add-on therapy. They have 
consistently been demonstrated to improve asthma 
control and to reduce the frequency and severity of exac-
erbations when compared to increasing the dose of ICS 
alone. Fixed combination inhalers of ICS and LABAs 
have been developed; these are more convenient, 
increase compliance and prevent patients using a LABA 
Fig. 19.22  Management approach in adults based on asthma control. *Beclometasone dipropionate (BDP) or equivalent. From British Thoracic 
Society and SIGN – see p. 732.
Move down to find and maintain lowest controlling step
Move up to improve control as needed
Patients should start treatment at the step most
appropriate to the initial severity of their asthma.
Check concordance and reconsider diagnosis if
response due to treatment is unexpectedly poor
Inhaled short-acting
β2-agonist as required
Add inhaled steroid
200–800 µg/day*
400 µg is an appropriate
starting dose for many
patients
Start at dose of inhaled
steroid appropriate to
severity of disease
1 Add inhaled long-
   acting β2-agonist
   (LABA)
2 Assess control of
   asthma:
   • Good response to
      LABA
      – continue LABA
   • Benefit from LABA
      but control still
      inadequate
      – continue LABA and
      increase inhaled
      steroid dose to
      800 µg/day* (if not
      already on this dose)
   • No response
      to LABA
      – stop LABA and
      increase inhaled
      steroid to 800 µg/
      day.* If control still
      inadequate, institute
      trial of other therapies,
      leukotriene receptor
      antagonist or SR
      theophylline
      
Consider trials of:
• Increasing inhaled
   steroid up to
   2000 µg/day*
• Addition of a fourth
   drug, e.g. leukotriene
   receptor antagonist, SR
   theophylline, β2-agonist
   tablet 
Use daily steroid tablet
in lowest dose providing
adequate control
Maintain high-dose
inhaled steroid at
2000 µg/day*
Consider other
treatments to minimise
use of steroid tablets
Refer patient for
specialist care
Mild intermittent
asthma
STEP 1
Regular preventer
therapy
STEP 2
Initial add-on
therapy
vs
Treatment
Symptoms
STEP 3
Persistent poor
control
STEP 4
Continuous or
frequent use of
oral steroids
STEP 5
Fig. 19.23  How to use a metered-dose inhaler. 
• Remove the cap and shake the inhaler
• Breathe out gently and place the
   mouthpiece into the mouth
• Incline the head backwards to minimise
   oropharyngeal deposition
• Simultaneously, begin a slow deep
   inspiration, depress the canister and
   continue to inhale
• Hold the breath for 10 seconds
‘Regular therapy with low-dose budesonide reduces the risk of 
severe exacerbations in patients with mild persistent asthma.’
• Pauwels RA, et al. Lancet 2003; 361:1066–1067.
19.23  Inhaled corticosteroids and asthma
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
19
671
as monotherapy – the latter may be accompanied by an 
increased risk of life-threatening attacks or asthma 
death. The onset of action of formoterol is similar to that 
of salbutamol such that, in carefully selected patients, a 
fixed combination of budesonide and formoterol may be 
used as both rescue and maintenance therapy.
Oral leukotriene receptor antagonists (e.g. montelu-
kast 10 mg daily) are generally less effective than LABA 
as add-on therapy, but may facilitate a reduction in the 
dose of ICS and control exacerbations. Oral theophyllines 
may be considered in some patients but their unpredict-
able metabolism, propensity for drug interactions and 
prominent side-effects limit their widespread use.
Step 4: Poor control on moderate dose  
of inhaled steroid and add-on therapy:  
addition of a fourth drug
In adults, the dose of ICS may be increased to 2000 µg 
BDP/BUD (or equivalent) daily. A nasal corticosteroid 
preparation should be used in patients with prominent 
upper airway symptoms. Oral therapy with leukotriene 
receptor antagonists, theophyllines or a slow-release β2-
agonist may be considered. If the trial of add-on therapy 
is ineffective, it should be discontinued. Oral itracona-
zole may be contemplated in patients with allergic bron-
chopulmonary aspergillosis (p. 697).
Step 5: Continuous or frequent use of oral steroids
At this stage, prednisolone therapy (usually adminis-
tered as a single daily dose in the morning) should be 
prescribed in the lowest amount necessary to control 
symptoms. Patients on long-term corticosteroid tablets 
(> 3 months) or receiving more than three or four courses 
per year will be at risk of systemic side-effects (p. 776). 
Osteoporosis can be prevented in this group by giving 
bisphosphonates (p. 1123). In atopic patients, omalizu-
mab, a monoclonal antibody directed against IgE, may 
prove helpful in reducing symptoms and allowing a 
reduction in the prednisolone dose. Steroid-sparing 
therapies, such as methotrexate, ciclosporin or oral gold, 
may be considered.
Step-down therapy
Once asthma control is established, the dose of inhaled 
(or oral) corticosteroid should be titrated to the lowest 
dose at which effective control of asthma is maintained. 
Decreasing the dose of ICS by around 25–50% every 
3 months is a reasonable strategy for most patients.
Exacerbations of asthma
The course of asthma may be punctuated by exacerba-
tions with increased symptoms, deterioration in lung 
function, and an increase in airway inflammation. Exac-
erbations are most commonly precipitated by viral infec-
tions, but moulds (Alternaria and Cladosporium), pollens 
(particularly following thunderstorms) and air pollution 
are also implicated. Most attacks are characterised by a 
gradual deterioration over several hours to days but 
some appear to occur with little or no warning: so-called 
brittle asthma. An important minority of patients appear 
to have a blunted perception of airway narrowing and 
fail to appreciate the early signs of deterioration.
Management of mild to moderate exacerbations
Doubling the dose of ICS does not prevent an 
impending exacerbation. Short courses of ‘rescue’ oral 
cortico­steroids (prednisolone 30–60 mg daily) therefore 
are often required to regain control. Tapering of the dose 
to withdraw treatment is not necessary, unless given for 
more than 3 weeks.
Indications for ‘rescue’ courses include:
•	 symptoms and PEF progressively worsening day by 
day, with a fall of PEF below 60% of the patient’s 
personal best recording
•	 onset or worsening of sleep disturbance by asthma
•	 persistence of morning symptoms until midday
•	 progressively diminishing response to an inhaled 
bronchodilator
•	 symptoms sufficiently severe to require treatment 
with nebulised or injected bronchodilators.
Management of acute severe asthma
Box 19.25 highlights the immediate assessment require-
ments in acute asthma. Measurement of PEF is 
Acute severe asthma
• PEF 33–50% predicted (< 200 L/min)
• Respiratory rate ≥ 25 breaths/min
• Heart rate ≥ 110 beats/min
• Inability to complete sentences in 1 breath
Life-threatening features
• PEF < 33% predicted 
(< 100 L/min)
• SpO2 < 92% or PaO2 
< 8 kPa (60 mmHg) 
(especially if being treated 
with oxygen)
• Normal or raised PaCO2
• Silent chest
• Cyanosis
• Feeble respiratory effort
• Bradycardia or arrhythmias
• Hypotension
• Exhaustion
• Confusion
• Coma
Near-fatal asthma
• Raised PaCO2 and/or requiring mechanical ventilation with 
raised inflation pressures
19.25  Immediate assessment of acute 
severe asthma
• Unpredictable clinical course: one-third worsen, one-third 
remain stable and one-third improve.
• Labour and delivery: 90% have no symptoms.
• Safety data: good for β2-agonists, inhaled steroids, 
theophyllines, oral prednisolone, and chromones.
• Oral leukotriene receptor antagonists: no evidence that 
these harm the fetus and they should not be stopped in 
women who have previously demonstrated significant 
improvement in asthma control prior to pregnancy.
• Steroids: women on maintenance prednisolone > 7.5 mg/
day should receive hydrocortisone 100 mg 3–4 times daily 
during labour.
• Prostaglandin F2α: may induce bronchospasm and should 
be used with extreme caution.
• Breastfeeding: use medications as normal.
• Uncontrolled asthma: associated with maternal 
(hyperemesis, hypertension, pre-eclampsia, vaginal 
haemorrhage, complicated labour) and fetal (intrauterine 
growth restriction and low birth weight, preterm birth, 
increased perinatal mortality, neonatal hypoxia) 
complications.
19.24  Asthma in pregnancy
Respiratory disease
19
672
mandatory, unless the patient is too ill to cooperate, and 
is most easily interpreted when expressed as a percent-
age of the predicted normal or of the previous best value 
obtained on optimal treatment (Fig. 19.24). Arterial 
blood gas analysis is essential to determine the PaCO2, 
a normal or elevated level being particularly dangerous. 
A chest X-ray is not immediately necessary, unless 
pneumo­thorax is suspected.
Treatment includes the following measures:
•	 Oxygen. High concentrations (humidified if 
possible) should be administered to maintain the 
oxygen saturation above 92% in adults. The 
presence of a high PaCO2 should not be taken as an 
indication to reduce oxygen concentration, but as a 
warning sign of a severe or life-threatening attack. 
Failure to achieve appropriate oxygenation is an 
indication for assisted ventilation.
•	 High doses of inhaled bronchodilators. Short-acting 
β2-agonists are the agent of choice. In hospital, they 
are most conveniently given via a nebuliser driven 
by oxygen, but delivery of multiple doses of 
salbutamol via a metered-dose inhaler through a 
spacer device provides equivalent bronchodilatation 
and can be used in primary care. Ipratropium 
bromide provides further bronchodilator therapy 
and should be added to salbutamol in acute severe 
or life-threatening attacks.
•	 Systemic corticosteroids. These reduce the 
inflammatory response and hasten the resolution of 
an exacerbation. They should be administered to all 
patients with an acute severe attack. They can 
usually be administered orally as prednisolone, but 
Fig. 19.24  Immediate treatment of patients with acute severe asthma. 
• Check with senior medical staff
• Prednisolone 40 mg daily for 5 days
• Start or double inhaled
  corticosteroids
• Return immediately if worse
• Appointment with GP within 48 hrs
Home
• Usual treatment
• Return immediately if worse
• Appointment with GP within
  48 hrs
Home
Did patient receive nebulised
therapy before PEF recorded?
Usual inhaled
bronchodilator
Wait 60 mins
No
Measure PEF
Wait 30 mins
• Administer repeat salbutamol
   5 mg + ipratropium bromide 500 µg
  by oxygen-driven nebuliser
• Consider continuous salbutamol
  nebuliser 5–10 mg/hr
• Consider IV magnesium sulphate
  1.2–2.0 g over 20 mins, or
  aminophylline 5 mg/kg loading dose
  over 20 mins followed by a
  continuous infusion at 1 mg/kg/hr
• Correct fluid and electrolytes
  (especially K+) 
Admit
IV access, CXR, plasma theophylline 
level, plasma K+
Arterial blood gas
Nebulised salbutamol 5 mg or
terbutaline 2.5 mg
6–12 times daily or as required
Oxygen—high-flow/60%
Prednisolone 40 mg orally
(or hydrocortisone 200 mg IV)
Arterial blood gas
Nebulised salbutamol 5 mg or
terbutaline 2.5 mg
Oxygen—high-flow/60%
Prednisolone 40 mg orally
Yes
PEF < 60%
predicted
PEF > 60%
predicted
50%
0%
75%
51%
100%
76%
Life-threatening/acute
severe
MEASURE PEAK EXPIRATORY FLOW
Convert PEF to % best or % predicted
Moderate
Mild
• Coma
• Respiratory arrest
• Deterioration of arterial blood gas tensions despite optimal 
therapy
PaO2 < 8 kPa (60 mmHg) and falling
PaCO2 > 6 kPa (45 mmHg) and rising
pH low and falling (H+ high and rising)
• Exhaustion, confusion, drowsiness
19.26  Indications for assisted ventilation in 
acute severe asthma
intravenous hydrocortisone may be used in patients 
who are vomiting or unable to swallow.
There is no evidence base for the use of intravenous 
fluids but many patients are dehydrated due to high 
insensible water loss and will probably benefit. Potas-
sium supplements may be necessary, as repeated doses 
of salbutamol can lower serum potassium.
If patients fail to improve, a number of further options 
may be considered. Intravenous magnesium may 
provide additional bronchodilatation in patients whose 
presenting PEF is below 30% predicted. Some patients 
appear to benefit from the use of intravenous amino-
phylline but cardiac monitoring is recommended.
PEF should be recorded every 15–30 minutes and 
then every 4–6 hours. Pulse oximetry should ensure that 
SaO2 remains above 92%, but repeat arterial blood gases 
are necessary if the initial PaCO2 measurements were 
normal or raised, the PaO2 was below 8 kPa (60 mmHg), 
or the patient deteriorates. Box 19.26 lists the indications 
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
19
673
consecutive years) and emphysema (abnormal perma-
nent enlargement of the airspaces distal to the terminal 
bronchioles, accompanied by destruction of their walls 
and without obvious fibrosis). Extra-pulmonary effects 
include weight loss and skeletal muscle dysfunction 
(Fig. 19.25). Commonly associated comorbid conditions 
include cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, 
the metabolic syndrome, osteoporosis, depression and 
lung cancer.
Epidemiology and aetiology
The prevalence of COPD is directly related to the preva-
lence of tobacco smoking and, in low- and middle-
income countries, the use of biomass fuels. Current 
estimates suggest that 80 million people worldwide 
suffer from moderate to severe disease. In 2005, COPD 
contributed to more than 3 million deaths (5% of 
deaths globally), but, by 2020, it is forecast to represent 
the third most important cause of death worldwide. The 
anticipated rise in morbidity and mortality from COPD 
will be greatest in Asian and African countries, as a 
result of their increasing tobacco consumption.
Other risk factors are shown in Box 19.27. Cigarette 
smoking represents the most significant risk factor, and 
the risk of developing COPD relates to both the amount 
and the duration of smoking. It is unusual to develop 
COPD with less than 10 pack years (1 pack year = 
20 cigarettes/day/year) and not all smokers develop 
the condition, suggesting that individual susceptibility 
factors are important.
Pathophysiology
COPD has both pulmonary and systemic components 
(see Fig. 19.25). The presence of airflow limitation, 
for endotracheal intubation and intermittent positive 
pressure ventilation.
Prognosis
The outcome from acute severe asthma is generally 
good. Death is fortunately rare but a considerable 
number of deaths occur in young people and many are 
preventable. Failure to recognise the severity of an 
attack, on the part of either the assessing physician or 
the patient, contributes to delay in delivering appropri-
ate therapy and to under-treatment.
Prior to discharge, patients should be stable on dis-
charge medication (nebulised therapy should have been 
discontinued for at least 24 hours) and the PEF should 
have reached 75% of predicted or personal best. The 
acute attack should prompt a look for and avoidance of 
any trigger factors, the delivery of asthma education and 
the provision of a written self-management plan. The 
patient should be offered an appointment with a GP or 
asthma nurse within 2 working days of discharge, and 
follow-up at a specialist hospital clinic within a month.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a pre-
ventable and treatable disease characterised by persist-
ent airflow limitation that is usually progressive, and 
associated with an enhanced chronic inflammatory 
response in the airways and the lung to noxious particles 
or gases. Exacerbations and comorbidities contribute to 
the overall severity in individual patients. Related diag-
noses include chronic bronchitis (cough and sputum 
on most days for at least 3 months, in each of 2 
Fig. 19.25  The pulmonary and systemic features of COPD. 
Altered fat
metabolism
contributing
to weight loss
Enlargement of mucus-secreting glands
and increase in number of goblet cells,
accompanied by an inflammatory cell
infiltrate, result in increased sputum
production leading to chronic bronchitis
Loss of elastic tissue, inflammation and
fibrosis in airway wall result in premature
airway closure, gas trapping and dynamic
hyperinflation leading to changes in 
pulmonary and chest wall compliance
Unopposed action of
proteases and oxidants
leading to destruction of
alveoli and appearance
of emphysema
Pulmonary vascular
remodelling and impaired
cardiac performance
Muscular weakness
reflecting deconditioning
and cellular changes
in skeletal muscles
Impaired salt and
water excretion
leading to
peripheral oedema
↑ Prevalence of
osteoporosis
Increased
circulating
inflammatory
markers
Pulmonary
Systemic
Respiratory disease
19
674
combined with premature airway closure, leads to gas 
trapping and hyperinflation, reducing pulmonary and 
chest wall compliance. Pulmonary hyperinflation also 
flattens the diaphragmatic muscles and leads to an 
increasingly horizontal alignment of the intercostal 
muscles, placing the respiratory muscles at a mechani-
cal disadvantage. The work of breathing is therefore 
markedly increased, first on exercise, when the time for 
expiration is further shortened, but then, as the disease 
advances, at rest.
Emphysema (Fig. 19.26) may be classified by the 
pattern of the enlarged airspaces as centriacinar, 
panacinar or paraseptal. Bullae form in some individu-
als. This results in impaired gas exchange and respira-
tory failure.
Clinical features
COPD should be suspected in any patient over the age 
of 40 years who presents with symptoms of chronic 
bronchitis and/or breathlessness. Important differential 
diagnoses include chronic asthma, tuberculosis, bron-
chiectasis and congestive cardiac failure.
Cough and associated sputum production are usually 
the first symptoms, often referred to as a ‘smoker’s 
cough’. Haemoptysis may complicate exacerbations of 
COPD but should not be attributed to COPD without 
thorough investigation.
Breathlessness usually precipitates the presentation 
to health care. The severity should be quantified by 
documenting what level of exertion the patient can 
manage before stopping; scales such as the modified 
MRC dyspnoea scale may be useful (Box 19.28). In 
advanced disease, enquiry should be made about the 
presence of oedema, which may be seen for the first time 
during an exacerbation, and morning headaches, which 
may suggest hypercapnia.
Physical signs (pp. 644–645) are non-specific, corre-
late poorly with lung function, and are seldom obvious 
Fig. 19.26  The pathology of emphysema.  A Normal lung.
 B Emphysematous lung showing gross loss of the normal surface 
area available for gas exchange. 
A
B
Grade
Degree of breathlessness related to activities
0
No breathlessness, except with strenuous exercise
1
Breathlessness when hurrying on the level or 
walking up a slight hill
2
Walks slower than contemporaries on level ground 
because of breathlessness or has to stop for breath 
when walking at own pace
3
Stops for breath after walking about 100 m or after 
a few minutes on level ground
4
Too breathless to leave the house, or breathless 
when dressing or undressing
(MRC = Medical Research Council)
19.28  Modified MRC dyspnoea scale
Environmental
• Tobacco smoke accounts for 95% of cases in UK
• Indoor air pollution; cooking with biomass fuels in confined 
areas in developing countries
• Occupational exposures, such as coal dust, silica and 
cadmium
• Low birth weight may reduce maximally attained lung 
function in young adult life
• Lung growth: childhood infections or maternal smoking may 
affect growth of lung during childhood, resulting in a lower 
maximally attained lung function in adult life
• Infections: recurrent infection may accelerate decline in FEV1; 
persistence of adenovirus in lung tissue may alter local 
inflammatory response, predisposing to lung damage; HIV 
infection is associated with emphysema
• Low socioeconomic status
• Cannabis smoking
Host factors
• Genetic factors: α1-antiproteinase deficiency; other COPD 
susceptibility genes are likely to be identified
• Airway hyper-reactivity
19.27  Risk factors for development of COPD
until the disease is advanced. Breath sounds are typi-
cally quiet. Crackles may accompany infection but, if 
persistent, raise the possibility of bronchiectasis. Finger 
clubbing is not a feature of COPD and should trigger 
further investigation for lung cancer or fibrosis. Pitting 
oedema should be sought but the frequently used term 
‘cor pulmonale’ is actually a misnomer, as the right heart 
seldom ‘fails’ in COPD and the occurrence of oedema 
usually relates to failure of salt and water excretion by 
the hypoxic hypercapnic kidney. The body mass index 
(BMI – p. 114) is of prognostic significance.
Two classical phenotypes have been described: ‘pink 
puffers’ and ‘blue bloaters’. The former are typically thin 
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
19
675
Management
The management of COPD (Fig. 19.28) has been the 
subject of unjustified pessimism. It is usually possible to 
help breathlessness, reduce the frequency and severity 
of exacerbations, enhance the health status, and improve 
the prognosis.
Reducing exposure to noxious particles and gases
Every attempt should be made to highlight to the patient 
the role of smoking in the development and progression 
of COPD, with advice and assistance to help them stop 
(p. 100). Reducing the number of cigarettes smoked each 
day has little impact on the course and prognosis of 
COPD, but complete cessation is accompanied by an 
improvement in lung function and deceleration in the 
rate of FEV1 decline (Fig. 19.29 and Box 19.30). In regions 
where the indoor burning of biomass fuels is important, 
the introduction of non-smoking cooking devices or use 
of alternative fuels should be encouraged.
Bronchodilators
Bronchodilator therapy is central to the management of 
breathlessness. The inhaled route is preferred and a 
number of different agents, delivered by a variety of 
devices, are available. Choice should be informed by 
patient preference and inhaler assessment. Short-acting 
bronchodilators, such as the β2-agonists salbutamol and 
terbutaline, or the anticholinergic ipratropium bromide, 
may be used for patients with mild disease, but longer-
acting bronchodilators, such as the β2-agonists salme-
terol, formoterol and indacaterol, or the anticholinergic 
tiotropium bromide, are more appropriate for patients 
with moderate to severe disease. Significant improve-
ments in breathlessness may be reported, despite 
minimal changes in FEV1, probably reflecting improve-
ments in lung emptying that reduce dynamic hyper­
inflation and ease the work of breathing.
Stage
Severity
FEV1
I
Mild*
FEV1/FVC < 0.70
FEV1 ≥ 80% predicted
II
Moderate
FEV1/FVC < 0.70
FEV1 50–79% predicted
III
Severe
FEV1/FVC < 0.70
FEV1 30–49% predicted
IV
Very severe
FEV1/FVC < 0.70
FEV1 < 30% predicted or FEV1 < 50% 
predicted if respiratory failure present
*Mild COPD should not be diagnosed on lung function alone if the patient is 
asymptomatic.
19.29  Spirometric classification of COPD severity 
based on post-bronchodilator FEV1
Based on NICE guidelines 2010.
Fig. 19.27  Gross emphysema. HRCT showing emphysema, most 
evident in the right lower lobe. 
R
L
and breathless, and maintain a normal PaCO2 until the 
late stage of disease. The latter develop (or tolerate) 
hypercapnia earlier and may develop oedema and sec-
ondary polycythaemia. In practice, these phenotypes 
often overlap.
Investigations
Although there are no reliable radiographic signs that 
correlate with the severity of airflow limitation, a chest 
X-ray is essential to identify alternative diagnoses, such 
as cardiac failure, other complications of smoking such 
as lung cancer, and the presence of bullae. A blood count 
is useful to exclude anaemia or polycythaemia, and in 
younger patients with predominantly basal emphy-
sema, α1-antiproteinase should be assayed.
The diagnosis requires objective demonstration of 
airflow obstruction by spirometry and is established 
when the post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC is less than 
70%. The severity of COPD may be defined in relation 
to the post-bronchodilator FEV1 (Box 19.29). A low peak 
flow is consistent with COPD but is non-specific, does 
not discriminate between obstructive and restrictive dis-
orders, and may underestimate the severity of airflow 
limitation.
Measurement of lung volumes provides an assess-
ment of hyperinflation. This is generally performed by 
using the helium dilution technique (p. 653); in patients 
with severe COPD, and with large bullae in particular, 
body plethysmography is preferred because the use of 
helium may underestimate lung volumes. Emphysema 
is suggested by a low gas transfer value (p. 653). Exercise 
tests provide an objective assessment of exercise toler-
ance and a baseline for judging response to bronchodila-
tor therapy or rehabilitation programmes; they may also 
be valuable when assessing prognosis. Pulse oximetry 
of less than 93% may indicate the need for referral for a 
domiciliary oxygen assessment.
The assessment of health status provides valuable 
clinical information. The St George’s Respiratory Ques-
tionnaire (SGRQ) is a commonly used research tool but 
is too cumbersome for routine clinical practice. The 
COPD Assessment Test (CAT) employs only eight ques-
tions and the scores correlate closely with the SGRQ.
HRCT is likely to play an increasing role in the assess-
ment of COPD, as it allows the detection, characterisa-
tion and quantification of emphysema (Fig. 19.27) and is 
more sensitive than a chest X-ray for detecting bullae.
‘Sustained smoking cessation in mild to moderate COPD is 
accompanied by a reduced decline in FEV1 compared to 
persistent smokers.’
• Anthonisen NR, et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:675–679.
19.30  Smoking cessation and COPD
Respiratory disease
19
676
of asthma but do not predict response to inhaled steroids 
in COPD.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Exercise should be encouraged at all stages and patients 
reassured that breathlessness, whilst distressing, is not 
dangerous. Multidisciplinary programmes that incorpo-
rate physical training, disease education and nutritional 
counselling reduce symptoms, improve health status 
and enhance confidence. Most programmes include 
2–3 sessions per week for 6 and 12 weeks, and are 
accompanied by demonstrable and sustained improve-
ments in exercise tolerance and health status.
Oxygen therapy
Long-term domiciliary oxygen therapy (LTOT) has been 
shown to be of significant benefit in selected patients 
(Boxes 19.31 and 19.32). It is most conveniently provided 
Fig. 19.29  Model of annual decline in FEV1 with accelerated 
decline in susceptible smokers. When smoking is stopped, 
subsequent loss is similar to that in healthy non-smokers. 
0
25
50
75
100
75
50
25
Age (years)
Smoked regularly
and susceptible
to its effects
Stopped
smoking
at 45
Stopped
smoking
at 65
Never smoked or not
susceptible to smoke
FEV1
(% of value at age 25)
Disability
Death
‘Long-term home oxygen therapy improves survival in selected 
patients with COPD complicated by severe hypoxaemia (arterial 
PaO2 less than 8.0 kPa (55 mmHg)).’
• Cranston JM, et al. Domiciliary oxygen for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2005, issue 4. Art no. 
CD001744.
For further information: 
 www.brit-thoracic.org.uk
19.31  Long-term domiciliary oxygen 
therapy
Arterial blood gases measured in clinically stable patients on 
optimal medical therapy on at least two occasions 3 weeks 
apart:
• PaO2 < 7.3 kPa (55 mmHg) irrespective of PaCO2 and FEV1 
< 1.5 L
• PaO2 7.3–8 kPa (55–60 mmHg) plus pulmonary hypertension, 
peripheral oedema or nocturnal hypoxaemia
• the patient has stopped smoking.
Use at least 15 hrs/day at 2–4 L/min to achieve a PaO2 
> 8 kPa (60 mmHg) without unacceptable rise in PaCO2.
19.32  Prescription of long-term oxygen therapy 
in COPD
Fig. 19.28  Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines for treatment of COPD. Post-bronchodilator FEV1 is 
recommended for the diagnosis and assessment of severity of COPD. From www.goldcopd.com – see p. 732.
Active reduction of risk factor(s); influenza vaccination
Add regular treatment with one or more long-acting bronchodilators (when needed)
Add rehabilitation
Add inhaled glucocorticosteroids if repeated
exacerbations
Add long-term oxygen if
chronic respiratory failure
Consider surgical
treatments
• FEV1/FVC < 0.70
• FEV1 ≥ 80% predicted
• FEV1/FVC < 0.70
• 50% ≤ FEV1 < 80%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC < 0.70
• 30% ≤ FEV1 < 50%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC < 0.70
• FEV1 < 30% predicted or
  FEV1 < 50% predicted plus
  chronic respiratory failure
I : Mild
II : Moderate
III : Severe
IV : Very severe
Add short-acting bronchodilator (when needed)
Oral bronchodilator therapy may be used in 
patients who cannot use inhaled devices efficiently. 
Theophylline preparations improve breathlessness and 
quality of life, but their use is limited by side-effects, 
unpredictable metabolism and drug interactions. Bam-
buterol, a pro-drug of terbutaline, is used on occasion. 
Orally active, highly selective phosphodiesterase inhibi-
tors are currently under appraisal.
Corticosteroids
Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) reduce the frequency 
and severity of exacerbations, and are currently 
re­commended in patients with severe disease (FEV1 
< 50%) who report two or more exacerbations requiring 
antibiotics or oral steroids per year. Regular use is asso-
ciated with a small improvement in FEV1, but ICS do 
not alter the natural history of the FEV1 decline. It is 
more usual to prescribe a fixed combination of an ICS 
and a LABA.
Oral corticosteroids are useful during exacerbations 
but maintenance therapy contributes to osteoporosis 
and impaired skeletal muscle function and should be 
avoided. Oral corticosteroid trials assist in the diagnosis 
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
19
677
poor prognostic indicators include weight loss and pul-
monary hypertension. A composite score comprising the 
body mass index (B), the degree of airflow obstruction 
(O), a measurement of dyspnoea (D) and exercise capac-
ity (E) may assist in predicting death from respiratory 
and other causes (Box 19.33). Respiratory failure, cardiac 
disease and lung cancer represent common modes of 
death.
Acute exacerbations of COPD
Acute exacerbations of COPD are characterised by an 
increase in symptoms and deterioration in lung function 
and health status. They become more frequent as the 
disease progresses and are usually triggered by bacteria, 
viruses or a change in air quality. They may be accom-
panied by the development of respiratory failure and/
or fluid retention and are an important cause of death.
Many patients can be managed at home with the use 
of increased bronchodilator therapy, a short course of 
oral corticosteroids and, if appropriate, antibiotics. The 
presence of cyanosis, peripheral oedema or an alteration 
in consciousness indicates the need for referral to hospi-
tal. In other patients, consideration of comorbidity and 
social circumstances may influence decisions regarding 
hospital admission.
Management
In patients with an exacerbation of severe COPD, high 
concentrations of oxygen may cause respiratory depres-
sion and worsening acidosis (p. 665). Controlled oxygen 
at 24% or 28% should be used with the aim of maintain-
ing a PaO2 above 8 kPa (60 mmHg) (or an SaO2 between 
88% and 92%) without worsening acidosis.
Nebulised short-acting β2-agonists, combined with an 
anticholinergic agent (e.g. salbutamol and ipratropium), 
should be administered. With careful supervision, it is 
usually safe to drive nebulisers with oxygen, but if 
by an oxygen concentrator and patients should be 
instructed to use oxygen for a minimum of 15 hours per 
day; greater benefits are seen in patients who receive 
more than 20 hours per day. The aim of therapy is to 
increase the PaO2 to at least 8 kPa (60 mmHg) or SaO2 to 
at least 90%. Ambulatory oxygen therapy should be con-
sidered in patients who desaturate on exercise and show 
objective improvement in exercise capacity and/or 
dyspnoea with oxygen. Oxygen flow rates should be 
adjusted to maintain SaO2 above 90%.
Surgical intervention
Patients in whom large bullae compress surrounding 
normal lung tissue, who otherwise have minimal airflow 
limitation and a lack of generalised emphysema, may be 
considered for bullectomy. Patients with predominantly 
upper lobe emphysema, with preserved gas transfer and 
no evidence of pulmonary hypertension, may benefit 
from lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS), in which 
peripheral emphysematous lung tissue is resected with 
the aim of reducing hyperinflation and decreasing the 
work of breathing. Both bullectomy and LVRS can be 
performed thora­scopically, minimising morbidity. Lung 
transplantation may benefit carefully selected patients 
with advanced disease (p. 665).
Other measures
Patients with COPD should be offered an annual influ-
enza vaccination and, as appropriate, pneumococcal 
vaccination. Obesity, poor nutrition, depression and 
social isolation should be addressed as far as possible. 
Mucolytic therapy or antioxidant agents are occasionally 
used but with limited evidence.
Addressing end-of-life needs is an important yet 
often ignored aspect of care in advanced disease. Mor-
phine may be used for palliation of breathlessness in 
advanced disease and benzodiazepines in low dose may 
reduce anxiety. Decisions regarding resuscitation should 
be discussed with the patient in advance of critical 
illness. 
Prognosis
COPD has a variable natural history but is usually pro-
gressive. The prognosis is inversely related to age and 
directly related to the post-bronchodilator FEV1. Other 
Variable
Points on BODE index
0
1
2
3
FEV1
≥ 65
50–64
36–49
≤ 35
Distance walked 
in 6 mins (m)
≥ 350
250–349
150–249
≤ 149
MRC dyspnoea 
scale*
0–1
2
3
4
Body mass 
index
> 21
≤ 21
A patient with a BODE score of 0–2 has a mortality rate of 
around 10% at 52 mths, whereas a patient with a BODE score 
of 7–10 has a mortality rate of around 80% at 52 mths.
*See Box 19.28.
19.33  Calculation of the BODE index
• Asthma: may appear de novo in old age, so airflow 
obstruction should not always be assumed to be due to COPD.
• PEF recordings: older people with poor vision have difficulty 
reading PEF meters.
• Perception of bronchoconstriction: impaired by age, so an 
older patient’s description of symptoms may not be a reliable 
indicator of severity.
• Stopping smoking: the benefits on the rate of loss of lung 
function decline with age but remain valuable up to the age 
of 80.
• Metered-dose inhalers: many older people cannot use 
these because of difficulty coordinating and triggering the 
device. Even mild cognitive impairment virtually precludes 
their use. Frequent demonstration and re-instruction in the 
use of all devices are required.
• Mortality rates for acute asthma: higher in old age, partly 
because patients underestimate the severity of 
bronchoconstriction and also develop a lower degree of 
tachycardia and pulsus paradoxus for the same degree of 
bronchoconstriction.
• Treatment decisions: advanced age in itself is not a barrier 
to intensive care or mechanical ventilation in an acute 
episode of asthma or COPD, but this decision may be difficult 
and should be shared with the patient (if possible), the 
relatives and the GP.
19.34  Obstructive pulmonary disease in old age
Respiratory disease
19
678
concern exists regarding oxygen sensitivity, they may be 
driven by compressed air and supplemental oxygen 
delivered by nasal cannula.
Oral prednisolone reduces symptoms and improves 
lung function. Currently, doses of 30 mg for 10 days 
are recommended but shorter courses may be 
acceptable. Prophylaxis against osteoporosis should be 
considered in patients who receive repeated courses of 
steroids (p. 776).
The role of bacteria in exacerbations remains contro-
versial and there is little evidence for the routine admin-
istration of antibiotics. They are currently recommended, 
however, for patients reporting an increase in sputum 
purulence, sputum volume or breathlessness. In most 
cases, simple regimens are advised, such as an 
aminopenicillin or a macrolide. Co-amoxiclav is only 
required in regions where β-lactamase-producing organ-
isms are known to be common.
If, despite the above measures, the patient remains 
tachypnoeic, hypercapnic and acidotic (PaCO2 > 6 kPa, 
H+ ≥ 45 (pH < 7.35)), then NIV should be commenced 
(p. 193). Its use is associated with reduced requirements 
for mechanical ventilation and reduced mortality (Box 
19.35). It is not useful in patients who cannot protect 
their airway. Mechanical ventilation may be considered 
in those with a reversible cause for deterioration (e.g. 
pneumonia), or if there is no prior history of respiratory 
failure.
Exacerbations may be accompanied by the develop-
ment of peripheral oedema that usually responds to 
diuretics. There has been a vogue for using intravenous 
infusions of aminophylline, but evidence for benefit is 
limited and there is an associated risk of inducing 
arrhythmias and drug interactions. The use of the respi-
ratory stimulant doxapram has been largely superseded 
by the development of NIV, but it may be useful for 
a limited period in selected patients with a low 
respiratory rate.
Discharge from hospital may be planned once 
patients are clinically stable on their usual maintenance 
medication. The provision of a nurse-led ‘hospital 
at home’ team providing short-term nebuliser loan 
improves discharge rates and additional support for the 
patient.
‘Non-invasive ventilation is safe and effective in patients with an 
acute exacerbation of COPD complicated by mild to moderate 
respiratory acidosis, and should be considered early in the 
course of respiratory failure to reduce the need for endotracheal 
intubation, treatment failure and mortality.’
• Lim WJ, et al. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for treatment of 
respiratory failure due to exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2004, issue 3. Art. no. CD004104.
19.35  Non-invasive ventilation in COPD 
exacerbations
Aetiology and pathology
Bronchiectasis may result from a congenital defect 
affecting airway ion transport or ciliary function, such 
as cystic fibrosis (see below), or may be acquired second-
ary to damage to the airways by a destructive infection, 
inhaled toxin or foreign body. The result is chronic 
inflammation and infection in airways. Box 19.36 shows 
the common causes, of which tuberculosis is the most 
common worldwide.
Localised bronchiectasis may occur due to the accu-
mulation of pus beyond an obstructing bronchial lesion, 
such as enlarged tuberculous hilar lymph nodes, a 
bronchial tumour or an inhaled foreign body (e.g. an 
aspirated peanut).
The bronchiectatic cavities may be lined by granula-
tion tissue, squamous epithelium or normal ciliated epi-
thelium. There may also be inflammatory changes in the 
deeper layers of the bronchial wall and hypertrophy of 
the bronchial arteries. Chronic inflammatory and fibrotic 
changes are usually found in the surrounding lung 
tissue, resulting in progressive destruction of the normal 
lung architecture in advanced cases.
Clinical features
The symptoms are shown in Box 19.37.
Physical signs in the chest may be unilateral or bilat-
eral. If the bronchiectatic airways do not contain secre-
tions and there is no associated lobar collapse, there are 
no abnormal physical signs. When there are large 
amounts of sputum in the bronchiectatic spaces, numer-
ous coarse crackles may be heard over the affected areas. 
Collapse with retained secretions blocking a proximal 
bronchus may lead to locally diminished breath sounds, 
while advanced disease may cause scarring and over­
lying bronchial breathing. Acute haemoptysis is an 
important complication of bronchiectasis; management 
is described on page 659.
Investigations
In addition to common respiratory pathogens, sputum 
culture may reveal Pseudomonas aeruginosa, fungi such as 
Aspergillus and various mycobacteria. Frequent cultures 
Congenital
• Cystic fibrosis
• Ciliary dysfunction syndromes
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (immotile cilia syndrome)
Kartagener’s syndrome (sinusitis and transposition of the 
viscera)
• Primary hypogammaglobulinaemia (p. 881)
Acquired: children
• Pneumonia (complicating whooping cough or measles)
• Primary TB
• Inhaled foreign body
Acquired: adults
• Suppurative pneumonia
• Pulmonary TB
• Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis complicating asthma 
(p. 697)
• Bronchial tumours
19.36  Causes of bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis means abnormal dilatation of the bronchi. 
Chronic suppurative airway infection with sputum pro-
duction, progressive scarring and lung damage occur, 
whatever the cause.
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
19
679
Physiotherapy
Patients should be shown how to perform regular daily 
physiotherapy to assist the drainage of excess bronchial 
secretions. Efficiently executed, this is of great value 
both in reducing the amount of cough and sputum, and 
in preventing recurrent episodes of bronchopulmonary 
infection. Patients should lie in a position in which the 
lobe to be drained is uppermost. Deep breathing fol-
lowed by forced expiratory manœuvres (the ‘active cycle 
of breathing’ technique) helps to move secretions in the 
dilated bronchi towards the trachea, from which they 
can be cleared by vigorous coughing. Devices that 
increase airway pressure either by a constant amount 
(positive expiratory pressure mask) or in an oscillatory 
manner (flutter valve), aid sputum clearance in some 
patients, and a variety of techniques should be tried to 
find the one that suits the individual. The optimum 
duration and frequency of physiotherapy depend on the 
amount of sputum, but 5–10 minutes twice daily is a 
minimum for most patients.
Antibiotic therapy
For most patients with bronchiectasis, the appropriate 
antibiotics are the same as those used in COPD (p. 678) 
but larger doses and longer courses are required, and 
resolution of symptoms is often incomplete. When 
secondary infection occurs with staphylococci and 
Gram-negative bacilli, in particular Pseudomonas species, 
antibiotic therapy becomes more challenging and should 
be guided by the microbiological sensitivities. For 
Pseudomonas, oral ciprofloxacin (500–750 mg twice daily) 
or ceftazidime by intravenous injection or infusion 
(1–2 g 3 times daily) may be required. Haemoptysis in 
bronchiectasis often responds to treatment of the under-
lying infection, although, in severe cases, percutaneous 
embolisation of the bronchial circulation by an interven-
tional radiologist may be necessary.
Surgical treatment
Excision of bronchiectatic areas is only indicated in a 
small proportion of cases. These are usually patients in 
whom the bronchiectasis is confined to a single lobe or 
segment on CT. Unfortunately, many of the patients in 
whom medical treatment proves unsuccessful are 
also unsuitable for surgery because of either extensive 
bilateral bronchiectasis or coexisting severe airflow 
obstruction. In progressive forms of bronchiectasis, 
resection of destroyed areas of lung that are acting as a 
reservoir of infection should only be considered as a last 
resort.
Prognosis
The disease is progressive when associated with ciliary 
dysfunction and cystic fibrosis, and eventually causes 
respiratory failure. In other patients, the prognosis can 
be relatively good if physiotherapy is performed regu-
larly and antibiotics are used aggressively.
Prevention
As bronchiectasis commonly starts in childhood follow-
ing measles, whooping cough or a primary tuberculous 
infection, adequate prophylaxis for and treatment of 
these conditions are essential. The early recognition and 
treatment of bronchial obstruction are also important.
• Cough: chronic, daily, persistent
• Sputum: copious, continuously purulent
• Pleuritic pain: when infection spreads to involve pleura, or 
with segmental collapse due to retained secretions
• Haemoptysis:
Streaks of blood common, larger volumes with 
exacerbations of infection
Massive haemoptysis requiring bronchial artery 
embolisation sometimes occurs
• Infective exacerbation: increased sputum volume with 
fever, malaise, anorexia
• Halitosis: frequently accompanies purulent sputum
• General debility: difficulty maintaining weight, anorexia, 
exertional breathlessness
19.37  Symptoms of bronchiectasis
are necessary to ensure appropriate treatment of resist-
ant organisms.
Bronchiectasis, unless very gross, is not usually 
apparent on a chest X-ray. In advanced disease, thick-
ened airway walls, cystic bronchiectatic spaces, and 
associated areas of pneumonic consolidation or collapse 
may be visible. CT is much more sensitive, and shows 
thickened, dilated airways (Fig. 19.30).
A screening test can be performed in patients sus-
pected of having a ciliary dysfunction syndrome by 
measuring the time taken for a small pellet of saccharin 
placed in the anterior chamber of the nose to reach the 
pharynx, at which point the patient can taste it. This time 
should not exceed 20 minutes but is greatly prolonged 
in patients with ciliary dysfunction. Ciliary beat fre-
quency may also be assessed from biopsies taken from 
the nose. Structural abnormalities of cilia can be detected 
by electron microscopy.
Management
In patients with airflow obstruction, inhaled broncho­
dilators and corticosteroids should be used to enhance 
airway patency.
Fig. 19.30  CT of bronchiectasis. Extensive dilatation of the bronchi, 
with thickened walls (arrows) in both lower lobes. 
R
L
Respiratory disease
19
680
amniocentesis may be offered to those known to be at 
high risk.
Clinical features
The lungs are macroscopically normal at birth, but bron-
chiolar inflammation and infections usually lead to bron-
chiectasis in childhood. At this stage, the lungs are most 
commonly infected with Staphylococcus aureus; however, 
in adulthood, many patients become colonised with Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Recurrent exacerbations of bron-
chiectasis, initially in the upper lobes but subsequently 
throughout both lungs, cause progressive lung damage, 
resulting ultimately in death from respiratory failure. 
Other clinical manifestations are shown in Box 19.38. 
Most men with CF are infertile due to failure of develop-
ment of the vas deferens, but microsurgical sperm 
Cystic fibrosis
Genetics, pathogenesis and epidemiology
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common fatal genetic 
disease in Caucasians, with autosomal recessive inherit-
ance, a carrier rate of 1 in 25, and an incidence of about 
1 in 2500 live births (pp. 48 and 53). CF is the result of 
mutations affecting a gene on the long arm of chromo-
some 7, which codes for a chloride channel known as 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR); this influences salt and water movement across 
epithelial cell membranes. The most common CFTR 
mutation in northern European and American popula-
tions is ΔF508, but over a thousand mutations of this 
gene have now been identified. The genetic defect causes 
increased sodium and chloride content in sweat and 
increased resorption of sodium and water from respira-
tory epithelium (Fig. 19.31). Relative dehydration of the 
airway epithelium is thought to predispose to chronic 
bacterial infection and ciliary dysfunction, leading to 
bronchiectasis. The gene defect also causes disorders in 
the gut epithelium, pancreas, liver and reproductive 
tract (see below).
In the 1960s, few patients with CF survived child-
hood, yet with aggressive treatment of airway infection 
and nutritional support, life expectancy has improved 
dramatically, so that there are now more adults than 
children with CF in many developed countries. Until 
recently, the diagnosis was most commonly made from 
the clinical picture (bowel obstruction, failure to thrive, 
steatorrhoea and/or chest symptoms in a young child), 
supported by sweat electrolyte testing and genotyping. 
Patients with unusual phenotypes were commonly 
missed, however, and late diagnosis led to poorer out-
comes. Neonatal screening for CF using immunoreactive 
trypsin and genetic testing of newborn blood samples is 
now routine in the UK, and should reduce delayed diag-
nosis and improve outcomes. Prenatal screening by 
Fig. 19.31  Cystic fibrosis: basic defect in the pulmonary epithelium.  A The CF gene codes for a chloride channel (1) in the apical (luminal) 
membrane of epithelial cells in the conducting airways. This is normally controlled by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and indirectly by 
β-adrenoceptor stimulation, and is one of several apical ion channels which control the quantity and solute content of airway-lining fluid. Normal channels 
appear to inhibit the adjacent epithelial sodium channels (2).  B In cystic fibrosis, one of many CF gene defects causes absence or defective function of 
this chloride channel (3). This leads to reduced chloride secretion and loss of inhibition of sodium channels, with excessive sodium resorption (4) and 
dehydration of the airway lining. The resulting abnormal airway-lining fluid predisposes to infection by mechanisms still to be fully explained. 
cAMP
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Water
cAMP
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Water
Basal surface
1
2
3
4
Airway lumen
Apical surface
EPITHELIAL
CELL
β2-adrenoceptor
Cystic fibrosis
Normal
A
B
Respiratory
• Infective exacerbations of 
bronchiectasis
• Spontaneous pneumothorax
• Haemoptysis
• Nasal polyps
• Respiratory failure
• Cor pulmonale
• Lobar collapse due to 
secretions
Gastrointestinal
• Malabsorption and 
steatorrhoea
• Distal intestinal obstruction 
syndrome
• Biliary cirrhosis and portal 
hypertension
• Gallstones
Others
• Diabetes (25% of adults)
• Delayed puberty
• Male infertility
• Stress incontinence due to 
repeated forced cough
• Psychosocial problems
• Osteoporosis
• Arthropathy
• Cutaneous vasculitis
19.38  Complications of cystic fibrosis
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
681
requirements of CF patients are met by supplemental 
feeding, including nasogastric or gastrostomy tube 
feeding if required. Diabetes eventually develops in over 
25% of patients and often requires insulin therapy. 
Osteoporosis secondary to malabsorption and chronic ill 
health should be sought and treated.
Novel therapies for cystic fibrosis
Small molecules designed to correct the function of par-
ticular CFTR defects are being developed, and one 
(ivacaftor) gives significant clinical benefits in patients 
with the G551D mutation. Somatic gene therapy for CF 
is also under development. Manufactured normal copies 
of the CF gene are ‘packaged’ in liposomes or virus 
vectors and administered to the airways by aerosol inha-
lation. Trials are under way but more efficient gene 
delivery methods are needed to make this practical.
INFECTIONS OF THE  
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract are 
a major cause of morbidity and mortality, particularly 
in patients at the extremes of age, and those with pre-
existing lung disease or immune suppression.
Upper respiratory tract infection
Upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs), such as 
coryza (the common cold), acute pharyngitis and acute 
tracheobronchitis, are the most common of all commu-
nicable diseases and represent the most frequent cause 
of short-term absenteeism from work and school. The 
vast majority are caused by viruses (p. 328) and, in 
adults, are usually short-lived and rarely serious.
Acute coryza is the most common URTI and is usually 
the result of rhinovirus infection. In addition to general 
malaise, acute coryza typically causes nasal discharge, 
sneezing and cough. Involvement of the pharynx results 
in a sore throat, that of the larynx a hoarse or lost voice. 
aspiration and in vitro fertilisation are possible. Geno-
type is a poor predictor of disease severity in individuals; 
even siblings with matching genotypes may have differ-
ent phenotypes. This suggests that other ‘modifier genes’, 
as yet unidentified, influence clinical outcome.
Management
Treatment of CF lung disease
The management of CF lung disease is that of severe 
bronchiectasis. All patients with CF who produce 
sputum should perform chest physiotherapy regularly, 
and more frequently during exacerbations. While infec-
tions with Staph. aureus can often be managed with 
oral antibiotics, intravenous treatment (frequently self-
administered at home through an implanted subcutane-
ous vascular port) is usually needed for Pseudomonas 
infections. Regular nebulised antibiotic therapy (colistin 
or tobramycin) is used between exacerbations in an 
attempt to suppress chronic Pseudomonas infection.
Unfortunately, the bronchi of many CF patients even-
tually become colonised with pathogens that are resist-
ant to most antibiotics. Resistant strains of P. aeruginosa, 
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and Burkholderia cepacia are 
the main culprits, and may require prolonged treatment 
with unusual combinations of antibiotics. Aspergillus 
and non-tuberculous mycobacteria are also frequently 
found in the sputum of CF patients but, in most cases, 
these behave as benign ‘colonisers’ of the bronchiectatic 
airways and do not require specific therapy. Some 
patients have coexistent asthma, which is treated with 
inhaled bronchodilators and corticosteroids; allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (p. 697) also occurs 
occasionally in CF.
Four maintenance treatments have been shown to 
cause modest rises in lung function and/or to reduce the 
frequency of chest exacerbations in CF patients (Box 
19.39). Individual responses are variable and should be 
carefully monitored to avoid burdening patients with 
treatments that prove ineffective.
For advanced CF lung disease, home oxygen and NIV 
may be necessary to treat respiratory failure. Ultimately, 
lung transplantation can produce dramatic improve-
ments but is limited by donor organ availability.
Treatment of non-respiratory manifestations of CF
There is a clear link between good nutrition and 
prognosis in CF. Malabsorption due to exocrine pancre-
atic failure is treated with oral pancreatic enzymes 
and vitamin supplements. The increased caloric 
Therapy
Patients treated
Nebulised recombinant 
human DNase 2.5 mg daily
Age ≥ 5, FVC > 40% predicted
Nebulised tobramycin 
300 mg twice daily, given in 
alternate mths
Patients colonised with 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Regular oral azithromycin 
500 mg three times/wk
Patients colonised with 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Nebulised hypertonic saline, 
4 mL 7%, twice daily
Age ≥ 6, FEV1 > 40% predicted
19.39  Treatments that reduce chest exacerbations 
and/or improve lung function in cystic fibrosis
• Issues for the patient:
Move to adult CF centre – loss of trusted paediatric team
Feelings of being different from peers due to chronic 
illness
Demanding treatments that conflict with social and  
school life
Pressure to take responsibility for self-care
Relationship/fertility concerns
• Issues for the patient’s parents:
Loss of control over patient’s treatment – feeling excluded
Loss of trusted paediatric team
Need to develop trust in adult team
Feelings of helplessness when adolescent rebels or will 
not take treatment
• Issues for the CF team:
Reluctance or refusal by patient to engage with transition
Management of deterioration due to non-adherence
Motivation of adolescents to self-care
Provision of adolescent-friendly health-care environment
19.40  Cystic fibrosis in adolescence
Respiratory disease
19
682
Community-acquired pneumonia
Figures from the UK suggest that an estimated 5–11/1000 
adults suffer from community-acquired pneumonia 
(CAP) each year, accounting for around 5–12% of all 
lower respiratory tract infections. It affects all age groups 
but is particularly common at the extremes of age; 
worldwide, CAP continues to kill more children than 
any other illness, and its propensity to ease the passing 
of the frail and elderly led to pneumonia being known 
as the ‘old man’s friend’.
Most cases are spread by droplet infection and, whilst 
CAP may occur in previously healthy individuals, 
several factors may impair the effectiveness of local 
defences and predispose to CAP (Box 19.41). Streptococ-
cus pneumoniae (Fig. 19.32) remains the most common 
infecting agent. The likelihood that other organisms may 
be involved depends on the age of the patient and the 
clinical context. Viral infections are important causes of 
CAP in children, and their contribution to adult CAP is 
increasingly recognised (Box 19.42).
A ‘best guess’ as to the likely organism may be made 
from the context in which pneumonia develops, but not 
from the clinical and radiological picture, which does 
not differ sufficiently from one organism to another; the 
term ‘atypical pneumonia’ has therefore been dropped. 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is more common in young 
people and rare in the elderly, whereas Haemophilus 
influenzae is more common in the elderly, particularly 
when underlying lung disease is present. Legionella pneu-
mophila occurs in local outbreaks centred on contami-
nated cooling towers in hotels, hospitals and other 
industrial buildings. Staphylococcus aureus is more 
common following an episode of influenza. Foreign 
travel raises the possibility of infections that might 
otherwise be unusual in the UK: for example, Burkholde-
ria pseudomallei from South-east Asia. Travel also facili-
tates the spread of illnesses such as severe acute 
If complicated by a tracheitis or bronchitis, chest tight-
ness and wheeze typical of asthma occur. Specific inves-
tigation is rarely warranted and treatment with simple 
analgesics, antipyretics and decongestants is all that is 
required. Symptoms usually resolve quickly, but if 
repeated URTIs ‘go to the chest’, a more formal diagno-
sis of asthma ought to be considered. A variety of viruses 
causing URTI may also trigger exacerbations of asthma 
or COPD and aggravate other lung diseases.
Bordetella pertussis, the cause of whooping cough, is 
an important source of URTI. It is highly contagious and 
is notifiable in the UK. Vaccination confers protection 
and is usually offered in infancy, but its efficacy wanes 
in adult life and the infection is easily spread. Adults 
usually experience a mild illness similar to acute coryza, 
but some individuals develop paroxysms of coughing 
which can persist for weeks to months, earning whoop-
ing cough the designation of ‘the cough of 100 days’. 
The diagnosis may be confirmed by bacterial culture, 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from a nasopharyngeal 
swab or serological testing. If the illness is recognised 
early in the clinical course, macrolide antibiotics may 
ameliorate the course.
Rhinosinusitis typically causes a combination of nasal 
congestion, blockage or discharge, and may be accom-
panied by facial pain/pressure or loss of smell. Exami-
nation usually confirms erythematous swollen nasal 
mucosa and pus may be evident. Nasal polyps should 
be sought and dental infection excluded. Treatment with 
topical corticosteroids, nasal decongestants and regular 
nasal douching are usually sufficient and, although bac-
terial infection is often present, antibiotics are only indi-
cated if symptoms persist for more than 5 days. Persistent 
symptoms or recurrent episodes should prompt a refer-
ral to an ear, nose and throat specialist.
Influenza is discussed on page 319.
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is as an acute respiratory illness asso­
ciated with recently developed radiological pulmonary 
shadowing, which may be segmental, lobar or multi­
lobar. The context in which pneumonia develops is 
highly indicative of the likely organism(s) involved; 
therefore, pneumonias are usually classified as commu-
nity- or hospital-acquired, or as occurring in immuno-
compromised hosts. ‘Lobar pneumonia’ is a radiological 
and pathological term referring to homogeneous con-
solidation of one or more lung lobes, often with associ-
ated pleural inflammation. ‘Bronchopneumonia’ refers 
to more patchy alveolar consolidation associated with 
bronchial and bronchiolar inflammation, often affecting 
both lower lobes.
The inflammatory response in lobar pneumonia 
evolves through stages of congestion, red then grey 
hepatisation, and finally resolution. In the first stage, the 
alveolar units are flooded by a proteinaceous exudate 
and by neutrophils and red blood cells, and numerous 
pneumococci may be observed. As fibrin forms on the 
cut surface of the affected lobe, it resembles liver and 
so this stage is known as ‘red hepatisation’. As conges-
tion resolves, the lung tissue becomes grey (‘grey 
hepatisation’), and ultimately, clearance and repair 
mechanisms restore the normal architecture of the lung.
Fig. 19.32  Gram stain of sputum showing Gram-positive 
diplococci characteristic of Strep. pneumoniae (arrows). 
• Cigarette smoking
• Upper respiratory tract 
infections
• Alcohol
• Corticosteroid therapy
• Old age
• Recent influenza infection
• Pre-existing lung disease
• HIV
• Indoor air pollution
19.41  Factors that predispose to pneumonia
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
683
Bacteria
• Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae
• Legionella pneumophila
• Chlamydia pneumoniae
• Haemophilus influenzae
• Staphylococcus aureus
• Chlamydia psittaci
• Coxiella burnetii (Q fever, 
‘querry’ fever)
• Klebsiella pneumoniae 
(Freidländer’s bacillus)
• Actinomyces israelii
Viruses
• Influenza, parainfluenza
• Measles
• Herpes simplex
• Varicella
• Adenovirus
• Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
• Coronavirus (Urbani 
SARS-associated 
coronavirus)
(SARS = severe acute respiratory syndrome)
19.42  Organisms causing community-acquired 
pneumonia
with lower lobe pneumonia or if there is associated 
hepatitis. Less typical presentations may be seen in the 
very young and the elderly.
On examination, the respiratory and pulse rate may 
be raised and the blood pressure low, while an assess-
ment of the mental state may reveal a delirium. These 
are important indicators of the severity of the illness 
(Fig. 19.33). Not all patients are pyrexial but this is 
a helpful diagnostic clue if present. Oxygen saturation 
on air may be low, and the patient cyanosed and 
distressed.
Chest signs (p. 645) vary, depending on the phase of 
the inflammatory response. When consolidated, the 
lung is typically dull to percussion and, as conduction 
of sound is enhanced, auscultation reveals bronchial 
breathing and whispering pectoriloquy; crackles are 
heard throughout. However, in many patients, signs are 
more subtle with reduced air entry only, but crackles 
are usually present.
An assessment of nutrition is important as, if poor, 
the response to treatment will be impaired, particularly 
in the elderly. On occasion, inferences as to the likely 
organism may be drawn from clinical examination. For 
example, the presence of herpes labialis may point to 
streptococcal infection, as may the finding of ‘rusty’ 
sputum. The presence of poor dental hygiene should 
prompt consideration of Klebsiella or Actinomyces israelii. 
The differential diagnosis of pneumonia is shown in 
Box 19.43.
Fig. 19.33  Hospital CURB-65. *Defined as a Mental Test Score of 8 or less, or new disorientation in person, place or time. ( Urea of 7 mmol/L ≅ 
20 mg/dL.) 
Consider hospital-supervised
treatment
Options may include
• Short-stay inpatient
• Hospital-supervised outpatient
Likely to be suitable for
home treatment
Manage in hospital as
severe pneumonia
Assess for ICU admission,
especially if CURB-65
score = 4 or 5
3 or
more
0 or 1
Any of:
 • Confusion*
 • Urea > 7 mmol/L
 • Respiratory rate > 30/min
 • Blood pressure (systolic < 90 mmHg or diastolic < 60 mmHg)
 • Age > 65 years
CURB- 65 score
2
Score 1 point for each feature present
respiratory syndrome (SARS), caused by a form of 
corona­virus arising in the Guangdong province of 
China, but which spread rapidly through Hong Kong 
and Vietnam, and then throughout the world. Certain 
occupations may be associated with exposure to specific 
bacteria (p. 715).
Clinical features
Pneumonia, particularly lobar pneumonia, usually 
presents as an acute illness. Systemic features such as 
fever, rigors, shivering and malaise predominate and 
delirium may be present. The appetite is invariably lost 
and headache frequently reported.
Pulmonary symptoms include cough, which at first 
is characteristically short, painful and dry, but later 
accompanied by the expectoration of mucopurulent 
sputum. Rust-coloured sputum may be seen in patients 
with Strep. pneumoniae, and the occasional individual 
may report haemoptysis. Pleuritic chest pain may be a 
presenting feature and, on occasion, may be referred 
to the shoulder or anterior abdominal wall. Upper 
abdominal tenderness is sometimes apparent in patients 
• Pulmonary infarction
• Pulmonary/pleural TB
• Pulmonary oedema (can be unilateral)
• Pulmonary eosinophilia (p. 713)
• Malignancy: bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma
• Rare disorders: cryptogenic organising pneumonia/
bronchiolitis obliterans organising pneumonia (COP/BOOP)  
(p. 708)
19.43  Differential diagnosis of pneumonia
Respiratory disease
19
684
Fig. 19.34  Pneumonia of the right middle lobe.  A PA view: 
consolidation in the right middle lobe with characteristic opacification 
beneath the horizontal fissure and loss of normal contrast between the 
right heart border and lung.  B Lateral view: consolidation confined to the 
anteriorly situated middle lobe. 
A
B
Blood
Full blood count
• Very high (> 20 × 109/L) or low (< 4 × 109/L) white cell 
count: marker of severity
• Neutrophil leucocytosis > 15 × 109/L: suggests bacterial 
aetiology
• Haemolytic anaemia: occasional complication of Mycoplasma
Urea and electrolytes
• Urea > 7 mmol/L (~20 mg/dL): marker of severity
• Hyponatraemia: marker of severity
Liver function tests
• Abnormal if basal pneumonia inflames liver
• Hypoalbuminaemia: marker of severity
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate/C-reactive protein
• Non-specifically elevated
Blood culture
• Bacteraemia: marker of severity
Serology
• Acute and convalescent titres for Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, 
Legionella and viral infections
Cold agglutinins
• Positive in 50% of patients with Mycoplasma
Arterial blood gases
• Measure when SaO2 < 93% or when severe clinical features 
to assess ventilatory failure or acidosis
Sputum
Sputum samples
• Gram stain (see Fig. 19.32), culture and antimicrobial 
sensitivity testing
Oropharynx swab
• PCR for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and other atypical 
pathogens
Urine
• Pneumococcal and/or Legionella antigen
Chest X-ray
Lobar pneumonia
• Patchy opacification evolves into homogeneous consolidation 
of affected lobe
• Air bronchogram (air-filled bronchi appear lucent against 
consolidated lung tissue) may be present (see Fig. 19.34)
Bronchopneumonia
• Typically patchy and segmental shadowing
Complications
• Para-pneumonic effusion, intrapulmonary abscess or 
empyema
Staph. aureus
• Suggested by multilobar shadowing, cavitation, 
pneumatocoeles and abscesses
Pleural fluid
• Always aspirate and culture when present in more than trivial 
amounts, preferably with ultrasound guidance
19.44  Investigations in CAP
Investigations
The aims of investigation (Box 19.44) are to confirm the 
diagnosis and exclude other conditions, assess the sever-
ity and identify the development of complications. 
Typical chest X-ray findings in a lobar pneumonia are 
shown in Figure 19.34. Whilst many cases of mild to 
moderate CAP can be successfully managed without 
identification of the organism, a range of microbiological 
tests should be performed on patients with severe CAP.
Management
The most important aspects of management are oxy-
genation, fluid balance and antibiotic therapy. In 
severe or prolonged illness, nutritional support may be 
required.
Oxygen
Oxygen should be administered to all patients with 
tachy­pnoea, hypoxaemia, hypotension or acidosis, with 
the aim of maintaining the PaO2 at or above 8 kPa 
(60 mmHg) or the SaO2 at or above 92%. High concentra-
tions (35% or more), preferably humidified, should be 
used in all patients who do not have hypercapnia associ-
ated with COPD. Continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP) should be considered in those who remain 
hypoxic despite this, and these patients should be 
managed in a high-dependency or intensive care envi-
ronment, where mechanical ventilation can be rapidly 
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
685
paracetamol, co-codamol or NSAIDs is sufficient. In 
some patients, opiates may be required but these must 
be used with extreme caution in patients with poor res-
piratory function, as they may suppress ventilation. 
Physiotherapy is not usually indicated in patients with 
CAP, but may help expectoration in those who suppress 
cough because of pleural pain.
Most patients respond promptly to antibiotic therapy. 
However, fever may persist for several days and the 
chest X-ray often takes several weeks or even months to 
resolve, especially in old age. Delayed recovery suggests 
either that a complication has occurred (Box 19.47), that 
the diagnosis is incorrect (see Box 19.43) or, alterna-
tively, that the pneumonia may be secondary to a proxi-
mal bronchial obstruction or recurrent aspiration. The 
mortality rate of adults with non-severe pneumonia is 
very low (< 1%); hospital death rates are typically 
between 5 and 10% but may be as high as 50% in severe 
illness.
Discharge and follow-up
The decision to discharge patients depends on 
their home circumstances and the likelihood of compli-
cations. A chest X-ray need not be repeated before dis-
charge in those making a satisfactory clinical recovery. 
Clinical review should be arranged around 6 weeks later 
and a chest X-ray obtained if there are persistent symp-
toms, physical signs or reasons to suspect under­lying 
malignancy.
Prevention
Current smokers should be advised to stop. Influenza 
and pneumococcal vaccination should be considered in 
selected patients (p. 148). Because of the mode of spread, 
Legionella pneumophila has important public health impli-
cations and usually requires notification to the appropri-
ate health authority. In developing countries, tackling 
malnourishment and indoor air pollution, and encour-
aging immunisation against measles, pertussis and Hae-
mophilus influenzae type b are particularly important in 
children.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia
Hospital-acquired or nosocomial pneumonia is a new 
episode of pneumonia occurring at least 2 days after 
admission to hospital. It is the second most common 
hospital-acquired infection (HAI) and the leading cause 
of HAI-associated death. The elderly are particularly at 
risk, along with patients in intensive care units, espe-
cially when mechanically ventilated; in the latter case, 
• CURB score of 4–5, failing to respond rapidly to initial 
management
• Persisting hypoxia (PaO2 < 8 kPa (60 mmHg)), despite high 
concentrations of oxygen
• Progressive hypercapnia
• Severe acidosis
• Circulatory shock
• Reduced conscious level
19.45  Indications for referral to ITU
employed. Indications for referral to the intensive 
therapy unit (ITU) are summarised in Box 19.45.
Intravenous fluids
These should be considered in patients with severe 
illness, older patients and those who are vomiting. 
Otherwise, an adequate oral intake of fluid should 
be encouraged. Inotropic support may be required 
in patients with shock (p. 190).
Antibiotics
Prompt administration of antibiotics improves the 
outcome. The initial choice of antibiotic is guided by 
clinical context, severity assessment, local knowledge of 
antibiotic resistance patterns and any available epi­
demiological information. Current regimens are detailed 
in Box 19.46. In most patients with uncomplicated pneu-
monia, a 7-day course is adequate, although treatment 
is usually required for longer in those with Legionella, 
staphylococcal or Klebsiella pneumonia. Oral antibiotics 
are usually adequate unless the patient has a severe 
illness, impaired consciousness, loss of swallowing 
reflex, or functional or anatomical reasons for 
malabsorption.
It is important to relieve pleural pain, as it may 
prevent the patient from breathing normally and cough-
ing efficiently. For the majority, simple analgesia with 
Uncomplicated CAP
• Amoxicillin 500 mg 3 times daily orally
If patient is allergic to penicillin
• Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily orally or Erythromycin 
500 mg 4 times daily orally
If Staphylococcus is cultured or suspected
• Flucloxacillin 1–2 g 4 times daily IV plus
• Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily IV
If Mycoplasma or Legionella is suspected
• Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily orally or IV or 
Erythromycin 500 mg 4 times daily orally IV plus
• Rifampicin 600 mg twice daily IV in severe cases
Severe CAP
• Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily IV or Erythromycin 
500 mg 4 times daily IV plus
• Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g 3 times daily IV or Ceftriaxone 1–2 g 
daily IV or Cefuroxime 1.5 g 3 times daily IV or
• Amoxicillin 1 g 4 times daily IV plus flucloxacillin 2 g 4 times 
daily IV
19.46  Antibiotic treatment for CAP*
*Adapted from British Thoracic Society Guidelines.
• Para-pneumonic effusion – common
• Empyema (p. 662)
• Retention of sputum causing lobar collapse
• Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
• Pneumothorax, particularly with Staph. aureus
• Suppurative pneumonia/lung abscess
• ARDS, renal failure, multi-organ failure (p. 192)
• Ectopic abscess formation (Staph. aureus)
• Hepatitis, pericarditis, myocarditis, meningoencephalitis
• Pyrexia due to drug hypersensitivity
19.47  Complications of pneumonia
Respiratory disease
19
686
the term ‘ventilator-associated pneumonia’ (VAP) is 
used. Healthcare-associated pneumonia (HCAP) is the 
development of pneumonia in a person who has spent 
at least 2 days in hospital within the last 90 days, or has 
attended a haemodialysis unit, received intravenous 
antibiotics, or been resident in a nursing home or other 
long-term care facility. The factors predisposing to the 
development of pneumonia in a hospitalised patient 
are listed in Box 19.48. The organisms implicated in 
early-onset HAP (occurring within 4–5 days of 
admission) are similar to those involved in CAP. Late-
onset HAP is associated with a different range of patho-
gens to CAP, with more Gram-negative bacteria (e.g. 
Escherichia, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella species and Acineto-
bacter baumannii), Staph. aureus (including the meticillin-
resistant type (MRSA)) and anaerobes.
Clinical features and investigations
The diagnosis should be considered in any hospitalised 
or ventilated patient who develops purulent sputum (or 
endotracheal secretions), new radiological infiltrates, an 
otherwise unexplained increase in oxygen requirement, 
a core temperature of more than 38.3°C, and a leuco­
cytosis or leucopenia. However, the clinical features and 
radiographic signs are variable and non-specific, raising 
a broad differential diagnosis that includes venous 
thromboembolism, ARDS, pulmonary oedema, pulmo-
nary haemorrhage and drug toxicity. Therefore, in con-
trast to CAP, microbiological confirmation should be 
sought whenever possible. As in CAP, the full blood 
count (FBC), urea and electrolytes (U&E), erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), 
and arterial blood gas samples should be sent for analy-
sis and a chest X-ray performed, but other investigations 
and imaging may be necessary to exclude other condi-
tions. Adequate sputum samples may be difficult 
to obtain in frail elderly patients and physiotherapy 
should be considered to aid expectoration. In patients 
who are mechanically ventilated, bronchoscopy-directed 
• Increased risk of and from respiratory infection: because 
of reduced immune responses, increased closing volumes, 
reduced respiratory muscle strength and endurance, altered 
mucus layer, poor nutritional status and the increased 
prevalence of chronic lung disease.
• Predisposing factors: other medical conditions may 
predispose to infection, e.g. swallowing difficulties due to 
stroke increase the risk of aspiration pneumonia.
• Atypical presentation: older patients often present with 
confusion, rather than breathlessness or cough.
• Mortality: the vast majority of deaths from pneumonia in 
developed countries occur in older people.
• Influenza: has a much higher complication rate, morbidity 
and mortality. Vaccination significantly reduces morbidity and 
mortality in old age but uptake is poor.
• TB: most cases in old age represent reactivation of previous, 
often unrecognised disease and may be precipitated by 
steroid therapy, diabetes mellitus and the factors above. 
Cryptic miliary TB is an occasional alternative presentation. 
Older people more commonly suffer adverse effects from 
antituberculous chemotherapy and require close monitoring.
19.49  Respiratory infection in old age
Reduced host defences against bacteria
• Reduced immune defences (e.g. corticosteroid treatment, 
diabetes, malignancy)
• Reduced cough reflex (e.g. post-operative)
• Disordered mucociliary clearance (e.g. anaesthetic agents)
• Bulbar or vocal cord palsy
Aspiration of nasopharyngeal or gastric secretions
• Immobility or reduced conscious level
• Vomiting, dysphagia (N.B. stroke disease), achalasia or 
severe reflux
• Nasogastric intubation
Bacteria introduced into lower respiratory tract
• Endotracheal intubation/tracheostomy
• Infected ventilators/nebulisers/bronchoscopes
• Dental or sinus infection
Bacteraemia
• Abdominal sepsis
• IV cannula infection
• Infected emboli
19.48  Factors predisposing to hospital-acquired 
pneumonia
protected brush specimens, bronchoalveolar lavage 
(BAL) or endotracheal aspirates may be obtained.
Management
The principles of management are similar to those for 
CAP, focusing on adequate oxygenation, appropriate 
fluid balance and antibiotics. However, the choice of 
empirical antibiotic therapy is considerably more chal-
lenging, given the diversity of pathogens and the poten-
tial for drug resistance.
In early-onset HAP, patients who have received no 
previous antibiotics can be treated with co-amoxiclav or 
cefuroxime. If the patient has received a course of recent 
antibiotics, then piperacillin/tazobactam or a third-
generation cephalosporin should be considered.
In late-onset HAP, the choice of antibiotics must 
cover the Gram-negative bacteria (see above), Staph. 
aureus 
(including 
MRSA) 
and 
anaerobes. 
Anti-
pseudomonal cover may be provided by a carbapenem 
(meropenem) or a third-generation cephalosporin com-
bined with an aminoglycoside. MRSA cover may be 
provided by glycopeptides, such as vancomycin or lin-
ezolid. A. baumannii is usually sensitive to carbapenems 
but resistant cases may require the prolonged adminis-
tration of nebulised colistin. The choice of agents is most 
appropriately guided by knowledge of local patterns of 
microbiology and antibiotic resistance. It is usual to 
commence broad-based cover, discontinuing less appro-
priate antibiotics as culture results become available. In 
the absence of good evidence, the duration of antibiotic 
therapy remains a matter for clinical judgement.
Physiotherapy is important to aid expectoration in 
the immobile and elderly, and nutritional support is 
often required.
Prevention
Despite appropriate management, the mortality from 
HAP is approximately 30%, so prevention is very impor-
tant. Good hygiene is paramount, particularly with 
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
687
A non-infective form of aspiration pneumonia – 
exogenous lipid pneumonia – may follow the aspiration 
of animal, vegetable, or mineral oils.
The clinical features of suppurative pneumonia are 
summarised in Box 19.50.
Investigations and management
Radiological features of suppurative pneumonia include 
homogeneous lobar or segmental opacity consistent 
with consolidation or collapse. Abscesses are character-
ised by cavitation and fluid level. Occasionally, a pre-
existing emphysematous bulla becomes infected and 
appears as a cavity containing an air–fluid level.
Aspiration pneumonia can be treated with intra­
venous co-amoxiclav 1.2 g 3 times daily. If an anaerobic 
bacterial infection is suspected (e.g. from fetor of the 
sputum), oral metronidazole 400 mg 3 times daily 
should be added. Further modification of antibiotics 
may be required, depending on the clinical response and 
the microbiological results. CA-MRSA is usually suscep-
tible to a variety of oral non-β-lactam antibiotics, such 
as trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, tetra-
cyclines and linezolid. Parenteral therapy with vanco-
mycin or daptomycin can also be considered. F. 
necrophorum is highly susceptible to β-lactam antibiotics, 
and to metronidazole, clindamycin and third-generation 
cephalosporins. Prolonged treatment for 4–6 weeks may 
be required in some patients with lung abscess. Physio­
therapy is of great value, especially when suppuration 
is present in the lower lobes or when a large abscess 
cavity has formed.
In most patients, there is a good response to treat-
ment and, although residual fibrosis and bronchiectasis 
are common sequelae, these seldom give rise to serious 
morbidity. Surgery should be contemplated if no 
improvement occurs, despite optimal medical therapy. 
Removal or treatment of any obstructing endobronchial 
lesion is essential.
Pneumonia in the 
immunocompromised patient
Patients immunocompromised by drugs or disease 
(particularly HIV, p. 400) are at high risk of pulmonary 
infection. The majority of cases are caused by 
the 
same 
pathogens 
that 
cause 
pneumonia 
in 
regard to handwashing and any equipment used. The 
risk of aspiration should be minimised, and the use of 
stress ulcer prophylaxis with proton pump inhibitors 
limited, as they may increase the risk of ventilator-
associated pneumonia. Oral antiseptic (chlorhexidine 
2%) may be used to decontaminate the upper airway, 
and some intensive care units employ selective decon-
tamination of the digestive tract when the anticipated 
requirement for ventilation will exceed 48 hours.
Suppurative pneumonia, aspiration 
pneumonia and pulmonary abscess
These conditions are considered together, as their 
aetiology and clinical features overlap. Suppurative 
pneumonia is characterised by destruction of the lung 
parenchyma by the inflammatory process and, although 
microabscess formation is a characteristic histological 
feature, ‘pulmonary abscess’ is usually taken to refer to 
lesions in which there is a large localised collection of 
pus, or a cavity lined by chronic inflammatory tissue, 
from which pus has escaped by rupture into a 
bronchus.
Suppurative pneumonia and pulmonary abscess 
often develop after the inhalation of septic material 
during operations on the nose, mouth or throat under 
general anaesthesia, or of vomitus during anaesthesia or 
coma, particularly if oral hygiene is poor. Additional 
risk factors for aspiration pneumonia include bulbar or 
vocal cord palsy, stroke, achalasia or oesophageal reflux, 
and alcoholism. Aspiration tends to localise to depend-
ent areas of the lung, such as the apical segment of the 
lower lobe in a supine patient. Suppurative pneumonia 
and pulmonary abscess may also complicate local bron-
chial obstruction from a neoplasm or foreign body.
Infections are usually due to a mixture of anaerobes 
and aerobes in common with the typical flora encoun-
tered in the mouth and upper respiratory tract. Isolates 
of Bacteroides melaninogenicus, Fusobacterium necrophorum, 
anaerobic or micro-aerophilic cocci, and Bacteroides fragi-
lis may be identified. When suppurative pneumonia or 
a pulmonary abscess occurs in a previously healthy 
lung, the most likely infecting organism is Staph. aureus 
or Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Bacterial infection of a pulmonary infarct or a col-
lapsed lobe may also produce a suppurative pneumonia 
or lung abscess. The organisms isolated from the sputum 
include Strep. pneumoniae, Staph. aureus, Strep. pyogenes, 
H. influenzae and, in some cases, anaerobic bacteria. In 
many cases, however, no pathogen can be isolated, par-
ticularly when antibiotics have been given.
Strains of community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA) 
produce the cytotoxin Panton–Valentine leukocidin. The 
organism is mainly responsible for suppurative skin 
infection but may be associated with rapidly progres-
sive, severe, necrotising pneumonia.
Lemierre’s syndrome is a rare cause of pulmonary 
abscesses. The usual causative agent is the anaerobe, F. 
necrophorum. The illness typically commences as a sore 
throat, painful swollen neck, fever, rigor, haemoptysis 
and dyspnoea, and spread into the jugular veins leads 
to thrombosis and metastatic spread of the organisms.
Injecting drug-users are at particular risk of develop-
ing haematogenous lung abscess, often in association 
with endocarditis affecting the pulmonary and tricuspid 
valves.
Symptoms
• Cough with large amounts of sputum, sometimes fetid and 
blood-stained
• Pleural pain common
• Sudden expectoration of copious amounts of foul sputum if 
abscess ruptures into a bronchus
Clinical signs
• High remittent pyrexia
• Profound systemic upset
• Digital clubbing may develop quickly (10–14 days)
• Consolidation on chest examination; signs of cavitation rarely 
found
• Pleural rub common
• Rapid deterioration in general health, with marked weight 
loss if not adequately treated
19.50  Clinical features of suppurative pneumonia
Respiratory disease
19
688
•	 Cavitation may be seen with N. asteroides, 
mycobacteria and fungi.
•	 The presence of a ‘halo sign’ may suggest 
Aspergillus (see Fig. 19.45, p. 698).
•	 Pleural effusions suggest a pyogenic bacterial 
infection and are uncommon in P. jirovecii pneumonia.
Management
In theory, treatment should be based on the identified 
causative organism but, in practice, this is frequently 
unknown and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy is 
required, such as a third-generation cephalosporin or a 
quinolone, plus an antistaphylococcal antibiotic, or an 
antipseudomonal penicillin plus an aminoglycoside.
Thereafter, treatment may be tailored according to 
the results of investigations and the clinical response. 
These may dictate the addition of antifungal or antiviral 
therapies. The management of P. jirovecii infection is 
detailed on page 400, and that of invasive aspergillosis 
on page 698.
Tuberculosis
Epidemiology
Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by infection with Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis (MTB), which is part of a complex of 
organisms including M. bovis (reservoir cattle) and M. 
africanum (reservoir human). Recent figures suggest a 
decline in the incidence of TB, but its impact on world 
health remains significant. In 2010, an estimated 
8.8 million incident cases occurred and TB was esti-
mated to account for nearly 1.5 million deaths, making 
it the second most common cause of death due to an 
infective disease. Furthermore, it is estimated that 
around one-third of the world’s population has latent 
TB. The majority of cases occur in the world’s poorest 
nations, who struggle to cover the costs associated with 
management and control programmes (Fig. 19.35). In 
Africa, the resurgence of TB has been largely driven by 
HIV disease and, in the former Soviet Union and Baltic 
states, by a lack of appropriate health care associated 
with social and political upheaval.
Pathology and pathogenesis
M. bovis infection arises from drinking non-sterilised 
milk from infected cows. M. tuberculosis is spread by the 
inhalation of aerosolised droplet nuclei from other 
infected patients. Once inhaled, the organisms lodge in 
the alveoli and initiate the recruitment of macrophages 
and lymphocytes. Macrophages undergo transforma-
tion into epithelioid and Langhans cells, which aggre-
gate with the lymphocytes to form the classical 
tuberculous granuloma (Fig. 19.36). Numerous granulo-
mas aggregate to form a primary lesion or ‘Ghon focus’ 
(a pale yellow, caseous nodule, usually a few millimetres 
to 1–2 cm in diameter), which is characteristically situ-
ated in the periphery of the lung. Spread of organisms 
to the hilar lymph nodes is followed by a similar patho-
logical reaction, and the combination of the primary 
lesion and regional lymph nodes is referred to as the 
‘primary complex of Ranke’. Reparative processes 
encase the primary complex in a fibrous capsule, limit-
ing the spread of bacilli: so-called latent TB (p. 695). If 
no further complications ensue, this lesion eventually 
non-immunocompromised individuals, but in patients 
with more profound immunosuppression, unusual 
organisms or those normally considered to be of low 
virulence or non-pathogenic may become ‘opportunis-
tic’ pathogens (Box 19.51). Therefore, the possibility of 
Gram-negative bacteria, especially Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa, viral agents, fungi, mycobacteria, and less common 
organisms such as Nocardia asteroides has to be consid-
ered. Infection is often due to more than one organism.
Clinical features
These typically include fever, cough and breathlessness, 
but are influenced by the degree of immunosuppression; 
symptoms are less specific in the more profoundly 
immunosuppressed. The speed of onset tends to be less 
rapid in patients with opportunistic organisms such as 
Pneumocystis jirovecii and mycobacterial infections than 
with bacterial infections (p. 400). In P. jirovecii pneumo-
nia, symptoms of cough and breathlessness can be 
present for several days or weeks before the onset of 
systemic symptoms or the appearance of X-ray abnor-
malities. The clinical features of invasive pulmonary 
aspergillosis are described on page 698.
Diagnosis
The approach is informed by the clinical context and 
severity of the illness. Invasive investigations, such as 
bronchoscopy, BAL, transbronchial biopsy or surgical 
lung biopsy, are often impractical, as many patients are 
too ill to undergo these safely. However, ‘induced 
sputum’ (p. 652) offers a relatively safe method of 
obtaining microbiological samples. HRCT is useful in 
differentiating the likely cause:
•	 Focal unilateral airspace opacification favours 
bacterial infection, mycobacteria or Nocardia.
•	 Bilateral opacification favours P. jirovecii 
pneumonia, fungi, viruses and unusual bacteria, e.g. 
Nocardia.
Causes
Infecting organisms
Defective 
phagocytic 
function
Acute leukaemia
Cytotoxic drugs
Agranulocytosis
Gram-positive bacteria, 
including Staph. 
aureus
Gram-negative bacteria
Fungi, e.g. Candida 
albicans and 
Aspergillus fumigatus
Defects in 
cell-mediated 
immunity
Immunosuppressive 
drugs
Cytotoxic 
chemotherapy
Lymphoma
Thymic aplasia
Viruses
Cytomegalovirus
Herpesvirus
Adenovirus
Influenza
Fungi
Pneumocystis 
jirovecii (formerly 
carinii)
Candida albicans
Aspergillus fumigatus
Defects in 
antibody 
production
Multiple myeloma
Chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia
Haemophilus 
influenzae
Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae
19.51  Causes of immune suppression-associated 
lung infection
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
689
Fig. 19.35  Worldwide incidence of tuberculosis. Estimated new cases (all forms) per 100 000 population (WHO). From Maartens and Wilkinson 
2007 – see p. 732.
25–49
0–24
50–99
100–299
≥ 300
No estimate
Fig. 19.36  Tuberculous granuloma. Normal lung tissue is lost and 
replaced by a mass of fibrous tissue with granulomatous inflammation 
characterised by large numbers of macrophages and multinucleate giant 
cells (white arrow). The central area of this focus shows caseous 
degeneration (black arrow). 
calcifies and is clearly seen on a chest X-ray. However, 
lymphatic or haematogenous spread may occur before 
immunity is established, seeding secondary foci in other 
organs, including lymph nodes, serous membranes, 
meninges, bones, liver, kidneys and lungs, which may 
lie dormant for years. The only clue that infection has 
occurred may be the appearance of a cell-mediated, 
delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to tuberculin, 
demonstrated by tuberculin skin testing. If these repara-
tive processes fail, primary progressive disease ensues 
(Fig. 19.37). The estimated lifetime risk of developing 
disease after primary infection is 10%, with roughly half 
of this risk occurring in the first 2 years after infection. 
Factors predisposing to TB are summarised in Box 19.52 
and the natural history of infection with TB is summa-
rised in Box 19.53.
Clinical features: pulmonary disease
Primary pulmonary TB
Primary TB refers to the infection of a previously unin-
fected (tuberculin-negative) individual. A few patients 
Fig. 19.37  Primary pulmonary TB. (1) Spread from the primary focus 
to hilar and mediastinal lymph glands to form the ‘primary complex’, which 
in most cases heals spontaneously. (2) Direct extension of the primary 
focus – progressive pulmonary TB. (3) Spread to the pleura – tuberculous 
pleurisy and pleural effusion. (4) Blood-borne spread: few bacilli 
– pulmonary, skeletal, renal, genitourinary infection, often months or years 
later; massive spread – miliary TB and meningitis. 
1
2
4
3
develop a self-limiting febrile illness but clinical disease 
only occurs if there is a hypersensitivity reaction or 
progressive infection (Box 19.54). Progressive primary 
disease may appear during the course of the initial 
illness or after a latent period of weeks or months.
Miliary TB
Blood-borne dissemination gives rise to miliary TB, 
which may present acutely but more frequently is char-
acterised by 2–3 weeks of fever, night sweats, anorexia, 
weight loss and a dry cough. Hepatospleno­megaly may 
develop and the presence of a headache may indicate 
coexistent tuberculous meningitis. Auscultation of the 
chest is frequently normal, but in more advanced 
disease, widespread crackles are evident. Fundoscopy 
may show choroidal tubercles. The classical appearances 
on chest X-ray are of fine 1–2 mm lesions (‘millet seed’) 
distributed throughout the lung fields, although occa-
sionally the appearances are coarser. Anaemia and 
Respiratory disease
19
690
• Age over 60 yrs
• Intermittent low-grade pyrexia of unknown origin
• Unexplained weight loss, general debility 
(hepatosplenomegaly in 25–50%)
• Normal chest X-ray
• Blood dyscrasias; leukaemoid reaction, pancytopenia
• Negative tuberculin skin test
• Confirmation by biopsy with granulomas and/or acid-fast 
bacilli in liver or bone marrow
19.55  Cryptic TB
Infection (4–8 wks)
• Influenza-like illness
• Primary complex
• Skin test conversion
Disease
• Lymphadenopathy: hilar 
(often unilateral), 
paratracheal or mediastinal
• Collapse (especially right 
middle lobe)
• Consolidation (especially 
right middle lobe)
• Obstructive emphysema
• Cavitation (rare)
• Pleural effusion
• Miliary
• Meningitis
• Pericarditis
Hypersensitivity
• Erythema nodosum
• Dactylitis
• Phlyctenular conjunctivitis
19.54  Features of primary TB
Patient-related
• Age (children > young adults < elderly)
• First-generation immigrants from high-prevalence countries
• Close contacts of patients with smear-positive pulmonary TB
• Overcrowding (prisons, collective dormitories); homelessness 
(doss houses and hostels)
• Chest X-ray evidence of self-healed TB
• Primary infection < 1 yr previously
• Smoking: cigarettes and bidis (Indian cigarettes made of 
tobacco wrapped in temburini leaves)
Associated diseases
• Immunosuppression: HIV, anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) 
therapy, high-dose corticosteroids, cytotoxic agents
• Malignancy (especially lymphoma and leukaemia)
• Diabetes mellitus
• Chronic kidney disease
• Silicosis
• Gastrointestinal disease associated with malnutrition 
(gastrectomy, jejuno-ileal bypass, cancer of the pancreas, 
malabsorption)
• Deficiency of vitamin D or A
• Recent measles in children
19.52  Factors increasing the risk of TB
Time from infection
Manifestations
3–8 wks
Primary complex, positive tuberculin 
skin test
3–6 mths
Meningeal, miliary and pleural disease
Up to 3 yrs
Gastrointestinal, bone and joint, and 
lymph node disease
Around 8 yrs
Renal tract disease
From 3 yrs onwards
Post-primary disease due to 
reactivation or re-infection
19.53  Natural history of untreated primary TB
Adapted from Grange JM. In: Davies PDO, ed. Clinical tuberculosis. London: 
Hodder Arnold; 1998.
leucopenia reflect bone marrow involvement. ‘Cryptic’ 
miliary TB is an unusual presentation sometimes seen in 
old age (Box 19.55).
Post-primary pulmonary TB
Post-primary disease refers to exogenous (‘new’ infec-
tion) or endogenous (reactivation of a dormant primary 
lesion) infection in a person who has been sensitised by 
earlier exposure. It is most frequently pulmonary and 
characteristically occurs in the apex of an upper lobe, 
where the oxygen tension favours survival of the strictly 
aerobic organism. The onset is usually insidious, devel-
oping slowly over several weeks. Systemic symptoms 
include fever, night sweats, malaise, and loss of appetite 
and weight, and are accompanied by progressive pul-
monary symptoms (Box 19.56). Very occasionally, this 
form of TB may present with one of the complications 
listed in Box 19.57. Radiological changes include ill-
defined opacification in one or both of the upper lobes, 
and as progression occurs, consolidation, collapse and 
cavitation develop to varying degrees (Fig. 19.38). It is 
often difficult to distinguish active from quiescent 
disease on radiological criteria alone, but the presence 
of a miliary pattern or cavitation favours active disease. 
In extensive disease, collapse may be marked and results 
in significant displacement of the trachea and mediasti-
num. Occasionally, a caseous lymph node may drain 
into an adjoining bronchus, leading to tuberculous 
pneumonia.
Clinical features: extrapulmonary disease
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis accounts for about 20% of 
cases in those who are HIV-negative but is more common 
in HIV-positive individuals.
Lymphadenitis
Lymph nodes are the most common extrapulmonary 
site of disease. Cervical and mediastinal glands are 
affected most frequently, followed by axillary and 
inguinal, and more than one region may be involved. 
Disease may represent primary infection, spread from 
contiguous sites, or reactivation. Supraclavicular lym-
phadenopathy is often the result of spread from medi-
astinal disease. The nodes are usually painless and 
initially mobile but become matted together with time. 
When caseation and liquefaction occur, the swelling 
becomes fluctuant and may discharge through the skin 
with the formation of a ‘collar-stud’ abscess and sinus 
formation. Approximately half of cases fail to show 
any constitutional features, such as fevers or night 
sweats. The tuberculin test is usually strongly positive. 
During or after treatment, paradoxical enlargement, 
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
691
granulomas. Occasionally, patients may be frankly 
icteric, with a mixed hepatic/cholestatic picture.
Pericardial disease
Disease occurs in two forms (see Fig. 19.39 and p. 639): 
pericardial effusion and constrictive pericarditis. Fever 
and night sweats are rarely prominent and the presenta-
tion is usually insidious, with breathlessness and 
abdominal swelling. Coexistent pulmonary disease is 
very rare, with the exception of pleural effusion. Pulsus 
paradoxus, a raised JVP, hepatomegaly, prominent 
ascites and peripheral oedema are common to both 
types. Pericardial effusion is associated with increased 
pericardial dullness and a globular enlarged heart on 
chest X-ray, and pericardial calcification occurs in 
around 25% of cases. Constriction is associated with 
an early third heart sound and, occasionally, atrial 
fibrillation. Diagnosis is based on the clinical, radiologi-
cal and echocardiographic findings (p. 640). The 
effusion is frequently blood-stained. Open pericardial 
biopsy can be performed where there is diagnostic 
uncertainty. The addition of corticosteroids to anti­
tuberculosis treatment has been shown to help both 
forms of pericardial disease.
Central nervous system disease
Meningeal disease represents the most important form 
of central nervous system TB. Unrecognised and 
untreated, it is rapidly fatal. Even when appropriate 
treatment is prescribed, mortality rates of 30% have been 
reported, whilst survivors may be left with neurological 
sequelae. Clinical features, investigations and manage-
ment are described on page 1204.
Bone and joint disease
The spine is the most common site for bony TB (Pott’s 
disease), which usually presents with chronic back pain 
and typically involves the lower thoracic and lumbar 
• Chronic cough, often with 
haemoptysis
• Pyrexia of unknown origin
• Unresolved pneumonia
• Exudative pleural effusion
• Asymptomatic (diagnosis 
on chest X-ray)
• Weight loss, general 
debility
• Spontaneous pneumothorax
19.56  Clinical presentations of pulmonary TB
development of new nodes and suppuration may all 
occur but without evidence of continued infection; sur-
gical excision is rarely necessary. In non-immigrant chil-
dren in the UK, most mycobacterial lymphadenitis is 
caused by opportunistic mycobacteria, especially of the 
M. avium complex.
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis
TB can affect any part of the bowel and patients may 
present with a wide range of symptoms and signs (Fig. 
19.39). Upper gastrointestinal tract involvement is rare 
and is usually an unexpected histological finding in an 
endoscopic or laparotomy specimen. Ileocaecal disease 
accounts for approximately half of abdominal TB cases. 
Fever, night sweats, anorexia and weight loss are usually 
prominent and a right iliac fossa mass may be palpable. 
Up to 30% of cases present with an acute abdomen. 
Ultrasound or CT may reveal thickened bowel wall, 
abdominal lymphadenopathy, mesenteric thickening or 
ascites. Barium enema and small bowel enema reveal 
narrowing, shortening and distortion of the bowel, with 
caecal involvement predominating. Diagnosis rests on 
obtaining histology by either colonoscopy or mini-
laparotomy. The main differential diagnosis is Crohn’s 
disease (p. 897). Tuberculous peritonitis is characterised 
by abdominal distension, pain and constitutional symp-
toms. The ascitic fluid is exudative and cellular, with a 
predominance of lymphocytes. Laparoscopy reveals 
multiple white ‘tubercles’ over the peritoneal and 
omental surfaces. Low-grade hepatic dysfunction is 
common in miliary disease, in which biopsy reveals 
Pulmonary
• Massive haemoptysis
• Cor pulmonale
• Fibrosis/emphysema
• Atypical mycobacterial 
infection
• Aspergilloma
• Lung/pleural calcification
• Obstructive airways disease
• Bronchiectasis
• Bronchopleural fistula
Non-pulmonary
• Empyema necessitans
• Laryngitis
• Enteritis*
• Anorectal disease*
• Amyloidosis
• Poncet’s polyarthritis
*From swallowed sputum.
19.57  Chronic complications of pulmonary TB
Fig. 19.38  Chest X-ray: major manifestations and differential 
diagnosis of pulmonary TB. Less common manifestations include 
pneumothorax, ARDS (p. 192), cor pulmonale and localised emphysema. 
‘Miliary’ diffuse shadowing
Differential diagnosis
• Sarcoidosis
• Malignancy
• Pneumoconiosis
• Infection (e.g. histoplasmosis
 infection)
Pleural effusion/empyema
Differential diagnosis
• Bacterial pneumonia
• Pulmonary infarction
• Carcinoma 
• Connective tissue disorder
Cavitation
Differential diagnosis
• Pneumonia/lung abscess
• Lung cancer
• Pulmonary infarct
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
   (Wegener’s granulomatosis)
• Progressive massive fibrosis
Consolidation/collapse
Differential diagnosis
• Pneumonia
• Bronchial carcinoma
• Pulmonary infarct
Respiratory disease
19
692
spine (see Fig. 19.39). The infection starts as a discitis and 
then spreads along the spinal ligaments to involve the 
adjacent anterior vertebral bodies, causing angulation of 
the vertebrae with subsequent kyphosis. Paravertebral 
and psoas abscess formation is common and the disease 
may present with a large (cold) abscess in the inguinal 
region. CT or MRI is valuable in gauging the extent of 
disease, the amount of cord compression, and the site 
for needle biopsy or open exploration, if required. The 
major differential diagnosis is malignancy, which tends 
to affect the vertebral body and leave the disc intact. 
Important complications include spinal instability or 
cord compression.
TB can affect any joint but most frequently involves 
the hip or knee. Presentation is usually insidious, with 
pain and swelling; fever and night sweats are uncom-
mon. Radiological changes are often non-specific but, 
as disease progresses, reduction in joint space and ero-
sions appear. Poncet’s arthropathy is an immunologi-
cally mediated polyarthritis that usually resolves within 
2 months of starting treatment.
Genitourinary disease
Fever and night sweats are rare with renal tract TB and 
patients are often only mildly symptomatic for many 
years. Haematuria, frequency and dysuria are often 
present, with sterile pyuria found on urine microscopy 
and culture. In women, infertility from endometritis, or 
pelvic pain and swelling from salpingitis or a tubo-
ovarian abscess occurs occasionally. In men, genito­
urinary TB may present as epididymitis or prostatitis.
Fig. 19.39  Systemic presentations of extrapulmonary TB. 
Exudative ascites
Mesenteric adenitis
Intestinal obstruction
Cranial nerve palsy
Lymph node enlargement
Pericardial effusion
Constrictive pericarditis
Monoarthritis
Haematuria/dysuria
Infertility in women
Epididymitis
Anorectal ulceration
Headache, vomiting,
seizures, confusion
Lymphocytic meningitis
Hydrocephalus
Space-occupying lesion
(tuberculoma)
Kyphosis
Cord compression
Abdominal mass
Psoas abscess
General observation
 
Weight loss
 
Fever
 
Night sweats
Chronic back pain
Fig. 19.40  Typical changes of tuberculosis. The chest X-ray shows 
bilateral upper lobe airspace shadowing with cavitation. 
Diagnosis
The presence of an otherwise unexplained cough for 
more than 2–3 weeks, particularly in regions where TB 
is prevalent, or typical chest X-ray changes (Fig. 19.40), 
should prompt further investigation (Box 19.58). Direct 
microscopy of sputum remains the most important first 
step. The probability of detecting acid-fast bacilli is pro-
portional to the bacillary burden in the sputum (typi-
cally positive when 5000–10 000 organisms are present). 
By virtue of their substantial, lipid-rich wall, tubercu-
lous bacilli are difficult to stain. The most effective 
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
693
Specimens required
Pulmonary
• Sputum* (induced with nebulised hypertonic saline if not 
expectorating)
• Bronchoscopy with washings or BAL
• Gastric washing* (mainly used for children)
Extrapulmonary
• Fluid examination (cerebrospinal, ascitic, pleural, pericardial, 
joint): yield classically very low
• Tissue biopsy (from affected site): bone marrow/liver may be 
diagnostic in disseminated disease
Diagnostic tests
• Tuberculin skin test: low sensitivity/specificity; useful only in 
primary or deep-seated infection
• Stain
Ziehl–Neelsen
Auramine fluorescence
• Nucleic acid amplification
• Culture
Solid media (Löwenstein–Jensen, Middlebrook)
Liquid media (e.g. BACTEC or MGIT)
• Pleural fluid: adenosine deaminase
• Response to empirical antituberculous drugs (usually seen 
after 5–10 days)
Baseline blood tests
• FBC, CRP, ESR, U&E and LFTs
(BAL = bronchoalveolar lavage; MGIT = mycobacteria growth indicator tube)
19.58  Diagnosis of TB
*At least 2 but preferably 3, including an early morning sample.
appearances are typical of TB and there is no response 
to a broad-spectrum antibiotic.
MTB grows slowly and may take between 4 and 
6 weeks to appear on solid medium, such as Löwenstein– 
Jensen or Middlebrook. Faster growth (1–3 weeks) 
occurs in liquid media, such as the radioactive BACTEC 
system or the non-radiometric mycobacteria growth 
indicator tube (MGIT). The BACTEC method is the most 
widely accepted as the reference standard in developed 
nations and detects mycobacterial growth by measuring 
the liberation of 14CO2, following metabolism of 14C-
labelled substrate present in the medium.
Drug sensitivity testing is particularly important in 
those with a previous history of TB, treatment failure 
or chronic disease, and in those who are resident in or 
have visited an area of high prevalence of resistance, or 
who are HIV-positive. The detection of rifampicin resist-
ance, using molecular tools to test for the presence of the 
rpo gene currently associated with around 95% of 
rifampicin-resistant cases, is important, as rifampicin 
forms the cornerstone of 6-month chemotherapy.
Nucleic acid amplification tests, such as the Xpert/
RIF test, combine the potential to diagnose TB and detect 
the presence of rifampicin resistance, and may become 
the test of first choice in individuals with HIV or those 
suspected to have multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis 
(MDR-TB). If a cluster of cases suggests a common 
source, confirmation may be sought by fingerprinting of 
isolates with restriction-fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP).
The diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB can be more 
challenging. There are generally fewer organisms (par-
ticularly in meningeal or pleural fluid), so culture or 
histopathological examination of tissue is more impor-
tant. Adenosine deaminase in pleural fluid, and to a 
lesser extent in CSF, may assist in confirming suspected 
TB. In the presence of HIV, examination of sputum may 
still be useful, as subclinical pulmonary disease is 
common.
Management
Chemotherapy
The treatment of TB is based on the principle of an initial 
intensive phase to reduce the bacterial population 
rapidly, followed by a continuation phase to destroy any 
remaining bacteria (Box 19.59). Standard treatment 
involves 6 months’ treatment with isoniazid and 
rifampicin, supplemented in the first 2 months with 
pyrazinamide and ethambutol. Fixed-dose tablets com-
bining two or three drugs are preferred. Treatment 
should be commenced immediately in any patient who 
is smear-positive, or smear-negative but with typical 
chest X-ray changes and no response to standard 
antibiotics.
Six months of therapy is appropriate for all patients 
with new-onset pulmonary TB and most cases of 
extrapulmonary TB. However, 12 months of therapy is 
recommended for meningeal TB, including involvement 
of the spinal cord in cases of spinal TB; in these cases, 
ethambutol may be replaced by streptomycin. Pyridox-
ine should be prescribed in pregnant women and mal-
nourished patients to reduce the risk of peripheral 
neuropathy with isoniazid. Where drug resistance is not 
anticipated, patients can be assumed to be non-infectious 
after 2 weeks of appropriate therapy.
Fig. 19.41  Positive Ziehl–Neelsen stain. Mycobacteria retain the red 
carbol fuchsin stain, despite washing with acid and alcohol. 
techniques are the Ziehl–Neelsen (Fig. 19.41) and 
rhodamine–auramine. The latter causes the tuberculous 
bacilli to fluoresce against a dark background and is 
easier to use when numerous specimens need to be 
examined; however, it is more complex and expensive, 
limiting use in resource-poor regions.
A positive smear is sufficient for the presumptive 
diagnosis of TB but definitive diagnosis requires culture. 
Smear-negative sputum should also be cultured, as only 
10–100 viable organisms are required for sputum to be 
culture-positive. A diagnosis of smear-negative TB may 
be made in advance of culture if the chest X-ray 
Respiratory disease
19
694
hepatotoxic regimens may be considered, including 
streptomycin, ethambutol and fluoroquinolone.
Corticosteroids reduce inflammation and limit tissue 
damage, and are currently recommended when treating 
pericardial or meningeal disease, and in children with 
endobronchial disease. They may confer benefit in TB of 
the ureter, pleural effusions and extensive pulmonary 
disease, and can suppress hypersensitivity drug reac-
tions. Surgery should be considered in cases compli-
cated by massive haemoptysis, loculated empyema, 
constrictive pericarditis, lymph node suppuration, and 
spinal disease with cord compression, but usually only 
after a full course of antituberculosis treatment.
The effectiveness of therapy for pulmonary TB is 
assessed by further sputum smear at 2 months and at 
5 months. Treatment failure is defined as a positive 
sputum smear or culture at 5 months or any patient 
with a multidrug resistant strain, regardless of whether 
they are smear-positive or negative. Extrapulmonary 
TB must be assessed clinically or radiographically, 
as appropriate.
Control and prevention
The World Health Organization (WHO) is committed to 
reducing the incidence of TB by 2015. Supporting the 
development of laboratory and health-care services to 
improve detection and treatment of active and latent TB 
is an important component of this goal.
Most patients can be treated at home. Admission to 
a hospital unit with appropriate isolation facilities 
should be considered where there is uncertainty about 
the diagnosis, intolerance of medication, questionable 
treatment adherence, adverse social conditions or a sig-
nificant risk of MDR-TB (culture-positive after 2 months 
on treatment, or contact with known MDR-TB).
Patients treated with rifampicin should be advised 
that their urine, tears and other secretions will develop 
a bright orange/red coloration, and women taking the 
oral contraceptive pill must be warned that its efficacy 
will be reduced and alternative contraception may 
be necessary. Ethambutol and streptomycin should 
be used with caution in renal failure, with appropriate 
dose reduction and monitoring of drug levels. Adverse 
drug reactions occur in about 10% of patients, but 
are significantly more common with HIV co-infection 
(Box 19.60).
Baseline liver function and regular monitoring are 
important for patients treated with standard therapy. 
Rifampicin may cause asymptomatic hyperbilirubin­
aemia but, along with isoniazid and pyrazinamide, may 
also cause hepatitis. Mild asymptomatic increases in 
transaminases are common but significant hepatotoxic-
ity only occurs in 2–5%. It is appropriate to stop treat-
ment and allow any symptoms to subside and the liver 
function tests (LFTs) to recover before commencing a 
stepwise re-introduction of the individual drugs. Less 
Isoniazid
Rifampicin
Pyrazinamide
Streptomycin
Ethambutol
Mode of action
Cell wall synthesis
DNA transcription
Unknown
Protein synthesis
Cell wall synthesis
Major adverse 
reactions
Peripheral 
neuropathy1
Hepatitis2
Rash
Febrile reactions
Hepatitis
Rash
Gastrointestinal 
disturbance
Hepatitis
Gastrointestinal 
disturbance
Hyperuricaemia
8th nerve damage
Rash
Retrobulbar neuritis3
Arthralgia
Less common 
adverse reactions
Lupoid reactions
Seizures
Psychoses
Interstitial nephritis
Thrombocytopenia
Haemolytic anaemia
Rash
Photosensitisation
Gout
Nephrotoxicity
Agranulocytosis
Peripheral neuropathy
Rash
1The risk may be reduced by prescribing pyridoxine. 2More common in patients with a slow acetylator status and in alcoholics. 3Reduced visual acuity and colour 
vision may be reported with higher doses and are usually reversible.
19.60  Main adverse reactions of first-line antituberculous drugs
Intensive phase
Continuation phase
Comments
Standard regimen
2 mths of HRZE
4 mths of HR
2 mths of HRZE
4 mths of HRE
Applies only in countries with high levels of isoniazid resistance in new TB patients, and 
where isoniazid drug susceptibility testing in new patients is not done (or results are 
unavailable) before the continuation phase begins
Dosing frequency
Daily*
Daily
Optimal
Daily*
3 times/wk
Acceptable alternative for any new patient receiving directly observed therapy
3 times/wk
3 times/wk
Acceptable alternative, provided that the patient is receiving directly observed therapy and is 
NOT living with HIV or living in an HIV-prevalent setting
*Daily (rather than 3 times weekly) intensive-phase dosing may help to prevent acquired drug resistance in TB patients starting treatment with isoniazid 
resistance.
19.59  Treatment of new TB patients (World Health Organization recommendations)
(H = isoniazid; R = rifampicin; Z = pyrazinamide; E = ethambutol) Adapted from WHO Treatment of Tuberculosis Guidelines, 4th edn.
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
695
tuberculin conversion has been confirmed, and babies of 
mothers with pulmonary TB. It should also be consid-
ered for HIV-infected close contacts of a patient with 
smear-positive disease. A course of rifampicin and iso-
niazid for 3 months or isoniazid for 6 months is 
effective.
Tuberculin skin testing may be associated with false-
positive reactions in those who have had a BCG vaccina-
tion and in areas where exposure to non-tuberculous 
mycobacteria is high. The skin tests may also be falsely 
negative in the setting of immunosuppression or over-
whelming infection. These limitations may be overcome 
by employing interferon-gamma release assays (IGRAs) 
(Fig. 19.43). These tests measure the release of IFN-γ 
from sensitised T cells in response to antigens, such as 
early secretory antigenic target (ESAT)-6 or culture fil-
trate protein (CFP)-10, that are encoded by genes specific 
to the MTB and are not shared with BCG or opportun-
istic mycobacteria. The greater specificity of these tests, 
combined with the logistical convenience of one blood 
test, as opposed to two visits for skin testing, suggests 
that IGRAs will replace the tuberculin skin test in low-
incidence, high-income countries.
Directly observed therapy
Poor adherence to therapy is a major factor in prolonged 
illness, risk of relapse, and the emergence of drug resist-
ance. Directly observed therapy (DOT) involves the 
supervised administration of therapy 3 times weekly to 
improve adherence. DOT has become an important 
control strategy in resource-poor nations. In the UK, it 
is currently recommended for patients thought unlikely 
to be adherent to therapy: homeless people and drifters, 
alcohol or drug users, patients with serious mental 
illness and those with a history of non-compliance.
Detection of latent TB
Contact tracing is a legal requirement in many countries. 
It has the potential to identify the probable index case, 
other cases infected by the same index patient (with or 
without evidence of disease), and close contacts who 
should receive BCG vaccination (see below) or chemo-
therapy. Approximately 10–20% of close contacts of 
patients with smear-positive pulmonary TB and 2–5% of 
those with smear-negative, culture-positive disease have 
evidence of TB infection.
Cases are commonly identified using the tuberculin 
skin test (Box 19.61 and Fig 19.42). An otherwise asymp-
tomatic contact with a positive tuberculin skin test but 
a normal chest X-ray may be treated with chemoprophy-
laxis to prevent infection from progressing to clinical 
disease. Chemoprophylaxis is also recommended for 
children aged less than 16 years identified during contact 
tracing as having a strongly positive tuberculin test, chil-
dren aged less than 2 years in close contact with smear-
positive pulmonary disease, those in whom recent 
Fig. 19.42  Gradings of the Heaf test response.  A Negative.
 B Grade 1.  C Grade 2.  D Grade 3.  E Grade 4. 
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 19.43  The principles of interferon-gamma release assays. 
A sample of either purified T cells (T-SPOT.TB® test) or whole blood 
(QuantiFERON®–TB Gold test) is incubated in the presence of antigens 
specific to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). The release of interferon-
gamma (IFN-γ) by the cells is measured by enzyme-lined immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA). (ELISPOT = enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot assay) 
Incubate in
the presence
of antigens
specific to MTB
Incubate in
the presence
of antigens
specific to MTB
Purified
T lymphocytes
IFN-γ
released
IFN-γ binds to
antibody on base
of ELISPOT wells
Spots counted
A
Whole
blood
IFN-γ
released
Supernatant
removed and
IFN-γ measured
by ELISA
B
Heaf test
• Read at 3–7 days
• Multipuncture method
Grade 1: 4–6 papules
Grade 2: Confluent papules forming ring
Grade 3: Central induration
Grade 4: > 10 mm induration
Mantoux test
• Read at 2–4 days
• 10 tuberculin units used
Positive when induration 5–14 mm (equivalent to Heaf 
grade 2) and > 15 mm (Heaf grade 3–4)
False negatives
• Severe TB (25% of cases 
negative)
• Newborn and elderly
• HIV (if CD4 count  
< 200 cells/mL)
• Malnutrition
• Recent infection (e.g. 
measles) or immunisation
• Immunosuppressive drugs
• Malignancy
• Sarcoidosis
19.61  Skin testing in TB: tests using purified 
protein derivative (PPD)
Respiratory disease
19
696
patient with smear-positive TB will remain infectious for 
an average of 2 years; in 1 year, 25% of untreated cases 
will die. Death is more likely in those who are smear-
positive and those who smoke. A few patients die unex-
pectedly soon after commencing therapy and it is 
possible that some have subclinical hypoadrenalism that 
is unmasked by a rifampicin-induced increase in steroid 
metabolism. HIV-positive patients have higher mortal-
ity rates and a modestly increased risk of relapse.
Opportunistic mycobacterial 
infection
Other species of environmental mycobacteria (often 
termed ‘atypical’) may cause human disease (Box 19.63). 
The sites commonly involved are the lungs, lymph 
nodes, skin and soft tissues. The most widely recognised 
of these mycobacteria, M. avium complex (MAC), is well 
described in severe HIV disease (CD4 count < 50 cells/
mL – p. 407). However, several others (including MAC) 
colonise and/or infect apparently immunocompetent 
patients with chronic lung diseases such as COPD, bron-
chiectasis, pneumoconiosis, old TB, or cystic fibrosis. 
The clinical presentation varies from a relatively indo-
lent course in some to an aggressive course characterised 
by cavitatory or nodular disease in others. Radiological 
appearances may be similar to classical TB, but in 
patients with bronchiectasis, opportunistic infection 
may present with lower-zone nodules. The most com-
monly reported organisms include M. kansasii, M. mal-
moense, M. xenopi and M. abscessus, but geographical 
variation is marked. M. abscessus and M. fortuitum grow 
rapidly but the majority grow slowly. More rapid diag-
nostic systems are under development, including DNA 
probes, 
high-performance 
liquid 
chromatography 
(HPLC), PCR restriction enzyme analysis (PRA) and 16S 
rRNA gene sequence analysis. With the exception of M. 
kansasii, drug sensitivity testing is usually unhelpful in 
predicting treatment response. There is usually no 
requirement for notification, as the organisms are not 
normally communicable.
TB and HIV/AIDS
The close links between HIV and TB, particularly in sub-
Saharan Africa, and the potential for both diseases to 
overwhelm health-care funding in resource-poor nations 
have been recognised, with the promotion of pro-
grammes that link detection and treatment of TB with 
detection and treatment of HIV. It is recommended that 
all patients with TB should be tested for HIV disease. 
Mortality is high and TB is a leading cause of death in 
HIV patients. Full discussion of its presentation and 
management is given on page 400.
Drug-resistant TB
Drug-resistant TB is defined by the presence of resist-
ance to any first-line agent. Multidrug-resistant TB 
(MDR-TB) is defined by resistance to at least rifampicin 
and isoniazid, with or without other drug resistance. 
Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB) is defined as 
resistance to at least rifampicin and isoniazid, in addi-
tion to any quinolone and at least one injectable second-
line agent. The prevalence of MDR-TB is rising, 
particularly in the former Soviet Union, Central Asia 
and Africa. It is more common in those with a prior 
history of TB, particularly if treatment has been inad­
equate, and those with HIV infection. Box 19.62 lists the 
factors contributing to the emergence of drug-resistant 
TB. Diagnosis is challenging, especially in developing 
countries, and although cure may be possible, it requires 
prolonged treatment with less effective, more toxic and 
more expensive therapies. The mortality rate from 
MDR-TB is high and that from XDR-TB higher still.
Vaccines
BCG (the Calmette–Guérin bacillus), a live attenuated 
vaccine derived from M. bovis, is the most established 
TB vaccine. It is administered by intradermal injection 
and is highly immunogenic. BCG appears to be effective 
in preventing disseminated disease, including tubercu-
lous meningitis, in children, but its efficacy in adults is 
inconsistent and new vaccines are urgently needed. 
Current vaccination policies vary worldwide according 
to incidence and health-care resources, but usually 
target children and other high-risk individuals. BCG is 
very safe, with the occasional complication of local 
abscess formation. It should not be administered to 
those who are immunocompromised (e.g. by HIV) or 
pregnant.
Prognosis
Following successful completion of chemotherapy, cure 
should be anticipated in the majority of patients. There 
is a small (< 5%) and unavoidable risk of relapse. Most 
relapses occur within 5 months and usually have the 
same drug susceptibility. In the absence of treatment, a 
• Drug shortages
• Poor-quality drugs
• Lack of appropriate supervision
• Transmission of drug-resistant strains
• Prior anti-tuberculosis treatment
• Treatment failure (smear-positive at 5 mths)
19.62  Factors contributing to the emergence of 
drug-resistant TB
Pulmonary
• M. xenopi
• M. kansasii
• M. malmoense
• MAC
Lymph node
• MAC
• M. malmoense
• M. fortuitum
• M. chelonei
Soft tissue/skin
• M. leprae
• M. ulcerans (prevalent in 
Africa, northern Australia 
and South-east Asia)
• M. marinum
• M. fortuitum
• M. chelonei
Disseminated
• MAC (HIV-associated)
• M. haemophilum
• M. genavense
• M. fortuitum
• M. chelonei
• BCG
(BCG = bacille Calmette–Guérin; MAC = Mycobacterium avium 
complex – M. scrofulaceum, M. intracellulare and M. avium)
19.63  Site-specific opportunistic 
mycobacterial disease
Infections of the respiratory system 
19
697
Respiratory diseases caused by fungi
The majority of fungi encountered by humans are harm-
less saprophytes but in certain circumstances (Box 19.64) 
some species may cause disease by infecting human 
tissue, promoting damaging allergic reactions or pro-
ducing toxins. ‘Mycosis’ is the term applied to disease 
caused by fungal infection.
Aspergillus species
Most cases of bronchopulmonary aspergillosis are 
caused by Aspergillus fumigatus, but other members of 
the genus (A. clavatus, A. flavus, A. niger and A. terreus) 
occasionally cause disease. The conditions associated 
with Aspergillus species are listed in Box 19.65.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) occurs 
as a result of a hypersensitivity reaction to germinating 
fungal spores in the airway wall. The condition may 
complicate the course of asthma and cystic fibrosis, and 
is a recognised cause of pulmonary eosinophilia (p. 713). 
The prevalence of ABPA is approximately 1–2% in 
asthma and 5–10% in cystic fibrosis. A variety of human 
leucocyte antigens (HLA) convey both an increased and 
a decreased risk of developing the condition, suggesting 
that genetic susceptibility is important.
Clinical features and investigations
Clinical features depend on the stage of the disease. 
Common manifestations in the early phase include 
fever, breathlessness, cough productive of bronchial 
casts, and worsening of asthmatic symptoms. The 
appearance of radiographic infiltrates may cause ABPA 
to be mistaken for pneumonia, but the diagnosis may 
also be suggested by segmental or lobar collapse on 
chest X-rays of patients whose asthma symptoms are 
stable. Diagnostic features are shown in Box 19.66 and 
the typical Aspergillus hyphae in Figure 19.44. If bron-
chiectasis develops, its symptoms and complications 
often overshadow those of asthma.
Fig. 19.44  Branching Aspergillus hyphae seen in ABPA. The figure 
shows the use of calcofluor white, a non-specific fluorochrome stain that 
binds to fungi and fluoresces when exposed to light of the appropriate 
wavelength. Aspergillus fumigatus was subsequently grown on culture. 
• Asthma (in the majority of cases)
• Proximal bronchiectasis (inner two-thirds of chest CT field)
• Positive skin test to an extract of A. fumigatus
• Elevated total serum IgE > 417 KU/L or 1000 ng/mL
• Elevated serum IgE (A. fumigatus) or IgG (A. fumigatus)
• Peripheral blood eosinophilia > 0.5 × 109/L
• Presence or history of chest X-ray abnormalities
• Fungal hyphae of A. fumigatus on microscopic examination 
of sputum
19.66  Features of allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis
• Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (asthmatic 
pulmonary eosinophilia)
• Extrinsic allergic alveolitis (Aspergillus clavatus)
• Intracavitary aspergilloma
• Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
• Chronic and subacute pulmonary aspergillosis
19.65  Classification of bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis
Systemic factors
• Diabetes mellitus
• Chronic alcoholism
• HIV
• Radiotherapy
• Corticosteroids and other 
immunosuppressant 
medication
Local factors
• Tissue damage by suppuration or necrosis
• Alteration of normal bacterial flora by antibiotic therapy
19.64  Factors predisposing to fungal disease
Management
ABPA is generally considered an indication for regular 
therapy with low-dose oral corticosteroids (prednisolone 
7.5–10 mg daily), with the aim of suppressing the 
immuno­pathological responses and preventing progres-
sive tissue damage. In some patients, itraconazole 
(400 mg/day) facilitates a reduction in oral steroids, and 
a 4-month trial is usually recommended to assess its 
efficacy. The use of specific anti-IgE monoclonal anti-
bodies is under consideration. Exacerbations, particu-
larly when associated with new chest X-ray changes, 
should be treated promptly with prednisolone 40–60 mg 
daily and physiotherapy. If persistent lobar collapse 
occurs, bronchoscopy (usually under general anaes-
thetic) should be performed to remove impacted mucus 
and ensure prompt re-inflation.
Aspergilloma
Inhaled Aspergillus may lodge and germinate in areas of 
damaged lung tissue, forming a fungal ball or ‘aspergil-
loma’. The upper lobes are most frequently involved and 
fungal balls readily form in tuberculous cavities (Fig. 
19.45). Less common causes include damage from a lung 
abscess cavity, a bronchiectatic space, pulmonary infarct, 
sarcoid, ankylosing spondylitis or even a cavitated 
tumour. The presence of multiple aspergilloma cavities 
in a diseased area of lung has been termed a ‘complex 
aspergilloma’ (see below).
Clinical features and investigations
Simple aspergillomas are often asymptomatic and are 
identified incidentally on chest X-ray. However, they 
Respiratory disease
19
698
who develops fever, new respiratory symptoms (par-
ticularly pleural pain or haemoptysis) or a pleural rub. 
Invasion of pulmonary vessels causes thrombosis and 
infarction, and systemic spread may occur to the brain, 
heart, kidneys and others organs. Tracheobronchial 
aspergillosis involvement is characterised by the forma-
tion of fungal plaques and ulceration.
HRCT 
characteristically 
shows 
macronodules 
(usually ≥ 1 cm), which may be surrounded by a ‘halo’ 
of low attenuation if captured early (< 5 days). Culture 
or histopathological evidence of Aspergillus in diseased 
tissues provides a definitive diagnosis, but the majority 
of patients are too ill for invasive tests such as broncho­
scopy or lung biopsy. Other investigations include 
detection of Aspergillus cell wall components (galacto-
mannan and β-1,3-glucan) in blood or BAL fluid and 
Aspergillus DNA by PCR. Diagnosis is often inferred 
from a combination of features (Box 19.68).
Management and prevention
IPA carries a high mortality rate, especially if treatment 
is delayed. The treatment of choice is voriconazole. 
Second-line agents include liposomal amphotericin, 
may cause recurrent haemoptysis, which may be severe 
and life-threatening. Non-specific systemic features, 
such as lethargy and weight loss, may also be reported.
The fungal ball produces a tumour-like opacity on 
X-ray, but can be distinguished from a carcinoma by the 
presence of a crescent of air between the fungal ball and 
the upper wall of the cavity. HRCT is more sensitive (see 
Fig. 19.45). Elevated serum precipitins to A. fumigatus 
are found in virtually all patients. Sputum microscopy 
typically demonstrates scanty hyphal fragments and is 
usually positive on culture. Less than half exhibit skin 
hypersensitivity to extracts of A. fumigatus. Rarely, other 
filamentous fungi can cause intracavitary mycetoma and 
are identified by culture.
Management
Asymptomatic cases do not require treatment. Specific 
antifungal therapy is of no value and steroids may pre-
dispose to invasion. Aspergillomas complicated by hae-
moptysis should be excised surgically. In those unfit for 
surgery, palliative procedures range from local instilla-
tion of amphotericin B to bronchial artery embolisation. 
The latter may be used to control haemoptysis prior to 
definitive surgery.
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) is most com-
monly a complication of profound neutropenia caused 
by drugs (especially immunosuppressants) and/or 
disease (Box 19.67).
Clinical features and investigations
Acute IPA causes a severe necrotising pneumonia and 
must be considered in any immunocompromised patient 
• Neutropenia: risk related to duration and degree
• Solid organ or allogeneic stem cell transplantation
• Prolonged high-dose corticosteroid therapy
• Leukaemia and other haematological malignancies
• Cytotoxic chemotherapy
• Advanced HIV disease
• Severe COPD
• Critically ill patients on intensive care units
• Chronic granulomatous disease
19.67  Risk factors for invasive aspergillosis
Host factors
• Recent history of neutropenia (< 0.5 × 109/L for ≥ 10 days) 
temporally related to the onset of fungal disease
• Recipient of allogeneic stem cell transplant
• Prolonged use of corticosteroids (average minimum  
0.3 mg/kg/day prednisolone or equivalent) for > 3 wks 
(excludes ABPA)
• Treatment with other recognised T-cell immune 
suppressants, such as ciclosporin, TNF-α blockers, specific 
monoclonal antibodies (e.g. alemtuzumab) or nucleoside 
analogues during the last 90 days
• Inherited severe immune deficiency, e.g. chronic 
granulomatous disease or severe combined immune 
deficiency (p. 80)
Clinical criteria2
• The presence of one of the following on CT:
1. Dense, well-circumscribed lesion(s) with or without a  
halo sign
2. Air crescent sign
3. Cavity
Tracheobronchitis
• Tracheobronchial ulceration, nodule, pseudomembrane, 
plaque or eschar seen on bronchoscopy
Mycological criteria
• Mould in sputum, BAL fluid or bronchial brush, indicated by 
one of the following:
1. Recovery of fungal elements indicating a mould of 
Aspergillus
2. Recovery by culture of a mould of Aspergillus
• Indirect tests (detection of antigen or cell wall constituents)
1. Galactomannan antigen in plasma, serum or BAL fluid
2. β-1,3-glucan detected in serum (detects other species 
of fungi, as well as Aspergillus)3
19.68  Criteria for the diagnosis of probable 
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis1
3May be useful as a 
2Must be consistent with the mycological 
1Adapted from European Organisation for Research and Treatment of 
Cancer/Mycoses Study Group. 
findings and temporally related to current episode.
preliminary screening tool for invasive aspergillosis.
Fig. 19.45  CT of aspergilloma in the left upper lobe. The rounded 
fungal ball is separated from the wall of the cavity by a ‘halo’ of air. 
Tumours of the bronchus and lung 
19
699
caspofungin or posaconazole. Response may be assessed 
clinically, radiologically and serologically (by estimation 
of the circulating galactomannan level). Recovery is 
dependent on immune reconstitution, which may be 
accompanied by enlargement and/or cavitation of pul-
monary nodules.
Patients at risk of Aspergillus (and other fungal infec-
tions) should be nursed in rooms with high-efficiency 
particulate air (HEPA) filters and laminar airflow. In 
areas with high spore counts, patients are advised to 
wear a mask if venturing outside their hospital room. 
Posaconazole (200 mg 3 times daily) or itraconazole 
(200 mg/day) may be prescribed for primary prophy-
laxis, and patients with a history of definite or probable 
IPA should be considered for secondary prophylaxis 
before further immunosuppression.
Chronic and subacute pulmonary aspergillosis
Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA) is an indolent 
non-invasive complication of chronic lung disease, such 
as COPD, tuberculosis, opportunistic mycobacterial 
disease or fibrotic lung disease. It may be associated 
with malnutrition, diabetes or liver disease and 
co-infection with opportunistic mycobacteria. CPA may 
mimic tuberculosis, resulting in its delayed diagnosis. 
Features include cough (with or without haemoptysis), 
weight loss, anorexia and fatigue over months or years, 
with associated fever, night sweats and elevated inflam-
matory markers. Radiological features include thick-
walled cavities (predominantly apical), pulmonary 
infiltrates, pleural thickening and, later, fibrosis. The 
terms chronic necrotising (CNPA), cavitary (‘complex 
aspergilloma’) and fibrosing pulmonary aspergillosis 
have been applied, depending on the predominant fea-
tures. There is overlap between CNPA and ‘subacute’ 
and ‘semi-invasive’ aspergillosis. Subacute aspergillosis 
is increasingly recognised in intensive care patients, 
especially those with COPD. The diagnosis is made by 
a combination of radiological examination, histopathol-
ogy, isolation of fungus from the respiratory tract and 
detection of Aspergillus IgG in serum. Treatment usually 
involves prolonged indefinite courses of itraconazole or 
voriconazole, but cure is unusual. The most frequent 
pattern is chronic relapse/remission with gradual deter­
ioration. Surgical intervention is fraught with complica-
tions and should be avoided.
Other fungal infections
Mucormycosis (p. 384) may present with a pulmonary 
syndrome indistinguishable clinically from acute IPA. 
Diagnosis relies on histopathology (where available) 
and/or culture of the organism from diseased tissue. 
The principles of treatment are as for other forms of 
mucormycosis: correction of predisposing factors, anti-
fungal therapy with high-dose lipid amphotericin B or 
posaconazole, and surgical débridement.
Histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis 
and cryptococcosis are discussed on pages 384–386.
TUMOURS OF THE BRONCHUS  
AND LUNG
Lung cancer is the most common cause of death from 
cancer worldwide, causing 1.4 million deaths per year 
• Strikes 900 000 men and 330 000 women each year
• Accounts for 18% of all cancer deaths
• More than a threefold increase in deaths since 1950
• Rates rising in women: female lung cancer deaths outnumber 
male in some Nordic countries
• Has overtaken breast cancer in several countries, making it 
the most common cause of cancer death in men and women
19.69  The burden of lung cancer
(Box 19.69). Tobacco use is the major preventable cause. 
Just as tobacco use and cancer rates are falling in some 
developed countries, both smoking and lung cancer are 
rising in Eastern Europe and in many developing coun-
tries. The great majority of tumours in the lung are 
primary bronchial carcinomas and, in contrast to many 
other tumours, the prognosis remains poor, with fewer 
than 30% of patients surviving at 1 year and 6–8% at 
5 years. Carcinomas of many other organs, as well as 
osteogenic and other sarcomas, may cause metastatic 
pulmonary deposits.
Primary tumours of the lung
Aetiology
Cigarette smoking is by far the most important cause of 
lung cancer. It is thought to be directly responsible for 
at least 90% of lung carcinomas, the risk being propor-
tional to the amount smoked and to the tar content of 
cigarettes. The death rate from the disease in heavy 
smokers is 40 times that in non-smokers. Risk falls 
slowly after smoking cessation, but remains above that 
in non-smokers for many years. It is estimated that 1 in 
2 smokers dies from a smoking-related disease, about 
half in middle age. The effect of ‘passive’ smoking is 
more difficult to quantify but is currently thought to be 
a factor in 5% of all lung cancer deaths. Exposure to 
naturally occurring radon is another risk. The incidence 
of lung cancer is slightly higher in urban than in rural 
dwellers, which may reflect differences in atmospheric 
pollution (including tobacco smoke) or occupation, since 
a number of industrial materials are associated with 
lung cancer (p. 266). In recent years, the strong link 
between smoking and ill health has led many Western 
governments to legislate against smoking in public 
places, and smoking prevalence and some smoking-
related diseases are already declining in these countries 
(p. 100).
Bronchial carcinoma
The incidence of bronchial carcinoma increased dramati-
cally during the 20th century as a direct result of the 
tobacco epidemic (Fig. 19.46). In women, smoking 
preva­lence and deaths from lung cancer continue to 
increase, and more women now die of lung cancer than 
breast cancer in the USA and the UK.
Pathology
Bronchial carcinomas arise from the bronchial epithe-
lium or mucous glands. The common cell types are listed 
in Box 19.70. When the tumour occurs in a large bron-
chus, symptoms arise early, but tumours originating in 
a peripheral bronchus can grow very large without 
Respiratory disease
19
700
smoker should always be investigated to exclude a 
bronchial carcinoma. Occasionally, central tumours 
invade large vessels, causing sudden massive 
haemoptysis that may be fatal.
•	 Bronchial obstruction. This is another common 
presentation, and the clinical and radiological 
manifestations (Figs 19.48 and 19.5, p. 650; Box 
19.71) depend on the site and extent of the 
obstruction, any secondary infection, and the extent 
of coexisting lung disease. Complete obstruction 
causes collapse of a lobe or lung, with 
breathlessness, mediastinal displacement and 
dullness to percussion with reduced breath sounds. 
Partial bronchial obstruction may cause a 
monophonic, unilateral wheeze that fails to clear 
producing symptoms, resulting in delayed diagnosis. 
Peripheral squamous tumours may undergo central 
necrosis and cavitation, and may resemble a lung abscess 
on X-ray (Fig. 19.47). Bronchial carcinoma may involve 
the pleura directly or by lymphatic spread, and may 
extend into the chest wall, invading the intercostal 
nerves or the brachial plexus and causing pain. Lym-
phatic spread to mediastinal and supraclavicular lymph 
nodes often occurs before diagnosis. Blood-borne metas-
tases occur most commonly in liver, bone, brain, adrenals 
and skin. Even a small primary tumour may cause wide-
spread metastatic deposits and this is a particular char-
acteristic of small-cell lung cancers.
Clinical features
Lung cancer presents in many different ways, reflecting 
local, metastatic or paraneoplastic tumour effects.
•	 Cough. This is the most common early symptom. 
It is often dry but secondary infection may cause 
purulent sputum. A change in the character of a 
smoker’s cough, particularly if associated with other 
new symptoms, should always raise suspicion of 
bronchial carcinoma.
•	 Haemoptysis. Haemoptysis is common, especially 
with central bronchial tumours. Although it may be 
caused by bronchitic infection, haemoptysis in a 
Fig. 19.46  Mortality trends from lung cancer in England and Wales, 1950–2004, by age and year of death.  A Males.  B Females. Note 
the decline in mortality from lung cancer in men towards the end of this period, reflecting a change in smoking habit. 
45–54
55–64
65–74
0
1950
Males
Rate per 100 000
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
Year
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
75–84
85 and over
45–54
55–64
65–74
0
1950
Females
Rate per 100 000
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
Year
75–84
85 and over
50
100
150
200
250
300
Cell type
%
Squamous
35
Adenocarcinoma
30
Small-cell
20
Large-cell
15
19.70  Common cell types in bronchial carcinoma
Fig. 19.47  Large cavitated bronchial carcinoma in left 
lower lobe. 
Tumours of the bronchus and lung 
19
701
with coughing, and may also impair the drainage of 
secretions to cause pneumonia or lung abscess as a 
presenting problem. Pneumonia that recurs at the 
same site or responds slowly to treatment, 
particularly in a smoker, should always suggest an 
underlying bronchial carcinoma. Stridor (a harsh 
inspiratory noise) occurs when the larynx, trachea or 
a main bronchus is narrowed by the primary tumour 
or by compression from malignant enlargement of 
the subcarinal and paratracheal lymph nodes.
•	 Breathlessness. Breathlessness may be caused by 
collapse or pneumonia, or by tumour causing a 
large pleural effusion or compressing a phrenic 
nerve and leading to diaphragmatic paralysis.
•	 Pain and nerve entrapment. Pleural pain usually 
indicates malignant pleural invasion, although it 
can occur with distal infection. Intercostal nerve 
involvement causes pain in the distribution of a 
thoracic dermatome. Carcinoma in the lung apex 
may cause Horner’s syndrome (ipsilateral partial 
ptosis, enophthalmos, miosis and hypohidrosis  
of the face – p. 1172) due to involvement of the 
sympathetic chain at or above the stellate ganglion. 
Pancoast’s syndrome (pain in the inner aspect of the 
arm, sometimes with small muscle wasting in the 
hand) indicates malignant destruction of the T1 and 
C8 roots in the lower part of the brachial plexus by 
an apical lung tumour.
•	 Mediastinal spread. Involvement of the oesophagus 
may cause dysphagia. If the pericardium is invaded, 
arrhythmia or pericardial effusion may occur. 
Superior vena cava obstruction by malignant nodes 
causes suffusion and swelling of the neck and face, 
conjunctival oedema, headache and dilated veins on 
the chest wall, and is most commonly due to 
bronchial carcinoma. Involvement of the left 
recurrent laryngeal nerve by tumours at the left 
hilum causes vocal cord paralysis, voice alteration 
and a ‘bovine’ cough (lacking the normal explosive 
character). Supraclavicular lymph nodes may be 
palpably enlarged or identified using ultrasound; if 
so, a needle aspirate may provide a simple means 
of cytological diagnosis.
•	 Metastatic spread. This may lead to focal neurological 
defects, epileptic seizures, personality change, 
jaundice, bone pain or skin nodules. Lassitude, 
anorexia and weight loss usually indicate metastatic 
spread.
•	 Finger clubbing. Overgrowth of the soft tissue of 
the terminal phalanx, leading to increased nail 
curvature and nail bed fluctuation, is often seen  
(p. 644).
•	 Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (HPOA). 
This is a painful periostitis of the distal tibia, fibula, 
radius and ulna, with local tenderness and 
sometimes pitting oedema over the anterior shin. 
X-rays reveal subperiosteal new bone formation. 
While most frequently associated with bronchial 
carcinoma, HPOA can occur with other tumours.
•	 Non-metastatic extrapulmonary effects (Box 19.72). 
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone secretion (SIADH, p. 438) and ectopic 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone secretion (p. 774) are 
usually associated with small-cell lung cancer. 
Hypercalcaemia may indicate malignant bone 
Fig. 19.48  Collapse of the right lung: effects on neighbouring 
structures.  A Chest X-ray.  B The typical abnormalities are 
highlighted. 
A
B
Compensatory 
emphysema
of left lung
Site of 
obstruction of
right main bronchus
Displacement of 
trachea, heart and other 
mediastinal
structures to the right
Position of elevated
right hemidiaphragm 
(not seen on chest X-ray)
Common
• Bronchial carcinoma or adenoma
• Enlarged tracheobronchial lymph nodes (malignant or 
tuberculous)
• Inhaled foreign bodies (especially right lung)
• Bronchial casts or plugs consisting of inspissated mucus or 
blood clot (especially asthma, cystic fibrosis, haemoptysis, 
debility)
• Collections of mucus or mucopus retained in the bronchi as a 
result of ineffective expectoration (especially postoperative 
following abdominal surgery)
Rare
• Aortic aneurysm
• Giant left atrium
• Pericardial effusion
• Congenital bronchial atresia
• Fibrous bronchial stricture (e.g. following tuberculosis or 
bronchial surgery/lung transplant)
19.71  Causes of large bronchus obstruction
Respiratory disease
19
702
destruction or production of hormone-like peptides 
by a tumour. Associated neurological syndromes 
may occur with any type of bronchial carcinoma.
Investigations
The main aims of investigation are to confirm the diag-
nosis, establish the histological cell type and define the 
extent of the disease.
Imaging
Bronchial carcinoma produces a range of appearances 
on chest X-ray, from lobar collapse (see Fig. 19.5, p. 650) 
to mass lesions, effusion or malignant rib destruction 
(Fig. 19.49 and Box 19.73). CT should be performed early 
as it may reveal mediastinal or metastatic spread and is 
helpful for planning biopsy procedures: for example, in 
establishing whether a tumour is accessible by bron-
choscopy or percutaneous CT-guided biopsy.
Biopsy and histopathology
Around three-quarters of primary lung tumours can be 
visualised and sampled directly by biopsy and brushing 
using a flexible bronchoscope. Bronchoscopy also allows 
an assessment of operability, from the proximity of 
central tumours to the main carina (Fig. 19.50).
For tumours which are too peripheral to be accessible 
by bronchoscope, the yield of ‘blind’ bronchoscopic 
washings and brushings from the radiologically affected 
area is low, and percutaneous needle biopsy under CT 
or ultrasound guidance is a more reliable way to obtain 
a histological diagnosis. There is a small risk of iatro-
genic pneumothorax, which may preclude the proce-
dure if there is extensive coexisting COPD. In patients 
who are unfit for invasive investigation, sputum cytol-
ogy can reveal malignant cells (Fig. 19.51), although the 
yield is low.
In patients with pleural effusions, pleural aspiration 
and biopsy is the preferred investigation. Where facili-
ties exist, thoracoscopy increases yield by allowing tar-
geted biopsies under direct vision. In patients with 
metastatic disease, the diagnosis can often be confirmed 
Endocrine (Ch. 20)
• Inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion causing 
hyponatraemia
• Ectopic adrenocorticotrophic hormone secretion
• Hypercalcaemia due to secretion of parathyroid hormone-
related peptides
• Carcinoid syndrome (p. 889)
• Gynaecomastia
Neurological (Ch. 26)
• Polyneuropathy
• Myelopathy
• Cerebellar degeneration
• Myasthenia (Lambert–Eaton syndrome, p. 1227)
Other
• Digital clubbing
• Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Polymyositis and dermatomyositis
• Eosinophilia
19.72  Non-metastatic extrapulmonary 
manifestations of bronchial carcinoma
Fig. 19.49  Common radiological presentations of bronchial 
carcinoma. See Box 19.73 for details. 
2
5
6
7
4
3
8
1
1  Unilateral hilar enlargement
• Central tumour. Hilar glandular involvement. However, a 
peripheral tumour in the apical segment of a lower lobe can 
look like an enlarged hilar shadow on the PA X-ray
2  Peripheral pulmonary opacity (p. 660)
• Usually irregular but well circumscribed, and may contain 
irregular cavitation. Can be very large
3  Lung, lobe or segmental collapse
• Usually caused by tumour within the bronchus, leading to 
occlusion. Lung collapse may be due to compression of the 
main bronchus by enlarged lymph glands
4  Pleural effusion
• Usually indicates tumour invasion of pleural space; very 
rarely, a manifestation of infection in collapsed lung tissue 
distal to a bronchial carcinoma
5–7 Broadening of mediastinum, enlarged cardiac shadow, 
elevation of a hemidiaphragm
• Paratracheal lymphadenopathy may cause widening of the 
upper mediastinum. A malignant pericardial effusion will 
cause enlargement of the cardiac shadow. If a raised 
hemidiaphragm is caused by phrenic nerve palsy, screening 
will show it to move paradoxically upwards when patient 
sniffs
8  Rib destruction
• Direct invasion of the chest wall or blood-borne metastatic 
spread can cause osteolytic lesions of the ribs
19.73  Common radiological presentations of 
bronchial carcinoma
by needle aspiration or biopsy of affected lymph nodes, 
skin lesions, liver or bone marrow.
Staging to guide treatment
The propensity of small-cell lung cancer to metastasise 
early dictates that patients with this are usually not 
suitable for surgical intervention. In patients with 
non-small-cell cancer, appropriate treatment and prog-
nosis are determined by disease extent, so careful staging 
is required. CT scanning is used early to detect obvious 
local or distant spread. Enlarged upper mediastinal 
nodes may be sampled using a bronchoscope equipped 
with endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) or by media­
stinoscopy. Nodes in the lower mediastinum can be 
Tumours of the bronchus and lung 
19
703
Fig. 19.50  Bronchoscopic view of a bronchogenic carcinoma. 
There is distortion of mucosal folds, partial occlusion of the airway lumen 
and abnormal tumour tissue. 
sampled through the oesophageal wall using endoscopic 
ultrasound. Combined CT and PET imaging (see Fig. 
19.6, p. 651) is used increasingly to detect metabolically 
active tumour metastases. Head CT, radionuclide bone 
scanning, liver ultrasound and bone marrow biopsy are 
generally reserved for patients with clinical, haemato-
logical or biochemical evidence of tumour spread to 
these sites. Information on tumour size and nodal and 
metastatic spread is then collated to assign the patient 
to one of seven staging groups that determine optimal 
management and prognosis (Fig. 19.52). Detailed physio­
logical testing is required to assess whether the patient’s 
respiratory and cardiac function is sufficient to allow 
aggressive treatment.
Management
Surgical resection carries the best hope of long-term sur-
vival, but some patients treated with radical radiother-
apy and chemotherapy also achieve prolonged remission 
or cure. Unfortunately, in over 75% of cases, treatment 
with the aim of cure is not possible, or is inappropriate 
due to extensive spread or comorbidity. Such patients 
are offered palliative therapy and best supportive care. 
Radiotherapy and in some cases chemotherapy can 
relieve distressing symptoms.
Surgical treatment
Accurate pre-operative staging, coupled with improve-
ments in surgical and post-operative care, now offers 
5-year survival rates of over 75% in stage I disease 
(N0, tumour confined within visceral pleura) and 
55% in stage II disease, which includes resection in 
patients with ipsilateral peribronchial or hilar node 
involvement.
Radiotherapy
While much less effective than surgery, radical radio-
therapy can offer long-term survival in selected patients 
with localised disease in whom comorbidity precludes 
surgery. Radical radiotherapy is usually combined with 
chemotherapy when lymph nodes are involved (stage III). 
Highly targeted (stereotactic) radiotherapy may be given 
in 3–5 treatments for small lesions.
The greatest value of radiotherapy, however, is in the 
palliation of distressing complications, such as superior 
Fig. 19.51  Sputum sample showing a cluster of carcinoma cells. 
There is keratinisation, with orangeophilia of the cytoplasm. Non-
keratinised forms are also seen. The nuclei are large and ‘coal-black’ in 
density. These features suggest squamous cell bronchogenic carcinoma. 
Fig. 19.52  Tumour stage and 5-year survival in non-small cell lung cancer. The figure shows the relationship between tumour extent (size, 
lymph node status and metastases) and average prognosis (% survival at 5 years for each clinical stage). Adapted from Detterbeck 2009 - see p. 732.
N2
(Ipsilateral mediastinal
or subcarinal)
N1
(Ipsilateral hilar)
N0
(None)
T1 (<3 cm)
T2a (3–5 cm)
T2b (5–7 cm)
T3 (>7 cm)
Ia (50%)
IIa (36%)
IIIa (19%)
IIIb (7%)
IIIb (7%)
IV (2%)
IIIa (19%)
Ib (43%)
IIa (36%)
IIb (25%)
IIb (25%)
IIIa (19%)
T4 (Invading heart,
vessels, oesophagus,
carina etc.)
M1 Metastases present
N3
(Contralateral or
supraclavicular)
Lymph node spread
Tumour stage
Respiratory disease
19
704
bronchoscopic laser treatment to clear tumour tissue 
and allow re-aeration of collapsed lung. The best 
results are achieved in tumours of the main bronchi. 
Endobronchial stents can be used to maintain airway 
patency in the face of extrinsic compression by malig-
nant nodes.
General aspects of management
The best outcomes are obtained when lung cancer is 
managed in specialist centres by multidisciplinary 
teams, including oncologists, thoracic surgeons, respira-
tory physicians and specialist nurses. Effective commu-
nication, pain relief and attention to diet are important. 
Lung tumours can cause clinically significant depression 
and anxiety, and these may need specific therapy. The 
management of non-metastatic endocrine manifesta-
tions is described in Chapter 20. When a malignant 
pleural effusion is present, an attempt should be made 
to drain the pleural cavity using an intercostal drain; 
provided the lung fully re-expands, pleurodesis with a 
sclerosing agent such as talc should be performed to 
prevent recurrent effusion.
Prognosis
The overall prognosis in bronchial carcinoma is very 
poor, with around 70% of patients dying within a year 
of diagnosis and only 6–8% of patients surviving 5 years 
after diagnosis. The best prognosis is with well-
differentiated squamous cell tumours that have not 
metastasised and are amenable to surgical resection. The 
clinical features and prognosis of some less common 
benign and malignant lung tumours are given in 
Box 19.74.
Secondary tumours of the lung
Blood-borne metastatic deposits in the lungs may be 
derived from many primary tumours, in particular those 
of the breast, kidney, uterus, ovary, testes and thyroid. 
The secondary deposits are usually multiple and bilat-
eral. Often there are no respiratory symptoms and 
the diagnosis is made on radiological examination. 
Breathlessness may occur if a considerable amount of 
lung tissue has been replaced by metastatic tumour. 
vena cava obstruction, recurrent haemoptysis, and pain 
caused by chest wall invasion or by skeletal metastatic 
deposits. Obstruction of the trachea and main bronchi 
can also be relieved temporarily. Radiotherapy can be 
used in conjunction with chemotherapy in the treatment 
of small-cell carcinoma, and is particularly efficient at 
preventing the development of brain metastases in 
patients who have had a complete response to chemo-
therapy (p. 277).
Chemotherapy
The treatment of small-cell carcinoma with combina-
tions of cytotoxic drugs, sometimes in combination with 
radiotherapy, can increase the median survival from 
3 months to well over a year. The use of combinations 
of chemotherapeutic drugs requires considerable skill 
and should be overseen by teams of clinical oncologists 
and specialist nurses. Combination chemotherapy leads 
to better outcomes than single-agent treatment. Regular 
cycles of therapy, including combinations of intra­venous 
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and vincristine or intra-
venous cisplatin and etoposide, are commonly used. In 
general, chemotherapy is less effective in non-small-cell 
bronchial cancers. However, studies in such patients 
using platinum-based chemotherapy regimens have 
shown a 30% response rate associated with a small 
increase in survival. Some non-small-cell lung tumours, 
particularly adenocarcinomas, carry detectable muta-
tions in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
gene. Patients with these mutations are particularly 
responsive to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and 
erlotinib.
In non-small-cell carcinoma, there is some evidence 
that chemotherapy given before surgery may increase 
survival and can effectively ‘down-stage’ disease with 
limited nodal spread. Post-operative chemotherapy is 
now proven to enhance survival rates when operative 
samples show nodal involvement by tumour.
Nausea and vomiting are common side-effects of 
chemotherapy and are best treated with 5-HT3 receptor 
antagonists (p. 289).
Laser therapy and stenting
Palliation of symptoms caused by major airway 
obstruction can be achieved in selected patients using 
Tumour
Status
Histology
Typical presentation
Prognosis
Adenosquamous 
carcinoma
Malignant
Tumours with areas of 
unequivocal squamous and 
adeno-differentiation
Peripheral or central 
lung mass
Stage-dependent
Neuro-endocrine 
(carcinoid) 
tumour (p. 784)
Low-grade malignant
Neuroendocrine 
differentiation
Bronchial obstruction, 
cough
95% 5-yr survival with 
resection
Bronchial gland 
adenoma
Benign
Salivary gland differentiation
Tracheobronchial 
irritation/obstruction
Local resection curative
Bronchial gland 
carcinoma
Low-grade malignant
Salivary gland differentiation
Tracheobronchial 
irritation/obstruction
Local recurrence occurs
Hamartoma
Benign
Mesenchymal cells, cartilage
Peripheral lung nodule
Local resection curative
Bronchoalveolar 
carcinoma
Malignant
Tumour cells line alveolar 
spaces
Alveolar shadowing, 
productive cough
Variable, worse if multifocal
19.74  Rare types of lung tumour
Tumours of the bronchus and lung 
19
705
Benign tumours and cysts in the mediastinum are 
often diagnosed when a chest X-ray is undertaken for 
some other reason. In general, they do not invade vital 
structures but may cause symptoms by compressing the 
trachea or the superior vena cava. A dermoid cyst may 
very occasionally rupture into a bronchus.
Malignant mediastinal tumours are distinguished by 
their power to invade as well as compress surrounding 
structures. As a result, even a small malignant tumour 
can produce symptoms, although more commonly the 
tumour has attained a considerable size before this 
happens (Box 19.76). The most common cause is medi-
astinal lymph node metastases from bronchogenic car-
cinoma, but lymphomas, leukaemia, malignant thymic 
tumours and germ-cell tumours can cause similar fea-
tures. Aortic and innominate aneurysms have destruc-
tive features resembling those of malignant mediastinal 
tumours.
Endobronchial deposits are uncommon but can cause 
haem­optysis and lobar collapse.
Lymphatic infiltration may develop in patients with 
carcinoma of the breast, stomach, bowel, pancreas or 
bronchus. ‘Lymphangitic carcinomatosis’ causes severe 
and rapidly progressive breathlessness associated with 
marked hypoxaemia. The chest X-ray shows diffuse pul-
monary shadowing radiating from the hilar regions, 
often associated with septal lines, and CT demonstrates 
characteristic polygonal thickened interlobular septa. 
Palliation of breathlessness with opiates may help 
(p. 289).
Tumours of the mediastinum
Figure 19.53 shows the four major compartments of the 
mediastinum, and Box 19.75 lists likely causes of a medi-
astinal mass in each location.
Fig. 19.53  The divisions of the mediastinum. (1) Superior mediastinum. (2) Anterior mediastinum. (3) Middle mediastinum. (4) Posterior 
mediastinum. Sites of the more common mediastinal tumours are also illustrated. From Johnson 1986 – see p. 732.
1
3
2
4
Lower border of
4th thoracic vertebra
Lymphoid masses
Neurogenic tumour
Retrosternal thyroid
Thymus
Lower border of
manubrium sterni
Teratoma
Dermoid
Pleuropericardial cyst
Superior mediastinum
• Retrosternal goitre
• Persistent left superior 
vena cava
• Prominent left subclavian 
artery
• Thymic tumour
• Dermoid cyst
• Lymphoma
• Aortic aneurysm
Anterior mediastinum
• Retrosternal goitre
• Dermoid cyst
• Thymic tumour
• Lymphoma
• Aortic aneurysm
• Germ cell tumour
• Pericardial cyst
• Hiatus hernia through the 
diaphragmatic foramen of 
Morgagni
Posterior mediastinum
• Neurogenic tumour
• Paravertebral abscess
• Oesophageal lesion
• Aortic aneurysm
• Foregut duplication
Middle mediastinum
• Bronchial carcinoma
• Lymphoma
• Sarcoidosis
• Bronchogenic cyst
• Hiatus hernia
19.75  Causes of a mediastinal mass
Trachea and main bronchi
• Stridor, breathlessness, cough, pulmonary collapse
Oesophagus
• Dysphagia, oesophageal displacement or obstruction on 
barium swallow examination
Phrenic nerve
• Diaphragmatic paralysis
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
• Paralysis of left vocal cord with hoarseness and ‘bovine’ 
cough
Sympathetic trunk
• Horner’s syndrome
Superior vena cava
• SVC obstruction: non-pulsatile distension of neck veins, 
subconjunctival oedema, and oedema and cyanosis of  
head, neck, hands and arms. Dilated anastomotic veins  
on chest wall
Pericardium
• Pericarditis and/or pericardial effusion
19.76  Clinical features of malignant 
mediastinal invasion
Respiratory disease
19
706
share a sufficient number of clinical physiological and 
radiographic similarities (Box 19.77). The current clas-
sification is shown in Figure 19.55 and the potential dif-
ferential diagnoses in Box 19.78. They often present with 
a cough that is typically dry and distressing, and breath-
lessness that is frequently insidious in onset but thereaf-
ter relentlessly progressive. Physical examination reveals 
the presence of inspiratory crackles and in many cases 
digital clubbing develops. Pulmonary function tests 
typically show a restrictive ventilatory defect in the pres-
ence of small lung volumes and reduced gas transfer. 
The typical radiographic findings include ground glass 
and reticulonodular shadowing in the earliest stages, 
with progression to honeycomb cysts and traction bron-
chiectasis. Whilst these appearances may be seen on a 
‘plain’ chest X-ray, they are most easily appreciated on 
HRCT, which has assumed a central role in the evalua-
tion of DPLD (Fig. 19.56).
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
The idiopathic interstitial pneumonias represent a major 
subgroup of DPLDs that are grouped together because 
Investigations
A benign mediastinal tumour generally appears on chest 
X-ray as a sharply circumscribed mediastinal opacity 
encroaching on one or both lung fields (Fig. 19.54). CT 
(or MRI) is the investigation of choice for mediastinal 
tumours (e.g. see Fig. 20.11B, p. 753). A malignant medi-
astinal tumour seldom has a clearly defined margin 
and often presents as a general broadening of the 
mediastinum.
Bronchoscopy may reveal a primary bronchial carci-
noma causing mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Endo-
bronchial ultrasound may be used to guide sampling of 
peribronchial masses. The posterior mediastinum can be 
imaged and biopsied via the oesophagus using endo-
scopic ultrasound (p. 651).
Mediastinoscopy under general anaesthetic can be 
used to visualise and biopsy masses in the superior and 
anterior mediastinum, but surgical exploration of the 
chest, with removal of part or all of the tumour, is often 
required to obtain a histological diagnosis.
Management
Benign mediastinal tumours should be removed surgi-
cally because most produce symptoms sooner or later. 
Cysts may become infected, while neural tumours have 
the potential to undergo malignant transformation. The 
operative mortality is low in the absence of coexisting 
cardiovascular disease, COPD or extreme age.
INTERSTITIAL AND INFILTRATIVE 
PULMONARY DISEASES
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease
The diffuse parenchymal lung diseases (DPLDs) are a 
heterogeneous group of conditions affecting the pulmo-
nary parenchyma (interstitium) and/or alveolar lumen, 
which are frequently considered collectively as they 
Fig. 19.54  Intrathoracic goitre (arrows) extending from right 
upper mediastinum. 
Clinical presentation
• Cough: usually dry, persistent and distressing
• Breathlessness: usually slowly progressive; insidious onset; 
acute in some cases
Examination findings
• Crackles: typically bilateral and basal
• Clubbing: common in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis but also 
seen in other types, e.g. asbestosis
• Central cyanosis and signs of right heart failure in advanced 
disease
Radiology
• Chest X-ray: typically small lung volumes with reticulonodular 
shadowing but may be normal in early or limited disease
• HRCT: combinations of ground glass changes, reticulonodular 
shadowing, honeycomb cysts and traction bronchiectasis, 
depending on stage of disease
Pulmonary function
• Typically restrictive ventilatory defect with reduced lung 
volumes and impaired gas transfer; exercise tests assess 
exercise tolerance and exercise-related fall in SaO2
19.77  Features common to the diffuse 
parenchymal lung diseases
Infection
• Viral pneumonia
• Pneumocystis jirovecii
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae
• Tuberculosis
• Parasite, e.g. filariasis
• Fungal infection
Malignancy
• Leukaemia and lymphoma
• Lymphatic carcinomatosis
• Multiple metastases
• Bronchoalveolar  
carcinoma
Pulmonary oedema
Aspiration pneumonitis
19.78  Conditions that mimic diffuse parenchymal 
lung disease
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases
19
707
or connective tissue diseases, which must be excluded 
by careful history, examination and investigation.
The histological features of the condition are sugges-
tive of repeated episodes of focal damage to the alveolar 
epithelium consistent with an autoimmune process but 
the aetiology remains elusive; speculation has included 
exposure to viruses (e.g. Epstein–Barr virus), occupa-
tional dusts (metal or wood), drugs (antidepressants) or 
chronic gastro-oesophageal reflux. Familial cases are 
rare but genetic factors that control the inflammatory 
and fibrotic response are likely to be important. There is 
a strong association with cigarette smoking.
Clinical features
IPF usually presents in the older adult and is uncommon 
before the age of 50 years. With the advent of 
Fig. 19.56  Algorithm for the investigation of patients with interstitial lung disease following initial clinical and chest X-ray examination. 
Clinical assessment including chest X-ray, pulmonary function tests, haematology,
biochemical and immunological investigations
Appearances consistent
with another diffuse
parenchymal lung disease,
e.g. sarcoid
Inconsistent clinical or
CT appearances
Appearances consistent
with usual interstitial
pneumonia
High-resolution CT
Further investigations, e.g.
bronchoalveolar lavage,
transbronchial biopsy,
surgical biopsy
Diagnose idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis
Diagnose and treat
accordingly
Fig. 19.55  Classification of diffuse parenchymal lung disease. 
DPLD of known cause,
e.g. drugs or association
with connective tissue
disease
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease (DPLD)
Idiopathic interstitial
pneumonia
Granulomatous DPLD,
e.g. sarcoidosis
Other forms of DPLD, e.g.
lymphangioleiomyomatosis,
histiocytosis X etc.
Idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis
Idiopathic interstitial
pneumonia other
than idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis
Desquamative interstitial
pneumonia
Respiratory bronchiolitis
interstitial lung disease
Acute interstitial
pneumonia
Cryptogenic organising
pneumonia
Non-specific interstitial
pneumonia
Lymphocytic interstitial
pneumonia
of their unknown aetiology (Box 19.79). They are often 
distinguished by the predominant histological pattern 
on tissue biopsy; hence they are frequently referred 
to by their pathological description – for example, 
usual interstitial pneumonia or non-specific interstitial 
pneumonia. The most important of these is idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is defined as a pro-
gressive fibrosing interstitial pneumonia of unknown 
cause, occurring in adults and associated with the histo-
logical or radiological pattern of usual interstitial pneu-
monia (UIP). Important differentials include fibrosing 
diseases caused by occupational exposure, medication 
Respiratory disease
19
708
encountered in IPF (Fig. 19.58). However, it is also found 
in asbestosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, connective 
tissue diseases and drug reactions.
It is not uncommon to identify mildly positive anti-
nuclear antibodies or anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide 
(anti-CCP), in which case repeat serological testing 
should be performed, as lung disease may precede the 
appearance of connective tissue disease.
widespread CT scanning, it may present as an incidental 
finding in an otherwise asymptomatic individual but 
more typically presents with progressive breathlessness 
(which may have been insidious) and a non-productive 
cough. Constitutional symptoms are unusual. Clinical 
findings include finger clubbing and the presence of 
bi-basal fine late inspiratory crackles likened to the 
unfastening of Velcro.
Investigations
These are summarised in Box 19.80. Established IPF will 
be apparent on chest X-ray as bilateral lower lobe and 
subpleural reticular shadowing. However, the chest 
X-ray may be normal in individuals with early or limited 
disease. HRCT typically demonstrates a patchy, pre-
dominantly peripheral, subpleural and basal reticular 
pattern and, in more advanced disease, the presence of 
honeycombing cysts and traction bronchiectasis (Fig. 
19.57). When these features are present, HRCT has a 
high positive predictive value for the diagnosis of IPF 
and recourse to biopsy is seldom necessary. HRCT 
appearances may also be sufficiently characteristic to 
suggest an alternative diagnosis such as hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (p. 719) or sarcoidosis (p. 709). The pres-
ence of pleural plaques may suggest asbestosis (p. 718).
Pulmonary function tests classically show a restric-
tive defect with reduced lung volumes and gas transfer. 
However, lung volumes may be preserved in patients 
with concomitant emphysema. Dynamic tests are 
useful to document exercise tolerance and demonstrate 
exercise-induced arterial hypoxaemia, but as IPF 
advances, arterial hypoxaemia and hypocapnia are 
present at rest.
Bronchoscopy is seldom necessary unless there is a 
significant possibility of infection or a malignant process; 
lymphocytosis may suggest chronic hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis. The tissue samples obtained by transbron-
chial lung biopsy are invariably insufficient to be of 
value and, if tissue is required, a surgical lung biopsy 
should be performed. Lung biopsy should be considered 
in cases of diagnostic uncertainty or with atypical fea-
tures. UIP is the histological pattern predominantly 
Laboratory investigations
• Full blood count: lymphopenia in sarcoid; eosinophilia in 
pulmonary eosinophilias and drug reactions; neutrophilia in 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis
• Ca2+: may be elevated in sarcoid
• Lactate dehydrogenase: may be elevated in active alveolitis
• Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme: non-specific indicator 
of disease activity in sarcoid
• ESR and CRP: non-specifically raised
• Autoimmune screen: anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide 
(anti-CCP) and other autoantibodies may suggest connective 
tissue disease
Radiology (see Box 19.77)
Pulmonary function (see Box 19.77)
Bronchoscopy
• Bronchoalveolar lavage: differential cell counts may point to 
sarcoid and drug-induced pneumonitis, pulmonary 
eosinophilias, hypersensitivity pneumonitis or cryptogenic 
organising pneumonia; useful to exclude infection
• Transbronchial biopsy: useful in sarcoid and differential of 
malignancy or infection
• Bronchial biopsy: occasionally useful in sarcoid
Video-assisted thorascopic lung biopsy (in selected cases)
• Allows pathological classification: presence of asbestos 
bodies may suggest asbestosis, silica in occupational 
fibrosing lung disease
Others
• Liver biopsy: may be useful in sarcoidosis
• Urinary calcium excretion: may be useful in sarcoidosis
19.80  Investigations in diffuse parenchymal 
lung disease
Clinical diagnosis
Notes
Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP)
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis – see text
Non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP)
See page 709
Respiratory bronchiolitis–interstitial lung 
disease
More common in men and smokers. Usually presents at age 40–60 yrs. Smoking 
cessation may lead to improvement. Natural history unclear
Acute interstitial pneumonia
Often preceded by viral upper respiratory tract infection. Severe exertional dyspnoea, 
widespread pneumonic consolidation and diffuse alveolar damage on biopsy. Prognosis 
often poor
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP)
More common in men and smokers. Presents at age 40–60 yrs. Insidious onset of 
dyspnoea. Clubbing in 50%. Biopsy shows increased macrophages in alveolar space, 
septal thickening and type II pneumocyte hyperplasia. Prognosis generally good
Cryptogenic organising pneumonia 
(‘bronchiolitis obliterans organising 
pneumonia’ – BOOP)
Presents as clinical and radiological pneumonia. Systemic features and markedly 
raised ESR common. Finger clubbing absent. Biopsy shows florid proliferation of 
immature collagen (Masson bodies) and fibrous tissue. Response to corticosteroids 
classically excellent
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (LIP)
More common in women, slow onset over years. Investigate for associations with 
connective tissue disease or HIV. Unclear whether corticosteroids helpful
19.79  Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases
19
709
Fig. 19.57  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.  A Chest X-ray showing 
bilateral, predominantly lower-zone and peripheral coarse reticulonodular 
shadowing and small lungs.  B The CT scan shows honeycombing and 
scarring which is most marked peripherally. 
A
B
Fig. 19.58  Pathology of usual 
interstitial pneumonia.  A Lung tissue 
showing subpleural scarring, most 
prominently down the posterior edge of  
the lower lobe. This distribution of fibrosis 
is typical of usual interstitial pneumonitis. 
The fibrosis may be associated with 
prominent cystic change known as 
‘honeycomb lung’.  B Histology showing 
severe interstitial fibrosis with loss of the 
normal alveolar architecture and the 
development of ‘honeycomb’ cysts. 
A
B
Management and prognosis
Treatment is difficult. Although the combination of 
prednisolone, azathioprine and N-acetylcysteine had 
shown some promise, large studies suggest that it is 
mostly ineffective. Disappointing results have also been 
reported for trials of colchicine, interferon-γ 1b, bosentan 
and etanercept. Subject to further investigation, pirfeni-
done may slow the rate of decline of lung function and, 
by inference, improve mortality. It remains sensible to 
treat gastro-oesophageal reflux and to look for and treat 
pulmonary hypertension but, where possible, treatment 
with experimental agents outside clinical trials should 
not be tried. Where appropriate, lung transplantation 
should be considered. Oxygen may help breathlessness 
but opiates may be required to relieve severe dyspnoea. 
The optimum treatment for acute exacerbations is 
unknown but corticosteroids should probably be used.
The natural history is usually one of steady decline 
but some patients are prone to exacerbations, which are 
accompanied by an acute deterioration in breathless-
ness, disturbed gas exchange, and new ground glass 
changes or consolidation on HRCT. In advanced disease, 
central cyanosis is detectable and patients may develop 
features of right heart failure. A median survival of 
3 years is widely quoted; however, the rate of disease 
progression varies considerably, from death within a 
few months to survival with minimal symptoms for 
many years. Serial lung function testing may provide 
useful prognostic information, with relative preserva-
tion of lung function suggesting longer survival, and 
significantly impaired gas transfer and/or desaturation 
on exercise heralding a poorer prognosis. The finding of 
high numbers of fibroblastic foci on biopsy suggests a 
more rapid deterioration. IPF is associated with an 
increased risk of carcinoma of the lung.
Non-specific interstitial pneumonia
The clinical picture of fibrotic non-specific interstitial 
pneumonia (NSIP) is similar to that of IPF, although 
patients tend to be women and younger in age. As with 
UIP, the condition may present as an isolated idiopathic 
pulmonary condition, but an NSIP pattern is often asso-
ciated with connective tissue disease, certain drugs, 
chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis and HIV infection; 
care must be taken to identify these possibilities, as the 
pulmonary condition may precede the appearance of 
connective tissue disease. HRCT findings are less spe-
cific than with IPF and lung biopsy may be required. The 
prognosis is significantly better than that of IPF, particu-
larly in the cellular form of the condition, and the 5-year 
mortality rate is typically less than 15%.
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disorder 
of unknown aetiology characterised by the presence of 
non-caseating granulomas (Fig. 19.59). It is more often 
described in colder parts of northern Europe. It also 
appears to be more common and more severe in those 
Respiratory disease
19
710
supported by familial clustering; a range of class II HLA 
alleles confer protection from or susceptibility to the 
condition. Sarcoidosis occurs less frequently in smokers.
Clinical features
Sarcoidosis is considered with other DPLDs, as over 90% 
of cases affect the lungs, but the condition can involve 
almost any organ (Fig. 19.60 and Box 19.81). Löfgren’s 
syndrome – an acute illness characterised by erythema 
nodosum, peripheral arthropathy, uveitis, bilateral hilar 
lymphadenopathy (BHL), lethargy and occasionally 
fever – is often seen in young women. Alternatively, 
BHL may be detected in an otherwise asymptomatic 
individual undergoing a chest X-ray for other purposes. 
from a West Indian or Asian background, while Eskimos, 
Arabs and Chinese are rarely affected. The tendency 
for sarcoid to present in spring and summer has led 
to speculation about the role of infective agents, includ-
ing mycobacteria, propionibacteria and viruses, but 
the cause remains elusive. Genetic susceptibility is 
Fig. 19.59  Sarcoidosis of the lung. Histology showing non-caseating 
granulomas (arrows). 
Fig. 19.60  Possible systemic involvement in sarcoidosis. Inset (Erythema nodosum) From Savin et al. 1997 – see p. 732. 
Parotid gland enlargement
Pachymeningitis
Space-occupying lesion
Diabetes insipidus
Anterior uveitis
Sicca syndrome
Lymphadenopathy
Bilateral hilar
lymphadenopathy (BHL)
Cardiac arrhythmia
Heart block, sudden death
Splenomegaly
Nephrocalcinosis
Hypercalciuria
Renal stones
Arthropathies
Osteoporosis
Arthropathies
Osteoporosis
Mononeuritis multiplex
Peripheral neuropathy
Skin plaques and nodules
Infiltration of scars
Granulomatous liver disease
Phalangeal bone cysts
Lacrimal gland enlargement
Cranial nerve palsy
Interstitial lung disease
Nasal cutaneous sarcoid
lesions (lupus pernio)
Erythema nodosum
• Asymptomatic: abnormal routine chest X-ray (~30%) or 
abnormal liver function tests
• Respiratory and constitutional symptoms (20–30%)
• Erythema nodosum and arthralgia (20–30%)
• Ocular symptoms (5–10%)
• Skin sarcoid (including lupus pernio) (5%)
• Superficial lymphadenopathy (5%)
• Other (1%), e.g. hypercalcaemia, diabetes insipidus, cranial 
nerve palsies, cardiac arrhythmias, nephrocalcinosis
19.81  Presentation of sarcoidosis
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases
19
711
Pulmonary disease may also present in a more insidious 
manner with cough, exertional breathlessness and radio-
graphic infiltrates; chest auscultation is often unremark-
able. Fibrosis occurs in 20% of cases of pulmonary 
sarcoidosis and may cause a silent loss of lung function. 
Pleural disease is uncommon and finger clubbing not a 
feature. Complications such as bronchiectasis, aspergil-
loma, pneumothorax, pulmonary hypertension and cor 
pulmonale have been reported but are rare.
Investigations
Lymphopenia is characteristic and liver function 
tests may be mildly deranged. Hypercalcaemia may be 
present (reflecting increased formation of calcitrol – 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 – by alveolar macrophages), 
particularly if the patient has been exposed to strong 
sunlight. Hypercalciuria may also be seen and may lead 
to nephrocalcinosis. Serum ACE may provide a non-
specific marker of disease activity and can assist in 
moni­toring the clinical course. Chest radiography has 
been used to stage sarcoid (Box 19.82). In patients with 
pulmonary infiltrates, pulmonary function testing may 
show a restrictive defect accompanied by impaired gas 
exchange. Exercise tests may reveal oxygen desatura-
tion. Bronchoscopy may demonstrate a ‘cobblestone’ 
appearance of the mucosa, and bronchial and transbron-
chial biopsy usually shows non-caseating granulomas. 
The BAL fluid typically contains an increased CD4:CD8 
T-cell ratio. Characteristic HRCT appearances include 
reticulonodular opacities that follow a perilymphatic 
distribution, centred on bronchovascular bundles and 
the subpleural areas.
The occurrence of erythema nodosum with BHL on 
chest X-ray is often sufficient for a confident diagnosis, 
without recourse to a tissue biopsy. Similarly, a typical 
presentation with classical HRCT features may also be 
accepted. Otherwise, the diagnosis should be confirmed 
by histological examination of the involved organ. The 
presence of anergy (e.g. to tuberculin skin tests) may 
support the diagnosis.
Management
Patients who present with acute illness and erythema 
nodosum are treated with NSAIDs and, if disease is 
‘Oral glucocorticoids administered for 6–24 months improve 
chest X-ray appearances and symptoms, but there is little 
evidence of an improvement in lung function and there are no 
data from follow-up beyond 2 years.’
• Paramothayan NS, et al. Corticosteroids for pulmonary sarcoidosis. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2005, issue 2. Art. no.: CD001114.
19.83  Systemic corticosteroids in 
pulmonary sarcoidosis
Stage I: BHL (usually symmetrical); paratracheal nodes  
often enlarged
• Often asymptomatic, but may be associated with erythema 
nodosum and arthralgia. The majority of cases resolve 
spontaneously within 1 yr
Stage II: BHL and parenchymal infiltrates
• Patients may present with breathlessness or cough. The 
majority of cases resolve spontaneously
Stage III: parenchymal infiltrates without BHL
• Disease less likely to resolve spontaneously
Stage IV: pulmonary fibrosis
• Can cause progression to ventilatory failure, pulmonary 
hypertension and cor pulmonale
(BHL = bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy)
19.82  Chest X-ray changes in sarcoidosis
severe, a short course of corticosteroids. The majority of 
patients enjoy spontaneous remission and so, if there is 
no evidence of organ damage, systemic corticosteroid 
therapy can be withheld for 6 months. However, pred-
nisolone (at a starting dose of 20–40 mg/day) should be 
commenced immediately in the presence of hypercalcae-
mia, pulmonary impairment, renal impairment and 
uveitis (Box 19.83). Topical steroids may be useful in 
cases of mild uveitis, and inhaled corticosteroids have 
been used to shorten the duration of systemic cortico­
steroid use in asymptomatic parenchymal sarcoid. 
Patients should be warned that strong sunlight 
might precipitate hypercalcaemia and endanger renal 
function.
Features suggesting a less favourable outlook include 
age over 40 years, Afro-Caribbean ethnicity, persistent 
symptoms for more than 6 months, the involvement of 
more than three organs, lupus pernio and a stage III/IV 
chest X-ray. In patients with severe disease, methotrex-
ate (10–20 mg/week), azathioprine (50–150 mg/day) 
and the use of specific tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α 
inhibitors (p. 1102) have been effective. Chloroquine, 
hydroxychloroquine and low-dose thalidomide may be 
useful in cutaneous sarcoid with limited pulmonary 
involvement. Selected patients may be referred for con-
sideration of single lung transplantation. The overall 
mortality is low (1–5%) and usually reflects cardiac 
involvement or pulmonary fibrosis.
Lung diseases due to systemic 
inflammatory disease
Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome
See page 192.
Respiratory involvement in 
connective tissue disorders
Pulmonary complications of connective tissue disease 
are common, and affect the airways, alveoli, pulmonary 
vasculature, diaphragm and chest wall muscles, and 
chest wall itself (Box 19.84). In some instances, pulmo-
nary disease may precede the appearance of the connec-
tive tissue disorder. Indirect associations between 
connective tissue disorders and respiratory complica-
tions include those due to disease in other organs, e.g. 
thrombocytopenia causing haemoptysis; pulmonary 
toxic effects of drugs used to treat the connective tissue 
disorder, e.g. gold and methotrexate; and secondary 
infection due to the disease itself, neutropenia or 
immuno­suppressive drug regimens.
Respiratory disease
19
712
Rheumatoid disease
Pulmonary involvement in rheumatoid arthritis is 
important, accounting for around 10–20% of the mortal-
ity associated with the condition (p. 1096). The majority 
of cases occur within 5 years of the rheumatological 
diagnosis but pulmonary manifestations may precede 
joint involvement in 10–20%. Pulmonary fibrosis is the 
most common pulmonary manifestation. All forms of 
interstitial disease have been described but NSIP is prob-
ably the most frequent. A rare variant of localised upper 
lobe fibrosis and cavitation is occasionally seen.
Pleural effusion is common, especially in men with 
seropositive disease. Effusions are usually small and 
unilateral but can be large and bilateral. Most resolve 
spontaneously. Biochemical testing shows an exudate 
with markedly reduced glucose levels and raised LDH. 
Effusions that fail to resolve spontaneously may respond 
to a short course of oral prednisolone (30–40 mg daily) 
but some become chronic.
Rheumatoid pulmonary nodules are usually asymp-
tomatic and detected incidentally on imaging. They 
are usually multiple and subpleural in site (Fig. 19.61). 
Solitary nodules can mimic primary bronchial carci-
noma and, when they are multiple, the differential diag-
noses include pulmonary metastatic disease. Cavitation 
raises the possibility of tuberculosis and predisposes 
to pneumothorax. The combination of rheumatoid 
nodules and pneumoconiosis is known as Caplan’s syn-
drome (p. 717).
Bronchitis and bronchiectasis are both more common 
in rheumatoid patients. Rarely, the potentially fatal con-
dition called obliterative bronchiolitis may develop. Bac-
terial lower respiratory tract infections are frequent. 
Treatments given for rheumatoid arthritis may also be 
relevant: corticosteroid therapy predisposes to infec-
tions, methotrexate may cause pulmonary fibrosis, and 
anti-TNF therapy has been associated with the reactiva-
tion of tuberculosis.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Pleuropulmonary involvement is more common in lupus 
than in any other connective tissue disorder and may be 
a presenting problem, in which case it is sometimes 
Disorder
Airways
Parenchyma
Pleura
Diaphragm and  
chest wall
Rheumatoid arthritis
Bronchitis, obliterative 
bronchiolitis, 
bronchiectasis, crico-
arytenoid arthritis, stridor
Pulmonary fibrosis, 
nodules, upper lobe 
fibrosis, infections
Pleurisy, effusion, 
pneumothorax
Poor healing of 
intercostal drain sites
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
–
Pulmonary fibrosis, 
‘vasculitic’ infarcts
Pleurisy, effusion
Diaphragmatic 
weakness (shrinking 
lungs)
Systemic sclerosis
Bronchiectasis
Pulmonary fibrosis, 
aspiration pneumonia
–
Cutaneous thoracic 
restriction (hidebound 
chest)
Dermatomyositis/
polymyositis
Bronchial carcinoma
Pulmonary fibrosis
–
Intercostal and 
diaphragmatic myopathy
Rheumatic fever
–
Pneumonia
Pleurisy, effusion
–
19.84  Respiratory complications of connective tissue disorders
Fig. 19.61  Rheumatoid (necrobiotic) nodules. Thoracic CT just 
below the level of the main carina showing the typical appearance of 
peripheral pleural-based nodules. The nodule in the left lower lobe shows 
characteristic cavitation. 
attributed incorrectly to infection or pulmonary embo-
lism. Up to two-thirds of patients have repeated episodes 
of pleurisy, with or without effusions. Effusions may be 
bilateral and may also involve the pericardium.
The most serious manifestation of lupus is an acute 
alveolitis, which may be associated with diffuse alveolar 
haemorrhage. This condition is life-threatening and 
requires immunosuppression.
Pulmonary fibrosis is a relatively uncommon mani-
festation of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Some 
patients with SLE present with exertional dyspnoea and 
orthopnoea but without overt signs of pulmonary fibro-
sis. The chest X-ray reveals elevated diaphragms, and 
pulmonary function testing shows reduced lung 
volumes. This condition has been described as ‘shrink-
ing lungs’ and has been attributed to diaphragmatic 
myopathy.
SLE patients with antiphospholipid antibodies are at 
increased risk of venous and pulmonary thromboembo-
lism and require life-long anticoagulation.
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases
19
713
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia typically presents in 
an insidious manner with malaise, fever, weight loss, 
breathlessness and unproductive cough. The condition 
is more common in middle-aged females. The classical 
chest X-ray appearance has been likened to the photo-
graphic negative of pulmonary oedema with bilateral, 
peripheral and predominantly upper lobe parenchymal 
shadowing. The peripheral blood eosinophil count is 
almost always very high, and the ESR and total serum 
IgE are elevated. BAL reveals a high proportion of eosi-
nophils in the lavage fluid. Response to prednisolone 
(20–40 mg daily) is usually dramatic. Prednisolone 
can usually be withdrawn after a few weeks without 
relapse, but long-term, low-dose therapy is occasionally 
necessary.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia occurs as a result 
of a mosquito-borne filarial infection caused by the 
tissue-dwelling human nematode Wuchereria bancrofti or 
Brugia malayi. The condition presents with fever, weight 
loss, dyspnoea and asthma-like symptoms. There is 
marked peripheral blood eosinophilia and elevation of 
total IgE. High antifilarial antibody titres are seen. The 
diagnosis may be confirmed by a response to treatment 
with diethylcarbamazine (6 mg/kg/day for 3 weeks). 
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia must be distinguished 
from infection with Strongyloides stercoralis (p. 370), 
as corticosteroids may cause life-threatening dissemi­
nation in the latter. Ascariasis (‘larva migrans’) and 
other hookworm infestations are described in detail in 
Chapter 13.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (also known as 
Wegener’s granulomatosis) is a rare vasculitic and 
granulomatous condition (p. 1118). The lung is com-
monly involved in systemic forms of the condition but 
a limited pulmonary form may also occur. Respiratory 
symptoms include cough, haemoptysis and chest pain. 
Associated upper respiratory tract manifestations 
include nasal discharge and crusting, and otitis media. 
Fever, weight loss and anaemia are common. Radiologi-
cal features include multiple nodules and cavitation that 
may resemble primary or metastatic carcinoma, or a pul-
monary abscess. Tissue biopsy confirms the distinctive 
pattern of necrotising granulomas and necrotising vas-
culitis. Other respiratory complications of granulomato-
sis with polyangiitis include tracheal subglottic stenosis 
and saddle nose deformity. The differential diagnoses 
include mycobacterial and fungal infection and other 
forms of pulmonary vasculitis, including polyarteritis 
nodosa (pulmonary infarction), microscopic polyangi­
itis, Churg–Strauss syndrome (in which there is marked 
tissue eosinophilia and association with asthma), necro-
tising sarcoid, bronchocentric granulomatosis and lym-
phomatoid granulomatosis.
Goodpasture’s syndrome
This describes the association of pulmonary haemor-
rhage and glomerulonephritis, in which IgG antibodies 
Systemic sclerosis
Most patients with systemic sclerosis (p. 1112) eventu-
ally develop diffuse pulmonary fibrosis; at necropsy, 
more than 90% have evidence of lung fibrosis. In some 
patients, it is indolent but when progressive, as in IPF, 
the median survival time is around 4 years. Pulmonary 
fibrosis is rare in the CREST variant of progressive sys-
temic sclerosis but isolated pulmonary hypertension 
may develop.
Other pulmonary complications include recurrent 
aspiration pneumonias secondary to oesophageal 
disease. Rarely, sclerosis of the skin of the chest wall 
may be so extensive and cicatrising as to restrict chest 
wall movement – this constitutes the so-called ‘hide-
bound chest’.
Pulmonary eosinophilia and vasculitides
Pulmonary eosinophilia refers to the association of 
radio­graphic (usually pneumonic) abnormalities and 
peripheral blood eosinophilia. The term encompasses a 
group of disorders of different aetiology (Box 19.85). 
Eosinophils are the predominant cell recovered in 
sputum or BAL, and eosinophil products are likely to be 
the prime mediators of tissue damage.
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia is an acute febrile illness 
(of less than 5 days’ duration) characterised by diffuse 
pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxic respiratory failure. 
The pathology is usually that of diffuse alveolar damage. 
Diagnosis is confirmed by BAL, which characteristically 
demonstrates more than 25% eosinophils. The condition 
is usually idiopathic but drug reactions should be con-
sidered. Corticosteroids invariably induce prompt and 
complete resolution.
Extrinsic (cause known)
• Helminths: e.g. Ascaris, Toxocara, Filaria
• Drugs: nitrofurantoin, para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS), 
sulfasalazine, imipramine, chlorpropamide,  
phenylbutazone
• Fungi: e.g. Aspergillus fumigatus causing allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (p. 697)
Intrinsic (cause unknown)
• Cryptogenic eosinophilic pneumonia
• Churg–Strauss syndrome, diagnosed on the basis of ≥ 4 of 
the following features:
Asthma
Peripheral blood eosinophilia > 1.5 × 109/L (or > 10% of a 
total white cell count)
Mononeuropathy or polyneuropathy
Pulmonary infiltrates
Paranasal sinus disease
Eosinophilic vasculitis on biopsy of an affected site
• Hypereosinophilic syndrome
• Polyarteritis nodosa (p. 1117; rare)
19.85  Pulmonary eosinophilia
Respiratory disease
19
714
bind to the glomerular or alveolar basement membranes 
(see Box 17.39, p. 499). Pulmonary disease usually pre-
cedes renal involvement and includes radiographic infil-
trates and hypoxia with or without haemoptysis. It 
occurs more commonly in men and almost exclusively 
in smokers.
Lung diseases due to irradiation  
and drugs
Radiotherapy
Targeting radiotherapy to certain tumours is inevitably 
accompanied by irradiation of normal lung tissue. 
Although delivered in divided doses, the effects are 
cumulative. Acute radiation pneumonitis is typically 
seen within 6–12 weeks and presents with cough and 
dyspnoea. This may resolve spontaneously but responds 
to corticosteroid treatment. Chronic interstitial fibrosis 
may present several months later with symptoms of 
exertional dyspnoea and cough. Changes are often con-
fined to the area irradiated but may be bilateral. Estab-
lished post-irradiation fibrosis does not usually respond 
to corticosteroid treatment. The pulmonary effects of 
radiation (p. 277) are exacerbated by treatment with 
cytotoxic drugs and the phenomenon of ‘recall pneumo-
nitis’ describes the appearance of radiation injury in a 
previously irradiated area, when chemotherapy follows 
radiotherapy. If the patient survives, there are long-term 
risks of lung cancer.
Drugs
Drugs may cause a range of pulmonary conditions (Box 
19.86). Pulmonary fibrosis may occur in response to a 
variety of drugs, but is seen most frequently with bleo-
mycin, methotrexate, amiodarone and nitrofurantoin. 
Eosinophilic pulmonary reactions can also be caused by 
drugs. The pathogenesis may be an immune reaction 
similar to that in hypersensitivity pneumonitis, which 
specifically attracts large numbers of eosinophils into the 
lungs. This type of reaction is well described as a rare 
reaction to a variety of antineoplastic agents (e.g. bleo-
mycin), antibiotics (e.g. sulphonamides), sulfasalazine 
and the anticonvulsants phenytoin and carbamazepine. 
Patients usually present with breathlessness, cough and 
fever. The chest X-ray characteristically shows patchy 
shadowing. Most cases resolve completely on with-
drawal of the drug, but if the reaction is severe, rapid 
resolution can be obtained with corticosteroids.
Drugs may also cause other lung diseases, such as 
asthma, pulmonary haemorrhage and pleural disease. 
An ARDS-like syndrome of acute non-cardiogenic pul-
monary oedema may present with dramatic onset of 
breathlessness, severe hypoxaemia and signs of alveolar 
oedema on the chest X-ray. This syndrome has been 
reported most frequently in cases of opiate overdose in 
drug addicts (p. 219) but also after salicylate overdose, 
and occasionally after therapeutic doses of drugs, 
including hydrochlorothiazides and some cytotoxic 
agents.
Rare interstitial lung diseases
See Box 19.88.
• Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: the most common interstitial 
lung disease, with a worse prognosis.
• Chronic aspiration pneumonitis: must always be 
considered in elderly patients presenting with bilateral basal 
shadowing on a chest X-ray.
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s 
granulomatosis): a rare condition but more common in old 
age. Renal involvement is more common at presentation and 
upper respiratory problems are fewer.
• Asbestosis: symptoms may only appear in old age because 
of the prolonged latent period between exposure and 
disease.
• Drug-induced interstitial lung disease: more common, 
presumably because of the increased chance of exposure to 
multiple drugs.
• Rarer interstitial disease: sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary 
haemosiderosis, alveolar proteinosis and eosinophilic 
pneumonia rarely present.
• Increased dyspnoea: coexistent muscle weakness, chest 
wall deformity (e.g. thoracic kyphosis) and deconditioning 
may all exacerbate dyspnoea associated with interstitial lung 
disease.
• Surgical lung biopsy: often inappropriate in the very frail. A 
diagnosis therefore frequently depends on clinical and HRCT 
findings alone.
19.87  Interstitial lung disease in old age
Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (ARDS)
• Hydrochlorothiazide
• Thrombolytics (streptokinase)
• IV β-adrenoceptor agonists (e.g. for premature 
labour)
• Aspirin and opiates (in overdose)
Non-eosinophilic alveolitis
• Amiodarone, flecainide, gold, nitrofurantoin, cytotoxic  
agents – especially bleomycin, busulfan, mitomycin C, 
methotrexate, sulfasalazine
Pulmonary eosinophilia
• Antimicrobials (nitrofurantoin, penicillin, tetracyclines, 
sulphonamides, nalidixic acid)
• Drugs used in joint disease (gold, aspirin, penicillamine, 
naproxen)
• Cytotoxic drugs (bleomycin, methotrexate, procarbazine)
• Psychotropic drugs (chlorpromazine, dosulepin,  
imipramine)
• Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, phenytoin)
• Others (sulfasalazine, nadolol)
Pleural disease
• Bromocriptine, amiodarone, methotrexate,  
methysergide
• Induction of SLE – phenytoin, hydralazine,  
isoniazid
Asthma
• Pharmacological mechanisms (β-blockers, cholinergic 
agonists, aspirin and NSAIDs)
• Idiosyncratic reactions (tamoxifen, dipyridamole)
19.86  Drug-induced respiratory disease
Occupational and environmental lung disease
19
715
classically preceded by a latent period. Symptoms of 
rhinoconjunctivitis often precede the development of 
asthma. When OA follows exposure to high molecular 
weight proteins, sensitisation to the agent may be dem-
onstrated by skin testing or measurement of specific IgE. 
Confirmation of OA should be sought from lung func-
tion tests, which usually involves serial recording of 
peak flow at work, at least 4 times per day for at least 
3 weeks and, if possible, including a period away from 
work (Fig. 19.62). In certain circumstances, specific chal-
lenge tests are required to confirm the diagnosis.
It may be possible to remove the worker from 
the implicated agent but when this is not feasible, 
OCCUPATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
LUNG DISEASE
The role of occupation and environmental exposure in 
lung disease is a particularly important area of respira-
tory medicine. Occupational lung disease is common 
and, in addition to the challenges of its diagnosis and 
management, often involves discussions about the 
workplace and, in some circumstances, lawyers. Many 
countries encourage the registration of cases of occupa-
tional lung disease.
Occupational airway disease
Occupational asthma
Occupational asthma (OA) should be considered in any 
individual of working age who develops new-onset 
asthma, particularly if the patient reports an improve-
ment in asthma symptoms during periods away from 
work, e.g. at weekends and on holiday. Workers in 
certain occupations appear to be at particularly high risk 
(Box 19.89) and the condition is more common in 
smokers and atopic individuals. Depending on the 
intensity of exposure, asthmatic symptoms usually 
develop within the first year of employment but are 
Disease
Presentation
Chest X-ray
Course
Idiopathic pulmonary 
haemosiderosis
Haemoptysis, breathlessness, 
anaemia
Bilateral infiltrates, often 
perihilar
Diffuse pulmonary fibrosis
Rapidly progressive in children
Slow progression or remission in 
adults
Death from massive pulmonary 
haemorrhage or cor pulmonale and 
respiratory failure
Alveolar proteinosis
Breathlessness and cough
Occasionally fever, chest 
pain and haemoptysis
Diffuse bilateral shadowing, 
often more pronounced in 
the hilar regions
Air bronchogram
Spontaneous remission in one-third
Whole-lung lavage or granulocyte 
macrophage–colony stimulating 
factor (GM–CSF) therapy may be 
effective
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 
(histiocytosis X)
Breathlessness, cough, 
pneumothorax
Diffuse interstitial shadowing 
progressing to honeycombing
Course unpredictable but may 
progress to respiratory failure
Smoking cessation may be followed 
by significant improvement
Poor response to 
immunosuppressive treatment
Neurofibromatosis
Breathlessness and cough in 
a patient with multiple organ 
involvement with 
neurofibromas including skin
Bilateral reticulonodular 
shadowing of diffuse 
interstitial fibrosis
Slow progression to death from 
respiratory failure
Poor response to corticosteroid 
therapy
Alveolar microlithiasis
May be asymptomatic
Breathlessness and cough
Diffuse calcified 
micronodular shadowing 
more pronounced in the 
lower zones
Slowly progressive to cor pulmonale 
and respiratory failure
May stabilise in some
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Haemoptysis, breathlessness, 
pneumothorax and chylous 
effusion in females
Diffuse bilateral shadowing
CT shows characteristic 
thin-walled cysts with 
well-defined walls 
throughout both lungs
Progressive to death within 10 yrs
Oestrogen ablation and 
progesterone therapy of doubtful 
value
Consider lung transplantation
Pulmonary tuberous sclerosis
Very similar to lymphangioleiomyomatosis, except occasionally occurs in men
19.88  Rare interstitial lung diseases
Most frequently reported causative agents
• Isocyanates
• Flour and grain dust
• Colophony and fluxes
• Latex
• Animals
• Aldehydes
• Wood dust
Workers most commonly reported to occupational  
asthma schemes
• Paint sprayers
• Bakers and pastry-makers
• Nurses
• Chemical workers
19.89  Occupational asthma
Respiratory disease
19
716
breathlessness, accompanied by a drop in lung function; 
classically, these are most severe on the first day of the 
working week (‘Monday fever’), or on return to work 
following a period away. As the week progresses, symp-
toms improve and the fall in lung function becomes less 
dramatic. Continued exposure leads to the development 
of persistent symptoms and a progressive decline in 
FEV1 similar to that observed in COPD.
Pneumoconiosis
Pneumoconiosis can be defined as a permanent altera-
tion of lung structure due to the inhalation of mineral 
dust and the tissue reactions of the lung to its presence, 
excluding bronchitis and emphysema (Box 19.90). Not 
all dusts are pathogenic. For example, silica is highly 
fibrogenic, whereas iron (siderosis), tin (stannosis) and 
barium (baritosis) are almost inert. Beryllium causes an 
interstitial granulomatous disease similar to sarcoidosis. 
In many types of pneumoconiosis, a long period of dust 
exposure is required before radiological changes appear, 
and these may precede clinical symptoms. The most 
important pneumoconioses include coal worker’s pneu-
moconiosis, silicosis and asbestosis.
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP) follows pro-
longed inhalation of coal dust. Dust-laden alveolar 
macro­phages aggregate to form macules in or near the 
centre of the secondary pulmonary lobule and a fibrotic 
reaction ensues, resulting in the appearance of scattered 
discrete fibrotic lesions. Classification is based on the 
size and extent of radiographic nodularity. Simple coal 
worker’s pneumoconiosis (SCWP) refers to the appear-
ance of small radiographic nodules in an otherwise 
asymptomatic individual. SCWP does not impair 
lung function and, once exposure ceases, will seldom 
progress. Progressive massive fibrosis (PMF) refers to 
the formation of conglomerate masses (mainly in the 
upper lobes), which may cavitate. The development of 
consideration of personal protective equipment and 
workplace hygiene may allow patients to retain their job 
and income. Specialist follow-up in such situations is 
highly advisable. A favourable prognosis is indicated by 
a short history of symptoms and normal lung function 
at diagnosis. Where reduction or avoidance of exposure 
fails to bring about resolution, the general management 
does not differ from that of other forms of asthma.
Reactive airways dysfunction 
syndrome
Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome or acute irritant-
induced asthma refers to the development of a persistent 
asthma-like syndrome following the inhalation of an 
airway irritant: typically, a single specific exposure to a 
gas, smoke, fume or vapour in very high concentrations. 
Pulmonary function tests show airflow obstruction and 
airway hyper-reactivity, and the management is similar 
to that of asthma. Once developed, the condition often 
persists but it is common for symptoms to improve over 
years.
Chronic obstructive  
pulmonary disease
Whilst tobacco smoking remains the most important 
preventable cause of COPD, there is increasing recogni-
tion that other noxious particles and gases can both 
cause or aggravate the condition. Occupational COPD is 
recognised in workers exposed to coal dust, crystalline 
silica and cadmium. In many parts of the developing 
world, indoor air pollution from the burning of biomass 
fuels in confined spaces used for cooking contributes to 
the development of COPD.
Byssinosis
Byssinosis occurs in workers at cotton and flax mills 
who are exposed to cotton brack (dried leaf and plant 
debris). An acute form of the disease may occur but, 
more typically, byssinosis develops after 20–30 years’ 
exposure. Typical symptoms include chest tightness or 
Fig. 19.62  Peak flow readings in occupational asthma. Subjects with suspected occupational asthma are asked to perform 2-hourly serial peak 
flows at, and away from, work. The maximum, mean and minimum values are plotted daily. Days at work are indicated by the shaded areas. The diurnal 
variation is displayed at the top. In this example, a period away from work is followed by a marked improvement in peak flow readings and a reduction in 
diurnal variation. 
400
450
500
550
600
0%
20%
50%
Diurnal
variation
of PEF
Peak flow (L/min)
Weekdays
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
Occupational and environmental lung disease
19
717
silicoproteinosis, similar to alveolar proteinosis (see 
Box 19.88, p. 715).
Radiological features are similar to those of 
coal worker’s pneumoconiosis, with multiple well-
circumscribed 3–5-mm nodular opacities, predomi-
nantly in the mid- and upper zones. As the disease 
progresses, PMF may develop (Fig. 19.63). Enlargement 
of the hilar glands with an ‘egg-shell’ pattern of calcifica-
tion is said to be characteristic but is uncommon and 
non-specific. Silica is highly fibrogenic and the disease 
is usually progressive, even when exposure ceases; 
hence the affected worker should always be removed 
from further exposure. Individuals with silicosis are at 
increased risk of tuberculosis (silicotuberculosis), lung 
cancer and COPD. Associations with renal and connec-
tive tissue disease have also been described.
Berylliosis
Exposure to beryllium is encountered in aircraft engi-
neering and dentistry. The presence of cough, progres-
sive breathlessness, night sweats and arthralgia in a 
worker exposed to dusts, fumes or vapours containing 
beryllium should raise suspicions of berylliosis. The 
radiographic appearances are similar in type and distri-
bution to sarcoid, and biopsy shows sarcoid-like granu-
lomas. The diagnosis may be confirmed by specialised 
tests of lymphocyte function.
PMF is usually associated with cough, sputum that may 
be black (melanoptysis), and breathlessness. The chest 
X-ray appearances may be confused with lung cancer, 
tuberculosis and granulomatosis with polyangiitis. PMF 
may progress even after coal dust exposure ceases, and 
in extreme cases leads to respiratory failure and right 
ventricular failure.
Caplan’s syndrome describes the coexistence of rheu-
matoid arthritis and rounded fibrotic nodules 0.5–5 cm 
in diameter. They show pathological features similar to 
a rheumatoid nodule, including central necrosis, pali­
sading histiocytes, and a peripheral rim of lymphocytes 
and plasma cells. This syndrome may also occur in other 
types of pneumoconiosis.
Silicosis
Silicosis results from the inhalation of crystalline silica, 
usually in the form of quartz, by workers cutting, 
grinding and polishing stone. Classic silicosis is most 
common and usually manifests after 10–20 years of 
continuous silica exposure, during which time the 
patient remains asymptomatic. Accelerated silicosis is 
associated with a much shorter duration of dust expo-
sure (typically 5–10 years), and may present as early as 
1 year of exposure; as the name suggests, it follows a 
more aggressive course. Intense exposure to very fine 
crystalline silica dust can cause a more acute disease – 
Cause
Occupation
Description
Characteristic pathological features
Coal dust
Coal mining
Coal worker’s 
pneumoconiosis
Focal and interstitial ﬁbrosis, centrilobular 
emphysema, progressive massive ﬁbrosis
Silica
Mining, quarrying, stone dressing, metal grinding, 
pottery, boiler scaling
Silicosis
Asbestos
Demolition, ship breaking, manufacture of ﬁreproof 
insulating materials, pipe and boiler lagging
Asbestos-related 
disease
Pleural plaques, diffuse pleural thickening, acute 
benign pleurisy, carcinoma of lung, interstitial 
ﬁbrosis, mesothelioma
Iron oxide
Arc welding
Siderosis
Mineral deposition only
Tin oxide
Tin mining
Stannosis
Tin-laden macrophages
Beryllium
Aircraft, atomic energy and electronics industries
Berylliosis
Granulomas, interstitial ﬁbrosis
}
19.90  Lung diseases caused by exposure to inorganic dusts
A
Fig. 19.63  Silicosis.  A A chest X-ray from a patient with silicosis, showing the presence of small rounded nodules predominantly seen in the upper 
zones.  B HRCT from the same patient, demonstrating conglomeration of nodules with posterior bias. 
B
Respiratory disease
19
718
Acute benign asbestos pleurisy
Benign asbestos pleurisy is estimated to occur in around 
one-fifth of asbestos workers but many episodes are 
subclinical and pass unreported. When symptomatic, 
patients present with features of pleurisy, including 
mild fever and systemic disturbance. The diagnosis 
necessitates the exclusion of other known causes of pleu-
risy and pleural effusion. Repeated episodes may be 
followed by the development of diffuse (visceral) pleural 
thickening.
Diffuse pleural thickening
Diffuse pleural thickening (DPT) affects the visceral 
pleura and, if sufficiently extensive, may cause restric-
tive lung function impairment, exertional breathlessness 
and, occasionally, persistent chest pain. The typical 
appearances of DPT on chest X-ray include thickening 
of the pleura along the chest wall and obliteration of 
the costophrenic angles. Earlier manifestations of 
DPT, including parenchymal bands, may be detected 
by CT (Fig. 19.65). Occasionally, shrinkage of the 
visceral pleura results in the development of ‘round 
atelectasis’. There is no treatment and the condition 
may progress in around one-third of individuals. In 
exceptionally severe cases, surgical decortication may 
be considered. A pleural biopsy may be required to 
exclude mesothelioma.
Less common pneumoconioses
Siderosis refers to the development of a benign iron 
oxide pneumoconiosis in welders and other iron foundry 
workers. Baritosis may be seen in barium process 
workers, and stannosis in tin refining; haematite lung 
occurs in iron ore miners and resembles silicosis but 
stains the lung red. Diamond polishers may develop 
hard metal disease; this condition is similar to UIP but 
the pathology shows a giant cell interstitial pneumonia. 
Popcorn worker’s lung is a form of obliterative bronchio­
litis following ingestion of diacetyl used in butter 
flavouring.
Asbestos-related lung and  
pleural diseases
Asbestos is a naturally occurring silicate. Its fibres may 
be classified as either chrysotile (white asbestos), which 
accounts for 90% of the world’s production, or serpen-
tine (crocidolite or blue asbestos, and amosite or brown 
asbestos). Its favourable thermal and chemical insula-
tion properties led to its extensive use by the shipbuild-
ing and construction industries throughout the latter 
part of the twentieth century. Exposure to asbestos may 
be followed by the development of both pleural and 
pulmonary disease, after a lengthy latent period.
Pleural plaques
Pleural plaques are the most common manifestation of 
past asbestos exposure, and are discrete circumscribed 
areas of hyaline fibrosis that may occur on the parietal 
pleura of the chest wall, diaphragm, pericardium or 
mediastinum. They are virtually always asymptomatic 
and are usually identified as an incidental finding on a 
chest X-ray (Fig. 19.64) or thoracic CT scan, particularly 
when partially calcified. They do not cause any impair-
ment of lung function and are benign.
Fig. 19.64  Asbestos-related benign pleural plaques. Chest X-ray 
showing extensive calcified pleural plaques (‘candle wax’ appearance 
– arrows), particularly marked on the diaphragm and lateral pleural 
surfaces. 
Fig. 19.65  Thoracic CT scan showing right-sided pleural 
thickening and an associated parenchymal band. 
Asbestosis
Asbestosis is a diffuse parenchymal lung disease. Its 
development generally requires substantial exposure 
over several years, and is rare with low-level or bystander 
exposure. In common with other fibrosing lung diseases, 
asbestosis usually presents with exertional breathless-
ness and fine, late inspiratory crackles over the lower 
zones. Finger clubbing may be present. Pulmonary func-
tion tests and HRCT appearances are similar to those of 
UIP. These features, accompanied by a history of sub-
stantial asbestos exposure, are generally sufficient to 
establish the diagnosis; lung biopsy is rarely necessary. 
When biopsy is performed, the diagnosis is made when 
alveolar septal fibrosis is accompanied by an average of 
at least two asbestos bodies per square cm of lung tissue. 
In cases where there is doubt, asbestos fibre counts may 
Occupational and environmental lung disease
19
719
be performed on lung biopsy material to establish the 
diagnosis.
Asbestosis is usually slowly progressive but tends to 
be more indolent and associated with a better prognosis 
than UIP; in advanced cases, however, respiratory 
failure and cor pulmonale may still develop. About 40% 
of patients (who usually smoke) develop carcinoma of 
the lung and 10% may develop mesothelioma.
Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma is a malignant tumour affecting the pleura 
or, less commonly, the peritoneum. Its occurrence almost 
invariably suggests past asbestos exposure, which may 
be low-level. There is typically a long latent interval 
between first exposure and the onset of clinical manifes-
tations, such that, even though asbestos control 
measures have now been implemented, deaths from 
mesothelioma continue to increase.
Pleural mesothelioma typically presents with increas-
ing breathlessness resulting from pleural effusion, or 
unremitting chest pain when there is involvement of the 
chest wall. As the tumour progresses, it encases the 
underlying lung and may invade into the parenchyma, 
the mediastinum and the pericardium. Metastatic 
disease, although often not clinically detectable in life, is 
a common finding on post-mortem.
Mesothelioma is almost invariably fatal. Highly 
selected patients may be considered for radical surgery 
but, in the majority, therapy is invariably directed 
towards palliation of symptoms. The use of chemother-
apy may improve quality of life and is accompanied by 
a small survival benefit of around 3 months. Radiother-
apy can be used to control pain and limit the risk of 
tumour seeding at biopsy sites. Pleural effusions are 
managed with drainage and pleurodesis. Typical figures 
for survival from onset of symptoms are around 
16 months for epithelioid tumours, 10 months for sarco-
matoid tumours and 15 months for biphasic tumours, 
with only a minority of patients surviving longer periods.
Lung diseases due to organic dusts
A wide range of organic agents may cause respiratory 
disorders (Box 19.91). Disease results from a local 
immune response to animal proteins, or fungal antigens 
in mouldy vegetable matter. Hypersensitivity pneumo-
nitis is the most common of these conditions.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP; also called extrinsic 
allergic alveolitis) results from the inhalation of a wide 
variety of organic antigens, which give rise to a diffuse 
immune complex reaction in the alveoli and bronchioles. 
Common causes include farmer’s lung and bird fancier’s 
lung. Other examples are shown in Box 19.91. HP is not 
exclusively occupational or environmental, and other 
important causes include medications (see Box 19.86).
The pathology of hypersensitivity pneumonitis is 
consistent with both type III and type IV immunological 
mechanisms (p. 87). Precipitating IgG antibodies may be 
detected in the serum and a type III Arthus reaction is 
believed to occur in the lung, where the precipitation of 
immune complexes results in activation of complement 
and an inflammatory response in the alveolar walls, 
Disorder
Source
Antigen/agent
Farmer’s lung*
Mouldy hay, 
straw, grain
Micropolyspora faeni 
Aspergillus fumigatus
Bird fancier’s 
lung*
Avian excreta, 
proteins and 
feathers
Avian serum proteins
Malt worker’s 
lung*
Mouldy maltings
Aspergillus clavatus
Cheese worker’s 
lung*
Mouldy cheese
Aspergillus clavatus 
Penicillium casei
Maple bark 
stripper’s lung*
Bark from stored 
maple
Cryptostroma 
corticale
Saxophone 
player’s lung*
Reed of any 
wind instrument
Fusarium spp.
Penicillium spp.
Cladosporium spp.
Byssinosis
Textile industries
Cotton, flax, hemp 
dust
Inhalation 
(‘humidifier’) 
fever
Contamination of 
air conditioning
Thermophilic 
actinomycetes
*Presents as hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
19.91  Examples of lung diseases caused by 
organic dusts
characterised by the influx of mononuclear cells and 
foamy histiocytes. The presence of poorly formed non-
caseating granulomas in the alveolar walls suggests that 
type IV responses are also important. The distribution 
of the inflammatory infiltrate is predominantly peri-
bronchiolar, which helps to distinguish the appearances 
from non-specific interstitial pneumonia and lym-
phocytic interstitial pneumonia. Chronic forms may be 
accompanied by fibrosis. For reasons that remain uncer-
tain, there is a lower incidence of hypersensitivity pneu-
monitis in smokers than non-smokers.
Clinical features
The presentation of HP varies from an acute form to a 
more indolent pattern, depending on the antigen load. 
For example, the farmer exposed to mouldy hay after it 
was gathered and stored damp during a wet summer, 
or the pigeon fancier cleaning a large pigeon loft, will 
report influenza-like symptoms within a few hours, 
accompanied by cough, breathlessness and wheeze. On 
the other hand, the individual with low-level antigen 
exposure, such as to an indoor pet bird, will typically 
present in a more indolent fashion with slowly progres-
sive breathlessness, and, in some cases, established 
fibrosis may be present by the time the disease is recog-
nised. Chest auscultation typically reveals widespread 
end-inspiratory crackles and squeaks.
Investigations
In cases of acute HP, the chest X-ray typically shows 
ill-defined patchy airspace shadowing which, given 
the systemic features, may be confused with pneumonia. 
HRCT is more likely to show bilateral ground glass 
shadowing and areas of consolidation superimposed 
on small centrilobar nodular opacities with an upper 
and middle lobe predominance (Fig. 19.66). In more 
Respiratory disease
19
720
the number of CD8+ T lymphocytes, and transbronchial 
biopsy can occasionally provide sufficient tissue for a 
confident diagnosis; however, open lung biopsy may be 
necessary (Fig. 19.66B).
Management
If practical, the patient should cease exposure to the 
inciting agent. In some cases, however, this may be 
difficult, either because of implications for livelihood 
(e.g. farmers) or enthusiasm for hobbies (e.g. pigeon 
breeders). Dust masks with appropriate filters may 
minimise exposure and be combined with methods of 
reducing levels of antigen (e.g. drying hay before 
storage). In acute cases, prednisolone should be given 
for 3–4 weeks, starting with an oral dose of 40 mg per 
day. Severely hypoxaemic patients may require high-
concentration oxygen therapy initially. Most patients 
recover completely but, if unchecked, fibrosis may 
progress to cause severe respiratory disability, hypoxae-
mia, pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale and even-
tually death.
Inhalation (‘humidifier’) fever
Inhalation fever shares similarities with HP. It occurs as 
a result of contaminated humidifiers or air-conditioning 
units that release a fine spray of microorganisms into the 
atmosphere. The illness is characterised by self-limiting 
fever and breathlessness; permanent sequelae are 
unusual. An identical syndrome can also develop after 
disturbing an accumulation of mouldy hay, compost or 
mulch. So-called ‘hot tub lung’ appears to be attributable 
to Mycobacterium avium. Outbreaks of HP in workers 
using metalworking fluids appear to be linked to Aci-
netobacter or Ochrobactrum.
Occupational lung cancer
Individuals exposed to substantial quantities of asbestos 
are at increased risk of lung cancer particularly if they 
smoke tobacco. Increased risks of lung cancer have also 
been reported in workers who develop silicosis and 
those exposed to radon gas, beryllium, diesel exhaust 
fumes, cadmium, chromium, and dust and fumes from 
coke plants.
Occupational pneumonia
Occupational and environmental exposures may be 
closely linked to the development of pneumonia. 
Welders appear to be at increased risk of pneumonia 
and pneumococcal vaccine is currently recommended 
for those in the trade. Farm, abattoir and hide factory 
workers may be exposed to Coxiella burnetii, the 
chronic disease, features of fibrosis, such as volume 
loss, linear opacities and architectural distortion, appear. 
In common with other fibrotic diseases, pulmonary 
function tests show a restrictive ventilatory defect 
with reduced lung volumes and impaired gas transfer, 
and dynamic tests may detect oxygen desaturation. In 
more advanced disease, type I respiratory failure is 
present at rest.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of HP is usually based on the characteris-
tic clinical and radiological features, together with the 
identification of a potential source of antigen in the 
patient’s home or place of work (Box 19.92). It may be 
supported by a positive serum precipitin test or by more 
sensitive serological tests. However, the presence of pre-
cipitins without the other features does not signify a 
diagnosis; the great majority of farmers with positive 
precipitins do not have farmer’s lung, and up to 15% of 
pigeon breeders may have positive serum precipitins yet 
remain healthy.
Where HP is suspected but the cause is not readily 
apparent, a visit to the patient’s home or workplace 
should be made. Occasionally, if an agent previously 
unrecognised as causing HP is suspected, provocation 
testing may be necessary to prove the diagnosis; if posi-
tive, inhalation of the relevant antigen is followed after 
3–6 hours by pyrexia and a reduction in VC and gas 
transfer factor. BAL fluid usually shows an increase in 
Fig. 19.66  Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.  A HRCT showing typical 
patchy ground glass opacification.  B Histology shows evidence of an 
interstitial inflammatory infiltrate in the lung, expanding alveolar walls, with 
a peribronchial distribution. Within the infiltrate, there are foci of small, 
poorly defined non-caseating granulomas (insert), which often lie adjacent 
to the airways. In this case, there is little in the way of established lung 
fibrosis, but this can be marked. 
B
A
• Exposure to a known offending antigen
• Positive precipitating antibodies to offending antigen
• Recurrent episodes of symptoms
• Inspiratory crackles on examination
• Symptoms occurring 4–8 hrs after exposure
• Weight loss
19.92  Predictive factors in the identification of 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Pulmonary vascular disease
19
721
•	 Is the clinical presentation consistent with PE?
•	 Does the patient have risk factors for PE?
•	 Are there any alternative diagnoses that can explain 
the patient’s presentation?
Clinical presentation varies, depending on number, 
size and distribution of emboli and on underlying car-
diorespiratory reserve (Box 19.93). A recognised risk 
factor is present in 80–90% (Box 19.94). The presence of 
one or more risk factors increases the risk further still.
causative agent of Q fever. The organisms are excreted 
from milk, urine, faeces and amniotic fluid, or may be 
transmitted by cattle ticks or contaminated dust from the 
milking floor, or by drinking milk that is inadequately 
pasteurised. Birds (often parrots or budgerigars) infected 
with Chlamydia psittaci can cause psittacosis in humans. 
Sewage workers, farmers, animal handlers and veteri-
narians run an increased risk of contracting leptospiral 
pneumonia. Contact with rabbits, hares, muskrats 
and ground squirrels is associated with tularaemic 
pneumonia, caused by Francisella tularensis (p. 340). 
Anthrax (wool-sorter’s disease, p. 346) may occur in 
workers exposed to infected hides, hair, bristle, bone-
meal and animal carcases.
PULMONARY VASCULAR DISEASE
Venous thromboembolism
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT, p. 1008) and pulmonary 
embolism (PE) are included under this heading. The 
majority (80%) of pulmonary emboli arise from the 
propagation of lower limb DVT. Rare causes include 
septic emboli (from endocarditis affecting the tricuspid 
or pulmonary valves), tumour (especially choriocarci-
noma), fat, air, amniotic fluid and placenta.
The incidence of VTE in the community is unknown; 
it occurs in approximately 1% of all patients admitted to 
hospital and accounts for around 5% of in-hospital 
deaths. It is a common mode of death in patients with 
cancer, stroke and pregnancy.
Clinical features
VTE may be difficult to diagnose. It is helpful to 
consider:
Acute massive PE
Acute small/medium PE
Chronic PE
Pathophysiology
Major haemodynamic effects: 
↓cardiac output; acute right heart 
failure
Occlusion of segmental pulmonary 
artery → infarction ± effusion
Chronic occlusion of pulmonary 
microvasculature, right heart 
failure
Symptoms
Faintness or collapse, crushing 
central chest pain, apprehension, 
severe dyspnoea
Pleuritic chest pain, restricted 
breathing, haemoptysis
Exertional dyspnoea. Late 
symptoms of pulmonary 
hypertension or right heart 
failure
Signs
Major circulatory collapse: 
tachycardia, hypotension, ↑JVP, 
RV gallop rhythm, loud P2, severe 
cyanosis, ↓urinary output
Tachycardia, pleural rub, raised 
hemidiaphragm, crackles, effusion 
(often blood-stained), low-grade 
fever
May be minimal early in disease. 
Later: RV heave, loud P2. 
Terminal: signs of right heart 
failure
Chest X-ray
Usually normal. May be subtle 
oligaemia
Pleuropulmonary opacities, pleural 
effusion, linear shadows, raised 
hemidiaphragm
Enlarged pulmonary artery trunk, 
enlarged heart, prominent right 
ventricle
ECG
S1Q3T3 anterior T-wave inversion, 
RBBB
Sinus tachycardia
RV hypertrophy and strain
Arterial blood gases
Markedly abnormal with ↓PaO2 
and ↓PaCO2. Metabolic acidosis
May be normal or ↓PaO2 or 
↓PaCO2
Exertional ↓PaO2 or desaturation 
on formal exercise testing
Alternative diagnoses
Myocardial infarction, pericardial 
tamponade, aortic dissection
Pneumonia, pneumothorax, 
musculoskeletal chest pain
Other causes of pulmonary 
hypertension
(JVP = jugular venous pressure; PE = pulmonary embolism; RBBB = right bundle branch block; RV = right ventricular)
19.93  Features of pulmonary thromboemboli
Surgery
• Major abdominal/pelvic 
surgery
• Hip/knee surgery
• Post-operative intensive 
care
Obstetrics
• Pregnancy/puerperium
Cardiorespiratory disease
• COPD
• Congestive cardiac failure
• Other disabling disease
Lower limb problems
• Fracture
• Varicose veins
• Stroke/spinal cord injury
Malignant disease
• Abdominal/pelvic
• Advanced/metastatic
• Concurrent chemotherapy
Miscellaneous
• Increasing age
• Previous proven VTE
• Immobility
• Thrombotic disorders  
(p. 1054)
• Trauma
19.94  Risk factors for venous thromboembolism
Respiratory disease
19
722
Investigations
A variety of non-specific radiographic appearances have 
been described (Fig. 19.67) but the chest X-ray is most 
useful in excluding key differential diagnoses, e.g. pneu-
monia or pneumothorax. Normal appearances in an 
acutely breathless and hypoxaemic patient should raise 
the suspicion of PE, as should bilateral changes in a 
patient presenting with unilateral pleuritic chest pain.
The ECG is often normal but is useful in excluding 
other important differential diagnoses, such as acute 
myocardial infarction and pericarditis. The most 
common findings in PE include sinus tachycardia and 
anterior T-wave inversion but these are non-specific; 
larger emboli may cause right heart strain revealed by 
an S1Q3T3 pattern, ST-segment and T-wave changes, or 
the appearance of right bundle branch block.
Arterial blood gases typically show a reduced PaO2 
and a normal or low PaCO2, and an increased alveolar–
arterial oxygen gradient, but may be normal in a signifi-
cant minority. A metabolic acidosis may be seen in acute 
massive PE with cardiovascular collapse.
D-dimer is a specific degradation product released 
into the circulation when cross-linked fibrin undergoes 
endogenous fibrinolysis (p. 1000). An elevated D-dimer 
is of limited value, as it may be raised in a variety of 
conditions including PE, myocardial infarction, pneu-
monia and sepsis. However, low levels (< 500 ng/mL, 
measured by ELISA), particularly where clinical risk is 
low, have a high negative predictive value and further 
investigation is usually unnecessary (Fig. 19.68). The 
D-dimer result should be disregarded in high-risk 
patients, as further investigation is mandatory even if it 
is normal. Other circulating markers that reflect right 
ventricular micro-infarction, such as troponin I and 
brain natriuretic peptide, are under investigation.
CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA, Fig. 19.69) is the 
first-line diagnostic test. It has the advantages of visual-
ising the distribution and extent of the emboli, or high-
lighting an alternative diagnosis, such as consolidation, 
pneumothorax or aortic dissection. The sensitivity of CT 
scanning may be increased by simultaneous visualisa-
tion of the femoral and popliteal veins, although this is 
not widely practised. As the contrast media may be 
Fig. 19.67  Features of pulmonary thromboembolism/infarction on chest X-ray. 
Pulmonary opacities
(any size or shape,
rarely lobar or segmental,
can cavitate)
Elevated
hemidiaphragm
Horizontal linear opacities
(bilateral and usually in
lower zones)
Pleural effusion
(usually blood-stained
 on aspiration)
Wedge-shaped opacity
Oligaemia of lung field
Enlarged pulmonary
artery
Fig. 19.68  Algorithm for the investigation of patients with 
suspected pulmonary thromboembolism. Clinical risk is based on the 
presence of risk factors for venous thromboembolism and the probability of 
another diagnosis. 
 • Ultrasound leg
    veins ±
 • CT pulmonary
 
angiogram or
 • V/Q scan
    (no previous
    cardiopulmonary
    disease)
D-dimer –ve
Risk high
Assess clinical risk
Measure D-dimer levels
Venous thromboembolism
suspected
D-dimer –ve
Risk low
Not DVT/PE
D-dimer +ve
Risk low
Risk high
Treat
Confirm
diagnosis
. .
nephrotoxic, care should be taken in patients with renal 
impairment, and CTPA avoided in those with a history 
of allergy to iodinated contrast media.
Ventilation–perfusion scanning is seldom used now-
adays, although a limited role remains in those without 
significant cardiopulmonary disease. Colour Doppler 
ultrasound of the leg veins remains the investigation of 
choice in patients with suspected DVT, but may also be 
used in patients with suspected PE, particularly if there 
are clinical signs in a limb, as many will have identifiable 
proximal thrombus in the leg veins.
Pulmonary vascular disease
19
723
most commonly used oral anticoagulant. Therapy is ini-
tiated with a high loading dose, followed by a mainte-
nance dose based on the international normalised ratio 
(INR). LMWH should not be discontinued until the INR 
is 2 or more for at least 24 hours. Due to the narrow 
therapeutic index of warfarin and its propensity to inter-
act with other drugs and food, regular measurement 
of the INR is required throughout the duration of 
anticoagulation. Newer thrombin or activated factor X 
inhibitors offer more predictable dosing and have 
no requirement for coagulation monitoring; they may 
ultimately replace warfarin.
Decisions regarding the duration of anticoagulation 
represent a balance between the risk and consequences 
of recurrence, and the risks of prolonged anticoagula-
tion. In patients with an identifiable and reversible risk 
factor, anticoagulation may be safely discontinued fol-
lowing 3 months of therapy. Those with persistent pro-
thrombotic risks or a history of previous emboli should 
be anticoagulated for life. In patients with cancer-
associated VTE, LMWH should be continued for at 
least 6 months before switching to warfarin. For patients 
with unprovoked VTE, the appropriate duration of 
anticoagulation should be at least 3 months, but pro-
longed therapy should be considered in males (who 
have a higher risk of recurrent VTE than females), those 
in whom the D-dimer remains elevated when measured 
1 month after stopping anticoagulation, those with post-
thrombotic syndrome, and those in whom recurrent 
PE may be fatal. The disadvantages of prolonged anti-
coagulation range from the inconvenience of long-term 
INR monitoring to the more serious risk of major 
haemorrhage (around 3% per year). Life-threatening 
haemorrhage occurs in around 1% of cases per year and 
fatal bleeding in 0.25% cases per year.
Thrombolytic and surgical therapy
Thrombolysis is indicated in any patient presenting with 
acute massive PE accompanied by cardiogenic shock. In 
the absence of shock, the benefits are less clear but 
thrombolysis may be considered in those presenting 
with right ventricular dilatation and hypokinesis 
or severe hypoxaemia. Patients must be screened care-
fully for haemorrhagic risk, as there is a high risk of 
intra­cranial haemorrhage. Surgical pulmonary embolec-
tomy may be considered in selected patients but carries 
a high mortality.
Bedside echocardiography is extremely helpful in the 
differential diagnosis and assessment of acute circula-
tory collapse (p. 544). Acute dilatation of the right heart 
is usually present in massive PE, and thrombus (embo-
lism in transit) may be visible. Alternative diagnoses, 
including left ventricular failure, aortic dissection and 
pericardial tamponade, can also be identified.
Conventional pulmonary angiography has been 
largely superseded by CTPA but is still useful in selected 
settings or to deliver catheter-based therapies.
Management
General measures
Prompt recognition and treatment are potentially life-
saving. Sufficient oxygen should be given to hypox­
aemic patients to maintain arterial oxygen saturation 
above 90%. Circulatory shock should be treated with 
intravenous fluids or plasma expander, but inotropic 
agents are of limited value as the hypoxic dilated right 
ventricle is already close to maximally stimulated by 
endogenous catecholamines. Diuretics and vasodilators 
should also be avoided, as they will reduce cardiac 
output. Opiates may be necessary to relieve pain and 
distress but should be used with caution in the hypoten-
sive patient. External cardiac massage may be successful 
in the moribund patient by dislodging and breaking up 
a large central embolus.
Anticoagulation
Anticoagulation should be commenced immediately in 
patients with a high or intermediate probability of PE, 
but may be safely withheld in those with low clinical 
probability, pending investigation. Heparin reduces 
further propagation of clot and the risk of further emboli, 
and lowers mortality. It is most easily administered as 
subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). 
The dose is based on the patient’s weight and there is 
usually no requirement to monitor tests of coagulation 
(p. 1018). Treatment with LMWH should continue for at 
least 5 days, during which time an oral anticoagulant is 
commenced. Fondaparinux, a synthetic pentasaccharide 
closely related to heparin, represents an alternative to 
LMWH. Warfarin – a vitamin K antagonist – remains the 
Fig. 19.69  CT pulmonary angiogram. The arrow points to a saddle 
embolism in the bifurcation of the pulmonary artery. 
• Maternal mortality: VTE is the leading cause.
• CTPA: may be performed safely with fetal shielding 
(0.01–0.06 mGy). It is important to consider the risk of 
radiation to breast tissue (particularly if there is a family 
history of breast carcinoma) and the risk of iodinated 
contrast media to mother and fetus (neonatal 
hypothyroidism).
• 

V / Q scanning: greater radiation dose to fetus (0.11–
0.22 mGy) but less to maternal breast tissue.
• In utero radiation exposure: estimated incidence of 
childhood malignancy is about 1 in 16 000 per mGy.
• Warfarin: teratogenic, so VTE should be treated with LMWH 
during pregnancy.
19.95  VTE and pregnancy
Respiratory disease
19
724
Caval filters
A patient in whom anticoagulation is contraindicated, 
who has suffered massive haemorrhage on anticoagula-
tion, or recurrent VTE despite anticoagulation, should 
be considered for an inferior vena caval filter. Retrieva-
ble caval filters are particularly useful in patients with 
temporary risk factors. 
Prognosis
Immediate morality is greatest in those with echocardio-
graphic evidence of right ventricular dysfunction or car-
diogenic shock. Once anticoagulation is commenced, 
however, the risk of mortality rapidly falls. The risk of 
recurrence is highest in the first 6–12 months after the 
initial event, and at 10 years around one-third of indi-
viduals will have suffered a further event.
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is defined as a mean pul-
monary artery pressure of at least 25 mmHg at rest, as 
measured at right heart catheterisation. The definition 
may be further refined by consideration of the pulmo-
nary wedge pressure, the cardiac output and the 
transpulmonary pressure gradient (mean PAP − mean 
PWP). The clinical classification of pulmonary hyperten-
sion is shown in Box 19.97. Further classification is based 
on the degree of functional disturbance, assessed using 
the New York Heart Association (NYHA) grades I–IV. 
Although respiratory failure due to intrinsic pulmonary 
disease is the most common cause of pulmonary hyper-
tension, severe pulmonary hypertension may occur as a 
primary disorder, as a complication of connective tissue 
disease (e.g. systemic sclerosis), or as a result of chronic 
thromboembolic events.
Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) is a rare but 
important disease that affects predominantly women, 
aged between 20 and 30 years. Familial disease is rarer 
still but is known to be associated with mutations in the 
gene encoding type II bone morphogenetic protein 
receptor (BMPR2), a member of the TGF-β superfamily. 
Mutations in this gene have been identified in 
some patients with sporadic pulmonary hypertension. 
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
• Primary pulmonary hypertension: sporadic and familial
• Secondary to: connective tissue disease (limited cutaneous 
systemic sclerosis), congenital systemic to pulmonary shunts, 
portal hypertension, HIV infection, exposure to various drugs 
or toxins, and persistent pulmonary hypertension of the 
newborn
Pulmonary venous hypertension
• Left-sided atrial or ventricular heart disease
• Left-sided valvular heart disease
• Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease
• Pulmonary capillary haemangiomatosis
Pulmonary hypertension associated with disorders of  
the respiratory system and/or hypoxaemia
• COPD
• Diffuse parenchymal lung 
disease
• Sleep-disordered breathing
• Alveolar hypoventilation 
disorders
• Chronic exposure to high 
altitude
• Neonatal lung disease
• Alveolar capillary dysplasia
• Severe kyphoscoliosis
Pulmonary hypertension caused by chronic  
thromboembolic disease
• Thromboembolic 
obstruction of the proximal 
pulmonary arteries
• In situ thrombosis
• Sickle cell disease
Miscellaneous
• Inflammatory conditions
• Extrinsic compression of central pulmonary veins
19.97  Classification of pulmonary hypertension
Adapted from Dana Point 2008. Simonneau G, et al. Updated clinical 
classification of pulmonary hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 
54:S43–S54.
• Risk: rises by a factor of 2.5 over the age of 60 yrs.
• Prophylaxis for VTE: should be considered in all older 
patients who are immobile as a result of acute illness, except 
when this is due to acute stroke.
• Association with cancer: the prevalence of cancer among 
those with DVT increases with age but the relative risk of 
malignancy with DVT falls; therefore extensive investigation 
is not justified if initial assessment reveals no evidence of an 
underlying neoplasm.
• Warfarin: older patients are more sensitive to the 
anticoagulant effects of warfarin, partly due to the concurrent 
use of other drugs and the presence of other pathology. 
Life-threatening or fatal bleeds on warfarin are significantly 
more common in those aged over 80 yrs.
• Chronic immobility: long-term anticoagulant therapy is not 
required as there is no associated increase in 
thromboembolism.
19.96  Thromboembolic disease in old age
Pathological features include hypertrophy of both the 
media and the intima of the vessel wall, and a clonal 
expansion of endothelial cells which take on the appear-
ance of plexiform lesions. There is marked narrowing of 
the vessel lumen and this, together with the frequently 
observed in situ thrombosis, leads to an increase 
in pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary 
hypertension.
Clinical features
PH presents insidiously and is often diagnosed late. 
Typical symptoms include breathlessness, chest pain, 
fatigue, palpitation and syncope. Important signs 
include elevation of the jugular venous pulse (with a 
prominent ‘a’ wave if in sinus rhythm), a parasternal 
heave (right ventricular hypertrophy), accentuation of 
the pulmonary component of the second heart sound 
and a right ventricular third heart sound. Signs of inter-
stitial lung disease or cardiac, liver or connective tissue 
disease may suggest the underlying cause.
Investigations
PH is suspected if an electrocardiograph shows a right 
ventricular ‘strain’ pattern or a chest X-ray shows 
enlarged pulmonary arteries, peripheral pruning and 
right ventricle enlargement (Fig. 19.70). Doppler assess-
ment of the tricuspid regurgitant jet by transthoracic 
echocardiography provides a non-invasive estimate of 
Diseases of the upper airway
19
725
common type of seasonal allergic rhinitis in northern 
Europe, which is at its peak between May and July. 
However this is a worldwide problem, which may be 
aggravated during harvest seasons.
Perennial allergic rhinitis may be a specific reaction 
to antigens derived from house dust, fungal spores or 
animal dander, but similar symptoms can be caused by 
physical or chemical irritants – for example, pungent 
odours or fumes, including strong perfumes, cold air 
and dry atmospheres. The phrase ‘vasomotor rhinitis’ is 
often used in this context, as the term ‘allergic’ is a 
misnomer.
Clinical features
In the seasonal type, there are frequent sudden attacks 
of sneezing, with profuse watery nasal discharge and 
nasal obstruction. These attacks last for a few hours and 
are often accompanied by smarting and watering of the 
eyes and conjunctival irritation. In perennial rhinitis, the 
symptoms are similar but more continuous and usually 
less severe. Skin hypersensitivity tests with the relevant 
antigen are usually positive in seasonal allergic rhinitis, 
but are less useful in perennial rhinitis.
Management
In those sensitised to house dust, simple measures, such 
as thorough dust removal from the bed area, leaving a 
window open and renewing old pillows, are often 
helpful. Avoidance of pollen and antigens from domes-
tic pets, however desirable and beneficial, is usually 
impractical.
The following medications, singly or in combination, 
are usually effective in both seasonal and perennial aller-
gic rhinitis:
•	 an antihistamine such as loratadine
•	 sodium cromoglicate nasal spray
•	 steroid nasal spray, e.g. beclometasone 
dipropionate, fluticasone, mometasone or 
budesonide.
In patients whose symptoms are very severe and seri-
ously interfering with school, business or social activi-
ties, systemic corticosteroids are occasionally indicated, 
but adverse effects limit their usefulness. Vasomotor 
rhinitis is often difficult to treat, but may respond to 
ipratropium bromide, administered into each nostril 
3 times daily.
Sleep-disordered breathing
A variety of respiratory disorders affect sleep or are 
affected by sleep. Cough and wheeze disturbing sleep 
are characteristic of asthma, while the hypoventilation 
that accompanies normal sleep can precipitate respira-
tory failure in patients with disordered ventilation due 
to kyphoscoliosis, diaphragmatic palsy or muscle disease 
(e.g. muscular dystrophy).
In contrast, a small but important group of disorders 
cause problems only during sleep. Patients with these 
may have normal lungs and daytime respiratory func-
tion, but during sleep have either abnormalities of ven-
tilatory drive (central sleep apnoea) or upper airway 
obstruction (obstructive sleep apnoea). Of these, the 
obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome is by far 
the most common and important. When this coexists 
Fig. 19.70  Chest X-ray showing the typical appearance in 
pulmonary hypertension. 
the pulmonary artery pressure, which is equal to 4 × 
(tricuspid regurgitation velocity)2. Further assessment 
should be by right heart catheterisation to assess pulmo-
nary haemodynamics, measure vasodilator responsive-
ness and thus guide further therapy.
Management
The management of PH should be guided by expert 
advice. General measures include diuretic therapy for 
right heart failure, and long-term oxygen therapy for 
those with chronic hypoxaemia. Unless there is an 
increased risk of bleeding, anticoagulation should be 
considered. Digoxin may be useful in patients who 
develop atrial tachyarrhythmias. Pregnancy carries a 
very high risk of death and women of child-bearing age 
should be counselled appropriately. Excessive physical 
activity that leads to distressing symptoms should be 
avoided but otherwise patients should be encouraged to 
remain active. Pneumococcal and influenza vaccination 
should be given.
Specific treatment options include high-dose calcium 
channel blockers, prostaglandins such as epoprostenol 
(prostacyclin) or iloprost therapy, the phosphodiester­ase 
type 5 (PDE5) inhibitor sildenafil, and the oral endothelin 
antagonist bosentan. Selected patients are referred for 
heart–lung transplantation, and pulmonary thrombo-
endarterectomy may be contemplated in those with 
chronic proximal pulmonary thromboembolic disease. 
Another alternative is atrial septostomy (the creation of 
a right-to-left shunt), which decompresses the right ven-
tricle and improves haemodynamic performance.
DISEASES OF THE UPPER AIRWAY
Diseases of the nasopharynx
Allergic rhinitis
This is a disorder in which there are episodes of nasal 
congestion, watery nasal discharge and sneezing. It may 
be seasonal or perennial, and is due to an immediate 
hypersensitivity reaction in the nasal mucosa. Seasonal 
antigens include pollens from grasses, flowers, weeds or 
trees. Grass pollen is responsible for hay fever, the most 
Respiratory disease
19
726
feels that he or she has been asleep all night but wakes 
unrefreshed. Bed partners report loud snoring in all 
body positions and often have noticed multiple breath-
ing pauses (apnoeas). Difficulty with concentration, 
impaired cognitive function and work performance, 
depression, irritability and nocturia are other features.
Investigations
Provided that the sleepiness does not result from inad-
equate time in bed or from shift work, anyone who 
repeatedly falls asleep during the day when not in bed, 
who complains that his or her work is impaired by 
sleepi­ness, or who is a habitual snorer with multiple 
witnessed apnoeas should be referred for a sleep assess-
ment. A more quantitative assessment of daytime sleepi-
ness can be obtained by questionnaire (Box 19.98).
Overnight studies of breathing, oxygenation and 
sleep quality are diagnostic (Fig. 19.71) but the level of 
with COPD, severe respiratory failure can result even if 
the COPD is mild.
The sleep apnoea/hypopnoea 
syndrome
It is now recognised that 2–4% of the middle-aged popu-
lation suffer from recurrent upper airway obstruction 
during sleep. The resulting sleep fragmentation causes 
daytime sleepiness, especially in monotonous situations, 
resulting in a threefold increased risk of road traffic acci-
dents and a ninefold increased risk of single-vehicle 
accidents.
Aetiology
Sleep apnoea results from recurrent occlusion of the 
pharynx during sleep, usually at the level of the soft 
palate. Inspiration results in negative pressure within 
the pharynx. During wakefulness, upper airway dilating 
muscles, including palatoglossus and genioglossus, con-
tract actively during inspiration to preserve airway 
patency. During sleep, muscle tone declines, impairing 
the ability of these muscles to maintain pharyngeal 
patency. In a minority of people, a combination of an 
anatomically narrow palatopharynx and underactivity 
of the dilating muscles during sleep results in inspira-
tory airway obstruction. Incomplete obstruction causes 
turbulent flow, resulting in snoring (around 40% of 
middle-aged men and 20% of middle-aged women 
snore). More severe obstruction triggers increased 
inspiratory effort and transiently wakes the patient, 
allowing the dilating muscles to re-open the airway. 
These awakenings are so brief that patients have no 
recollection of them. After a series of loud deep breaths 
that may wake their bed partner, the patient rapidly 
returns to sleep, snores and becomes apnoeic once more. 
This cycle of apnoea and awakening may repeat itself 
many hundreds of times per night and results in severe 
sleep fragmentation and secondary variations in blood 
pressure, which may predispose over time to cardiovas-
cular disease.
Predisposing factors to the sleep apnoea/hypopnoea 
syndrome include male gender, which doubles the 
risk, and obesity, which is found in about 50%, 
because parapharyngeal fat deposits tend to narrow the 
pharynx. Nasal obstruction or a recessed mandible can 
further exacerbate the problem. Acromegaly and hypo­
thyroidism also predispose by causing submucosal infil-
tration and narrowing of the upper airway. Sleep apnoea 
is often familial, where the maxilla and mandible are 
back-set, narrowing the upper airway. Alcohol and 
seda­tives predispose to snoring and apnoea by relaxing 
the upper airway dilating muscles. As a result of marked 
sympathetic activation during apnoea, sleep-disordered 
breathing is associated over time with sustained hyper-
tension and an increased risk of coronary events and 
stroke. An association has also been described with 
insulin resistance, the metabolic syndrome and type II 
diabetes. Treatment of sleep apnoea reduces sympa-
thetic drive and blood pressure, and may also improve 
these associated metabolic disorders.
Clinical features
Excessive daytime sleepiness is the principal symptom 
and snoring is virtually universal. The patient usually 
Fig. 19.71  Sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome: overnight oxygen 
saturation trace. The left-hand panel shows the trace of a patient who 
had 53 apnoeas plus hypopnoeas/hour, 55 brief awakenings/hour and 
marked oxygen desaturation. The right-hand panel shows the effect of 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) of 10 cm H2O delivered 
through a tight-fitting nasal mask: it abolished his breathing irregularity and 
awakenings, and improved oxygenation. 
Time (hrs)
Time (hrs)
Oxygen
saturation
%
100
50
0
2400 0100 0200 0300 0400
2400 0100 0200 0300 0400
CPAP night
Baseline night
How likely are you to doze off or fall asleep in the situations 
described below? Choose the most appropriate number for each 
situation from the following scale:
0 = would never doze
1 = slight chance of dozing
2 = moderate chance of dozing
3 = high chance of dozing
• Sitting and reading
• Watching TV
• Sitting inactive in a public place (e.g. a theatre or a meeting)
• As a passenger in a car for an hour without a break
• Lying down to rest in the afternoon when circumstances 
permit
• Sitting and talking to someone
• Sitting quietly after a lunch without alcohol
• In a car, while stopped for a few minutes in the traffic
Normal subjects average 5.9 (SD 2.2) and patients with 
severe obstructive sleep apnoea average 16.0 (SD 4.4).
19.98  Epworth sleepiness scale
Diseases of the upper airway
19
727
Chronic laryngitis
The common causes are listed in Box 19.100. The chief 
symptoms are hoarseness or loss of voice (aphonia). 
There is irritation of the throat and a spasmodic cough. 
The disease pursues a chronic course, frequently unin-
fluenced by treatment, and the voice may become per-
manently impaired. Other causes of chronic hoarseness 
include use of inhaled corticosteroid treatment, tubercu-
losis, laryngeal paralysis or tumour.
In some patients, a chest X-ray may reveal an unsus-
pected bronchial carcinoma or pulmonary tuberculosis. 
If these are not found, laryngoscopy should be per-
formed to exclude a local structural cause.
When no specific treatable cause is found, the voice 
must be rested completely. This is particularly impor-
tant in public speakers and singers. Smoking should be 
avoided. Some benefit may be obtained from frequent 
inhalations of medicated steam.
Laryngeal paralysis
Interruption of the motor nerve supply of the larynx 
is nearly always unilateral and, because of the intratho-
racic course of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
usually left-sided. One or both recurrent laryngeal 
nerves may be damaged at thyroidectomy, by carci-
noma of the thyroid or by anterior neck injury. Rarely, 
the vagal trunk itself is involved by tumour, aneurysm 
or trauma.
Clinical features and management
Hoarseness always accompanies laryngeal paralysis, 
whatever its cause. Paralysis of organic origin is seldom 
reversible, but when only one vocal cord is affected, 
hoarseness may improve or even disappear after a few 
weeks, as the normal cord compensates by crossing the 
midline to approximate with the paralysed cord on 
phonation.
‘Bovine cough’ is a characteristic feature of organic 
laryngeal paralysis, and lacks the explosive quality of 
normal coughing because the cords fail to close the 
glottis. Sputum clearance may also be impaired. A 
normal cough in patients with partial loss of voice or 
aphonia virtually excludes laryngeal paralysis. Stridor is 
occasionally present but seldom severe, except when 
laryngeal paralysis is bilateral.
Laryngoscopy is required to establish the diagnosis 
of laryngeal paralysis. The paralysed cord lies in the 
so-called ‘cadaveric’ position, midway between abduc-
tion and adduction.
The cause should be treated, if possible. In unilateral 
paralysis, persistent dysphonia may be improved by the 
injection of Teflon into the affected vocal cord. In bilat-
eral organic paralysis, tracheal intubation, tracheostomy 
or plastic surgery on the larynx may be necessary.
investigations depends on local resources and the prob-
ability of the diagnosis. The current threshold for diag-
nosing moderate sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome is 
15 apnoeas/hypopnoeas per hour of sleep, where an 
apnoea is defined as a 10-second or longer breathing 
pause and a hypopnoea a 10-second or longer 50% 
reduction in breathing.
Several other conditions can cause daytime sleepi-
ness but can usually be excluded by a careful history 
(Box 19.99). Narcolepsy is a rare cause of sleepiness, 
occurring in 0.05% of the population (p. 1187). Idiopathic 
hypersomnolence occurs in younger individuals and is 
characterised by long nocturnal sleeps.
Management
The major hazard to patients and those around them is 
traffic accidents, so all drivers must be advised not to 
drive until treatment has relieved their sleepiness. In a 
minority, relief of nasal obstruction or the avoidance of 
alcohol may prevent obstruction. Advice to obese 
patients to lose weight is often unheeded, and the major-
ity of patients need to use continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) delivered by a nasal mask every night 
to splint the upper airway open. When CPAP is toler-
ated, the effect is often dramatic (see Fig. 19.71), with 
relief of somnolence and improved daytime perform-
ance, quality of life and survival. Unfortunately, 30–50% 
of patients do not tolerate CPAP. Mandibular advance-
ment devices that fit over the teeth and hold the mandi-
ble forward, thus opening the pharynx, are an alternative 
that is effective in some patients. There is no evidence 
that palatal surgery is of benefit.
Laryngeal disorders
The larynx is commonly affected by acute self-limiting 
infections (p. 681). Other disorders include chronic 
laryngitis, laryngeal tuberculosis, laryngeal paralysis 
and laryngeal obstruction. Tumours of the larynx 
are relatively common, particularly in smokers. For 
further details, the reader should refer to an otolaryn­
gology text.
• Repeated attacks of acute laryngitis
• Excessive use of the voice, especially in dusty atmospheres
• Heavy tobacco smoking
• Mouth-breathing from nasal obstruction
• Chronic infection of nasal sinuses
19.100  Causes of chronic laryngitis
Lack of sleep
• Inadequate time in bed
• Extraneous sleep disruption 
(e.g. babies/children)
• Shift work
• Excessive caffeine intake
• Physical illness (e.g. pain)
Sleep disruption
• Sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome
• Periodic limb movement disorder (recurrent limb movements 
during non-REM sleep, frequent nocturnal awakenings)
Sleepiness with relatively normal sleep
• Narcolepsy
• Idiopathic hypersomnolence (rare)
• Neurological lesions (e.g. hypothalamic or upper brainstem 
infarcts or tumours)
• Drugs
Psychological/psychiatric
• Depression
19.99  Differential diagnosis of 
persistent sleepiness
Respiratory disease
19
728
Tracheal disorders
Tracheal obstruction
External compression by lymph nodes containing metas-
tases, usually from a bronchial carcinoma, is a more 
frequent cause of tracheal obstruction than primary 
benign or malignant tumours. The trachea may also be 
compressed by a retrosternal goitre (see Fig. 19.11, 
p. 657). Rare causes include an aneurysm of the aortic 
arch and (in children) tuberculous mediastinal lymph 
nodes. Tracheal stenosis is an occasional complication of 
tracheostomy, prolonged intubation, granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis, p. 1118) or 
trauma.
Clinical features and management
Stridor can be detected in every patient with severe tra-
cheal narrowing. Bronchoscopic examination of the 
trachea should be undertaken without delay to deter-
mine the site, degree and nature of the obstruction.
Localised tumours of the trachea can be resected, but 
reconstruction after resection may be technically diffi-
cult. Endobronchial laser therapy, bronchoscopically 
placed tracheal stents, chemotherapy and radiotherapy 
are alternatives to surgery. The choice of treatment 
depends upon the nature of the tumour and the general 
health of the patient. Benign tracheal strictures can 
sometimes be dilated but may require resection.
Tracheo-oesophageal fistula
This may be present in newborn infants as a congenital 
abnormality. In adults, it is usually due to malignant 
lesions in the mediastinum, such as carcinoma or lym-
phoma, eroding both the trachea and oesophagus to 
produce a communication between them. Swallowed 
liquids enter the trachea and bronchi through the fistula 
and provoke coughing.
Surgical closure of a congenital fistula, if under-
taken promptly, is usually successful. There is usually 
no curative treatment for malignant fistulae, and death 
from overwhelming pulmonary infection rapidly 
supervenes.
PLEURAL DISEASE
Pleurisy, pleural effusion, empyema and asbestos-
associated pleural disease have been described above.
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax is the presence of air in the pleural space, 
which can either occur spontaneously, or result from 
iatrogenic injury or trauma to the lung or chest wall (Box 
19.102). Primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in 
patients with no history of lung disease. Smoking, tall 
stature and the presence of apical subpleural blebs are 
risk factors. Secondary pneumothorax affects patients 
with pre-existing lung disease and is associated with 
higher mortality rates (Fig. 19.72).
Where the communication between the airway and 
the pleural space seals off as the lung deflates and does 
not re-open, the pneumothorax is referred to as ‘closed’ 
Psychogenic hoarseness  
and aphonia
Psychogenic causes of hoarseness or aphonia may 
be suggested by associated symptoms in the history 
(p. 236). However, laryngoscopy may be necessary to 
exclude a physical cause. In psychogenic aphonia, only 
the voluntary movement of adduction of the vocal cords 
is seen to be impaired. Speech therapy may be helpful.
Laryngeal obstruction
Laryngeal obstruction is more liable to occur in children 
than in adults because of the smaller size of the glottis. 
Important causes are given in Box 19.101. Sudden com-
plete laryngeal obstruction by a foreign body produces 
the clinical picture of acute asphyxia: violent but ineffec-
tive inspiratory efforts with indrawing of the intercostal 
spaces and the unsupported lower ribs, accompanied by 
cyanosis. Unrelieved, the condition progresses to coma 
and death within a few minutes. When, as in most cases, 
the obstruction is incomplete at first, the main clinical 
features are progressive breathlessness accompanied by 
stridor and cyanosis. Urgent treatment to prevent com-
plete obstruction is needed.
Management
Transient laryngeal obstruction due to exudate and 
spasm, which may occur with acute pharyngitis in chil-
dren and with whooping cough, is potentially danger-
ous but can usually be relieved by steam inhalation. 
Laryngeal obstruction from all other causes carries a 
high mortality and demands prompt treatment.
When a foreign body causes laryngeal obstruction in 
children, it can often be dislodged by turning the patient 
head downwards, and squeezing the chest vigorously. 
In adults, a sudden forceful compression of the upper 
abdomen (Heimlich manœuvre) may be effective. 
Otherwise, the cause of the obstruction should be inves-
tigated by direct laryngoscopy, which may also permit 
the removal of an unsuspected foreign body or the inser-
tion of a tube past the obstruction into the trachea. Tra-
cheostomy must be performed without delay if these 
procedures fail to relieve obstruction but, except in dire 
emergencies, this should be performed in theatre by a 
surgeon.
In diphtheria, antitoxin should be administered, and 
for other infections the appropriate antibiotic should be 
given. In angioedema, complete laryngeal occlusion can 
usually be prevented by treatment with adrenaline 
(epinephrine) 0.5–1 mg (0.5–1 mL of 1 : 1000) IM, chlor­
phenamine maleate (10–20 mg by slow intravenous 
injection) and intravenous hydrocortisone sodium suc-
cinate (200 mg).
• Inflammatory or allergic oedema, or exudate
• Spasm of laryngeal muscles
• Inhaled foreign body
• Inhaled blood clot or vomitus in an unconscious patient
• Tumours of the larynx
• Bilateral vocal cord paralysis
• Fixation of both cords in rheumatoid disease
19.101  Causes of laryngeal obstruction
Pleural disease
19
729
bronchopleural fistula, which, if large, can facilitate the 
transmission of infection from the airways into the 
pleural space, leading to empyema. An open pneumo­
thorax is commonly seen following rupture of an 
emphysematous bulla, tuberculous cavity or lung 
abscess into the pleural space.
Occasionally, the communication between the airway 
and the pleural space acts as a one-way valve, allowing 
air to enter the pleural space during inspiration but not 
to escape on expiration. Large amounts of trapped air 
accumulate progressively in the pleural space and the 
intrapleural pressure rises to well above atmospheric 
levels. This is a tension pneumothorax. The pressure 
causes mediastinal displacement towards the opposite 
side, with compression of the opposite normal lung and 
impairment of systemic venous return, causing cardio-
vascular compromise (Fig. 19.73C).
Clinical features
The most common symptoms are sudden-onset unilat-
eral pleuritic chest pain or breathlessness. In those indi-
viduals with underlying chest disease, breathlessness 
can be severe and may not resolve spontaneously. In 
patients with a small pneumothorax, physical examina-
tion may be normal. A larger pneumothorax (> 15% of 
the hemithorax) results in decreased or absent breath 
sounds (p. 645). The combination of absent breath 
sounds and resonant percussion note is diagnostic of 
pneumothorax.
By contrast, in tension pneumothorax there is rapidly 
progressive breathlessness associated with a marked 
tachycardia, hypotension, cyanosis and tracheal dis-
placement away from the side of the silent hemithorax. 
Occasionally, tension pneumothorax may occur without 
mediastinal shift, if malignant disease or scarring has 
splinted the mediastinum.
Investigations
The chest X-ray shows the sharply defined edge of the 
deflated lung with complete translucency (no lung 
markings) between this and the chest wall (p. 645). Care 
must be taken to differentiate between a large pre-
existing emphysematous bulla and a pneumothorax. CT 
is used in difficult cases to avoid misdirected attempts 
Fig. 19.72  Bimodal age distribution for hospital admissions for 
pneumothorax in England. The incidence of primary spontaneous 
pneumothorax peaks in males aged 15–30 years. Secondary spontaneous 
pneumothorax occurs mainly in males over 55 years. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Patient age (years)
Male
Female
Rate per million population
0
200
400
Fig. 19.73  Types of spontaneous pneumothorax.  A Closed type.  B Open type.  C Tension (valvular) type. 
Tension type
Mean pleural pressure
positive, mediastinal shift
to opposite side
Closed type
Mean pleural pressure
negative
Open type
Mean pleural pressure
atmospheric
A
B
C
Spontaneous
Primary
• No evidence of overt lung disease. Air escapes from the lung 
into the pleural space through rupture of a small pleural bleb, 
or the pulmonary end of a pleural adhesion
Secondary
• Underlying lung disease, most commonly COPD and 
tuberculosis; also seen in asthma, lung abscess, pulmonary 
infarcts, bronchogenic carcinoma, and all forms of fibrotic 
and cystic lung disease
Traumatic
• Iatrogenic (e.g. following thoracic surgery or biopsy) or chest 
wall injury
19.102  Classification of pneumothorax
(Fig. 19.73A). The mean pleural pressure remains nega-
tive, spontaneous reabsorption of air and re-expansion 
of the lung occur over a few days or weeks, and infection 
is uncommon. This contrasts with an ‘open’ pneumo­
thorax, where the communication fails to seal and air 
continues to pass freely between the bronchial tree and 
pleural space (Fig. 19.73B). An example of the latter is a 
Respiratory disease
19
730
insertion of a blunt cannula into the pleural space may 
be beneficial, allowing time to prepare for chest drain 
insertion.
When needed, intercostal drains are inserted in the 
4th, 5th or 6th intercostal space in the mid-axillary line, 
connected to an underwater seal or one-way Heimlich 
valve, and secured firmly to the chest wall. Clamping of 
an intercostal drain is potentially dangerous and rarely 
indicated. The drain should be removed the morning 
after the lung has fully re-inflated and bubbling has 
stopped. Continued bubbling after 5–7 days is an indica-
tion for surgery. If bubbling in the drainage bottle stops 
before full re-inflation, the tube is either blocked, kinked 
or displaced. Supplemental oxygen may speed resolu-
tion, as it accelerates the rate at which nitrogen is reab-
sorbed by the pleura.
Patients with a closed pneumothorax should be 
advised not to fly, as the trapped gas expands at alti-
tude. After complete resolution, there is no clear evi-
dence to indicate how long patients should avoid flying, 
although guidelines suggest that waiting 1–2 weeks, 
with confirmation of full inflation prior to flight, is 
prudent. Patients should also be advised to stop smoking 
and informed about the risks of a recurrent pneumotho-
rax. Diving is potentially dangerous after pneumotho-
rax, unless a surgical pleurodesis has sealed the lung to 
the chest wall.
Recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax
After primary spontaneous pneumothorax, recurrence 
occurs within a year of either aspiration or tube drainage 
in approximately 25% of patients, and should prompt 
definitive treatment. Surgical pleurodesis is recom-
mended in all patients following a second pneumotho-
rax and should be considered following the first episode 
of secondary pneumothorax if low respiratory reserve 
makes recurrence hazardous. Pleurodesis can be 
achieved by pleural abrasion or parietal pleurectomy at 
thoracotomy or thoracoscopy. 
at aspiration. X-rays may also show the extent of any 
mediastinal displacement and reveal any pleural fluid 
or underlying pulmonary disease.
Management
Primary pneumothorax, in which the lung edge is less 
than 2 cm from the chest wall and the patient is not 
breathless, normally resolves without intervention. In 
young patients presenting with a moderate or large 
spontaneous primary pneumothorax, percutaneous 
needle aspiration of air is a simple and well-tolerated 
alternative to intercostal tube drainage, with a 60–80% 
chance of avoiding the need for a chest drain (Fig. 19.74). 
In patients with significant underlying chronic lung 
disease, however, secondary pneumothorax may cause 
respiratory distress. In these patients, the success rate of 
aspiration is much lower, and intercostal tube drainage 
and inpatient observation are usually required, particu-
larly in those individuals over 50 years old and those 
with respiratory compromise. If there is a tension pneu-
mothorax, immediate release of the positive pressure by 
Fig. 19.74  Management of spontaneous pneumothorax. 
(1) Immediate decompression prior to insertion of the intercostal drain.  
(2) Aspirate in the 2nd intercostal space anteriorly in the mid-clavicular line 
using a 16 F cannula; discontinue if resistance is felt, the patient coughs 
excessively, or more than 2.5 L of air are removed. (3) The post-aspiration 
chest X-ray is not a reliable indicator of whether a pleural leak remains, 
and all patients should be told to attend again immediately in the event of 
deterioration. 
Mediastinal shift
and/or hypotension
(tension pneumothorax)
Chronic lung disease
No
Yes1
Yes
No
Pneumothorax
> 15% of
hemithorax
or significant
dyspnoea
> 50 years
of age
Yes
Observe
patient
for 6 hours
Outpatient
follow-up3
Intercostal tube drainage attached to underwater seal device
Yes
No
Yes
No
Percutaneous
needle
aspiration2
No
> 2.5 L air
aspirated or
pneumothorax
persists
• Spontaneous pneumothorax: invariably associated with 
underlying lung disease in old age and has a significant 
mortality. Surgical or chemical pleurodesis is advised in all 
such patients.
• Rib fracture: common cause of pleural-type pain; may 
be spontaneous (due to coughing), traumatic or  
pathological. Underlying osteomalacia may contribute to  
poor healing, especially in the housebound with no  
exposure to sunlight.
• Tuberculosis: should always be considered and actively 
excluded in any elderly patient presenting with a unilateral 
pleural effusion.
• Mesothelioma: more common in older individuals than 
younger people due to a long latency period between 
asbestos exposure (often more than 20 yrs) and the 
development of disease.
• Analgesia: frail older people are particularly sensitive to the 
respiratory depressant effects of opiate-based analgesia and 
careful monitoring is required when using these agents for 
pleural pain.
19.103  Pleural disease in old age
Further information and acknowledgements
19
731
Deformities of the chest wall
Thoracic kyphoscoliosis
Abnormalities of alignment of the dorsal spine and 
their consequent effects on thoracic shape may be 
caused by:
•	 congenital abnormality
•	 vertebral disease, including tuberculosis, 
osteoporosis and ankylosing spondylitis
•	 trauma
•	 neuromuscular disease such as poliomyelitis.
Simple kyphosis (increased anteroposterior curva-
ture) causes less pulmonary embarrassment than 
kyphoscoliosis (anteroposterior and lateral curvature). 
Kyphoscoliosis, if severe, restricts and distorts expan-
sion of the chest wall and impairs diaphragmatic func-
tion, causing ventilation–perfusion mismatch in the 
lungs. Patients with severe deformity may develop type 
II respiratory failure (initially manifest during sleep), 
pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular failure. 
They can often be successfully treated with non-invasive 
ventilatory support (p. 193).
Pectus excavatum
Pectus excavatum (funnel chest) is an idiopathic condi-
tion in which the body of the sternum, usually only the 
lower end, is curved inwards. The heart is displaced to 
the left and may be compressed between the sternum 
and the vertebral column but only rarely is there associ-
ated disturbance of cardiac function. The deformity may 
restrict chest expansion and reduce vital capacity. Oper-
ative correction is rarely performed, and then only for 
cosmetic reasons.
Pectus carinatum
Pectus carinatum (pigeon chest) is frequently caused by 
severe asthma during childhood. Very occasionally, this 
deformity can be produced by rickets or be idiopathic.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.brit-thoracic.org.uk Website of the British Thoracic 
Society with access to guidelines on a range of respiratory 
conditions.
www.ersnet.org European Respiratory Society provides 
information on education and research, and patient 
information.
www.ginasthma.com Global Initiative for Asthma website with 
a comprehensive overview of asthma.
www.goldcopd.com Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease website containing a comprehensive overview  
of COPD.
www.thoracic.org American Thoracic Society provides 
information on education and research, and patient 
information.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 645 insets (upper lobe collapse) http://3.bp.blogspot.com; 
(pneumothorax) http://chestatlas.com; (pleural effusion) 
www.ispub.com.
DISEASES OF THE DIAPHRAGM AND 
CHEST WALL
Disorders of the diaphragm
Congenital disorders
Diaphragmatic hernias
Congenital defects of the diaphragm can allow 
herniation of abdominal viscera. Posteriorly situated 
hernias through the foramen of Bochdalek are more 
common than anterior hernias through the foramen of 
Morgagni.
Eventration of the diaphragm
Abnormal elevation or bulging of one hemidiaphragm, 
more often the left, results from total or partial absence 
of muscular development of the septum transversum. 
Most eventrations are asymptomatic and are detected by 
chance on X-ray in adult life, but severe respiratory dis-
tress can be caused in infancy if the diaphragmatic mus-
cular defect is extensive.
Acquired disorders
Elevation of a hemidiaphragm may result from paralysis 
or other structural causes (Box 19.104). The phrenic 
nerve may be damaged by bronchial carcinoma, disease 
of cervical vertebrae, tumours of the cervical cord, shin-
gles, trauma (including road traffic and birth injuries), 
surgery, and stretching of the nerve by mediastinal 
masses and aortic aneurysms. Idiopathic diaphragmatic 
paralysis occasionally occurs in otherwise fit patients. 
Paralysis of one hemidiaphragm results in loss of around 
20% of ventilatory capacity, but may not be noticed by 
otherwise healthy individuals. Ultrasound screening 
can be used to demonstrate paradoxical upward move-
ment of the paralysed hemidiaphragm on sniffing. CT 
of the chest and neck is the best way to exclude occult 
disease affecting the phrenic nerve.
Bilateral diaphragmatic weakness occurs in periph-
eral neuropathies of any type, including Guillain–Barré 
syndrome (p. 1224), in disorders affecting the anterior 
horn cells, e.g. poliomyelitis (p. 1207), in muscular dys-
trophies, and in connective tissue disorders such as SLE 
and polymyositis (pp. 1109 and 1114).
Hiatus hernia is common (p. 865). Diaphragmatic 
rupture is usually caused by a crush injury and may not 
be detected until years later. Respiratory disorders that 
cause pulmonary hyperinflation, e.g. emphysema, and 
those that result in small stiff lungs, e.g. diffuse pulmo-
nary fibrosis, compromise diaphragmatic function and 
predispose to fatigue.
• Phrenic nerve paralysis
• Eventration of the 
diaphragm
• Decrease in volume of one 
lung (e.g. lobectomy, 
unilateral pulmonary 
fibrosis)
• Severe pleuritic pain
• Pulmonary infarction
• Subphrenic abscess
• Large volume of gas in the 
stomach or colon
• Large tumours or cysts of 
the liver
19.104  Causes of elevation of a hemidiaphragm
Respiratory disease
19
732
Fig. 19.28 Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease, www.goldcopd.com.
Fig. 19.35 Maartens G, Wilkinson RJ. Tuberculosis. Lancet 
2007; 370:2030–2043.
Fig. 19.52 Adapted from Detterbeck FC, Boffa DJ, Tanoue 
LT. The new lung cancer staging system. Chest 2009; 
136:260–271.
Fig. 19.53 Johnson N McL. Respiratory medicine. Oxford: 
Blackwell Science; 1986.
Fig. 19.60 inset (erythema nodosum) Savin JA, Hunter JAA, 
Hepburn NC. Skin signs in clinical medicine. London: 
Mosby–Wolfe; 1997; copyright Elsevier.
Fig. 19.2 www.Netter.com Illustrations 155 (bronchus, 
acinus) and 191 (circulation), Elsevier.
Fig. 19.4 Innes JA. Davidson’s Essentials of medicine. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2009 (Fig. 19.4, p. 791); 
copyright Elsevier.
Fig. 19.6A–C http://radiology.rsnajnls.org.
Fig. 19.8 Adapted from Flenley D. Lancet 1971; 1:1921.
Fig. 19.16 WHO Global surveillance, prevention and control 
of chronic respiratory diseases: a comprehensive 
approach.
Fig. 19.22 British Thoracic Society and SIGN guideline on 
the Management of Asthma.
733
20 
Clinical examination in endocrine  
disease 734
An overview of endocrinology 736
Functional anatomy and physiology 736
Endocrine pathology 736
Investigation of endocrine disease 737
Presenting problems in endocrine disease 737
The thyroid gland 738
Functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations 738
Presenting problems in thyroid disease 740
Thyrotoxicosis 740
Hypothyroidism 743
Asymptomatic abnormal thyroid function 
tests 745
Thyroid lump or swelling 746
Autoimmune thyroid disease 747
Transient thyroiditis 751
Iodine-associated thyroid disease 752
Simple and multinodular goitre 752
Thyroid neoplasia 754
Congenital thyroid disease 755
The reproductive system 756
Functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations 756
Presenting problems in reproductive  
disease 758
Delayed puberty 758
Amenorrhoea 759
Male hypogonadism 760
Infertility 761
Gynaecomastia 762
Hirsutism 763
Polycystic ovarian syndrome 764
Turner’s syndrome 765
Klinefelter’s syndrome 766
Endocrine disease
The hypothalamus and the pituitary  
gland 785
Functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations 786
Presenting problems in hypothalamic and 
pituitary disease 787
Hypopituitarism 787
Pituitary tumour 789
Hyperprolactinaemia/galactorrhoea 790
Prolactinoma 791
Acromegaly 792
Craniopharyngioma 793
Diabetes insipidus 794
Disorders affecting multiple endocrine 
glands 795
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 795
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes 795
Late effects of childhood cancer therapy 796
M.W.J. Strachan
J. Newell-Price
The parathyroid glands 766
Functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations 766
Presenting problems in parathyroid  
disease 767
Hypercalcaemia 767
Hypocalcaemia 768
Primary hyperparathyroidism 769
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia 770
Hypoparathyroidism 770
The adrenal glands 771
Functional anatomy and physiology 771
Presenting problems in adrenal  
disease 773
Cushing’s syndrome 773
Therapeutic use of glucocorticoids 776
Adrenal insufficiency 777
Incidental adrenal mass 779
Primary hyperaldosteronism 780
Phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma 781
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 782
The endocrine pancreas and gastrointestinal 
tract 782
Presenting problems in endocrine pancreas 
disease 783
Spontaneous hypoglycaemia 783
Gastroenteropancreatic neuro-endocrine 
tumours 784
Endocrine disease
734
CLINICAL EXAMINATION IN ENDOCRINE DISEASE
Observation
Hands
Palmar erythema
Tremor
Acromegaly
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Skin
Hair distribution
Dry/greasy
Pigmentation/pallor
Bruising
Vitiligo
Striae
Thickness
Pulse
Atrial fibrillation
Sinus tachycardia
Bradycardia
Breasts
Galactorrhoea
Gynaecomastia
Neck
Voice
  Hoarse, e.g. hypothyroid
  Virilised
Thyroid gland (see
  opposite)
  Goitre
  Nodules
8
7
2
3
4
5
• Most examination in endocrinology
   is by observation
• Astute observation can often yield
  ‘spot’ diagnosis of endocrine disorders
• The emphasis of examination varies
   depending on which gland or hormone
   is thought to be involved 
Body fat
Central obesity in
Cushing’s syndrome and
growth hormone deficiency
9
Height and weight
Bones
Fragility fractures (e.g. of
vertebrae, neck of femur or
distal radius)
10
Genitalia
Virilisation
Pubertal development
Testicular volume
11
Legs
Proximal myopathy
Myxoedema
12
Blood pressure
Hypertension in Cushing’s
and Conn’s syndromes,
phaeochromocytoma
Hypotension in adrenal
insufficiency
Head
Eyes
  Graves’ disease
 (see opposite)
  Diplopia
  Visual field defect
  (see opposite)
Hair
  Alopecia
  Frontal balding
6
Facial features
  Hypothyroid
  Hirsutism
  Acromegaly
  Cushing’s
Mental state
  Lethargy
  Depression
  Confusion
  Libido  
1
Prognathism in acromegaly
Acromegalic hands. Note soft
tissue enlargement causing
‘spade-like’ changes
Pigmentation of creases
due to high ACTH levels
in Addison’s disease
Vitiligo in organ-specific
autoimmune disease
Multinodular goitre
Pretibial myxoedema
in Graves' disease
Clinical examination in endocrine disease
735
Endocrine disease causes clinical 
syndromes with symptoms and 
signs involving many organ systems, 
reflecting the diverse effects of 
hormone deficiency and excess. The 
emphasis of the clinical examination 
depends on the gland or hormone 
that is thought to be abnormal.
Diabetes mellitus (described in 
detail in Ch. 21) and thyroid disease 
are the most common endocrine 
disorders.
• Sit opposite patient
• You and patient cover opposite
  eyes
• Bring red pin (or wiggling finger)
  slowly into view from extreme of
  your vision, as shown
• Ask patient to say ‘now’ when it
  comes into view
• Continue to move pin into centre
  of vision and ask patient to tell
  you if it disappears
• Repeat in each of four quadrants
• Repeat in other eye
A bitemporal hemianopia is the
classical finding in pituitary
macroadenomas (p. 789)
6  Examination of the visual 
fields by confrontation
6  Examination in Graves’ ophthalmopathy
• Inspect from front and side
     Periorbital oedema (Fig. 20.7)
     Conjunctival inflammation
     (chemosis)
     Corneal ulceration
     Proptosis (exophthalmos)*
     Lid retraction*
• Range of eye movements
     Lid lag on descending gaze*
     Diplopia on lateral gaze
• Pupillary reflexes
     Afferent defect (pupils constrict
     further on swinging light to
     unaffected eye, Box 26.28)
• Vision
     Visual acuity impaired
     Loss of colour vision
     Visual field defects
• Ophthalmoscopy
     Optic disc pallor
     Papilloedema
*Note position of eyelids relative to iris.
Normal
     
Proptosis
     
Right proptosis and afferent pupillary defect
     
Lid
retraction
     
Normal
     
Normal
descent
     
Lid lag
descent
     
7  Examination of the thyroid gland
Abnormal findings
Diffuse soft goitre with bruit
 
Graves’ disease (p. 747) 
Diffuse firm goitre
 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (p. 751)
Diffuse tender goitre
 
Subacute thyroiditis (p. 751)
Multinodular goitre (p. 752)
 
± Retrosternal extension, tracheal
 
compression
Solitary nodule (p. 746)
 
Adenoma, cyst or carcinoma
Cervical lymphadenopathy
 
Suggests carcinoma
• Inspect from front to side
• Palpate from behind
  Thyroid moves on swallowing
  Cervical lymph nodes
  Tracheal deviation
• Auscultate for bruit
  Ask patient to hold breath
  If present, check for
  radiating murmur
• Percuss for retrosternal thyroid
• Consider systemic signs of thyroid
   dysfunction (Box 20.7)
 incl. tremor, palmar erythema,
 warm peripheries, tachycardia,
 lid lag
• Consider signs of Graves’ disease
 incl. ophthalmopathy, pretibial
 myxoedema
Endocrine disease
20
736
response elements on DNA to regulate gene expression 
(p. 42).
The classical model of endocrine function involves 
hormones synthesised in endocrine glands, which are 
released into the circulation and act at sites distant from 
those of secretion (as in Fig. 20.1). However, additional 
levels of regulation are now recognised. Many other 
organs secrete hormones or contribute to the peripheral 
metabolism and activation of pro-hormones. A notable 
example is the production of oestrogens from adrenal 
androgens in adipose tissue by the enzyme aromatase. 
Some hormones, such as neurotransmitters, act in a 
paracrine fashion to affect adjacent cells, or act in an 
autocrine way to affect behaviour of the cell that pro-
duces the hormone.
Endocrine pathology
For each endocrine axis or major gland, diseases can be 
classified as shown in Box 20.1. Pathology arising within 
the gland is often called ‘primary’ disease (for example, 
primary hypothyroidism in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis), 
while abnormal stimulation of the gland is often called 
‘secondary’ disease (for example, secondary hypo­
thyroidism in patients with a pituitary tumour and 
thyroid-stimulating hormone deficiency). Some patho-
logical processes can affect multiple endocrine glands 
(p. 795); these may have a genetic basis (such as organ-
specific autoimmune endocrine disorders and the mul-
tiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes) or be a 
consequence of therapy for another disease (for example, 
following treatment of childhood cancer with chemo-
therapy and/or radiotherapy).
Endocrinology concerns the synthesis, secretion and 
action of hormones. These are chemical messengers 
released from endocrine glands that coordinate the 
activities of many different cells. Endocrine diseases 
can therefore affect multiple organs and systems. This 
chapter describes the principles of endocrinology before 
dealing with the function and diseases of each gland 
in turn.
Some endocrine disorders are common, particularly 
those of the thyroid, parathyroid glands, reproductive 
system and β cells of the pancreas (Ch. 21). For example, 
thyroid dysfunction occurs in more than 10% of the 
population in areas with iodine deficiency, such as the 
Himalayas, and 4% of women aged 20–50 years in 
the UK. Some endocrine diseases are becoming more 
common in association with emerging diseases; HIV 
infection is associated in particular with adrenal 
insufficiency. Less common endocrine syndromes are 
described later in the chapter.
Few endocrine therapies have been evaluated by ran-
domised controlled trials, in part because hormone 
replacement therapy (for example, with levothyroxine) 
has obvious clinical benefits and placebo-controlled 
trials would be unethical, and in part because many 
endocrine diseases are rare, making trials difficult to 
perform. Recommendations for ‘evidence-based medi-
cine’ are, therefore, relatively scarce. They relate mainly 
to use of therapy that is ‘optional’ and/or recently avail-
able, such as oestrogen replacement in post-menopausal 
women, androgen therapy in older men and growth 
hormone replacement.
AN OVERVIEW OF ENDOCRINOLOGY
Functional anatomy and physiology
Some endocrine glands, such as the parathyroids and 
pancreas, respond directly to metabolic signals, but most 
are controlled by hormones released from the pituitary 
gland. Anterior pituitary hormone secretion is control-
led in turn by substances produced in the hypothalamus 
and released into portal blood, which drains directly 
down the pituitary stalk (Fig. 20.1). Posterior pituitary 
hormones are synthesised in the hypothalamus and 
transported down nerve axons, to be released from the 
posterior pituitary. Hormone release in the hypothala-
mus and pituitary is regulated by numerous stimuli and 
through feedback control by hormones produced by the 
target glands (thyroid, adrenal cortex and gonads). 
These integrated endocrine systems are called ‘axes’, 
and are listed in Figure 20.2.
A wide variety of molecules can act as hormones, 
including peptides such as insulin and growth hormone, 
glycoproteins such as thyroid-stimulating hormone, and 
amines such as noradrenaline (norepinephrine). The 
biological effects of hormones are mediated by binding 
to receptors. Many receptors are located on the cell 
surface. These interact with various intracellular signal-
ling molecules on the cytosolic side of the plasma mem-
brane to affect cell function, usually through changes in 
gene expression (p. 48). Some hormones, most notably 
steroids, triiodothyronine and vitamin D, bind to spe-
cific intracellular receptors, which directly bind to 
Fig. 20.1  An archetypal endocrine axis. Regulation by negative 
feedback and direct control is shown, along with the equilibrium between 
active circulating free hormone and bound or metabolised hormone. 
Feedback
regulation
Trophic
hormone
Hormone
Binding
protein
Target organ
Metabolism
Endocrine
gland
Pituitary
Neural
control
Action
Receptor
Direct
regulation
An overview of endocrinology
20
737
Fig. 20.2  The principal endocrine ‘axes’. Some major endocrine glands are not controlled by the pituitary. These include the parathyroid glands 
(regulated by calcium concentrations, p. 766), the adrenal zona glomerulosa (regulated by the renin–angiotensin system, p. 771) and the endocrine 
pancreas (Ch. 21). Italics show negative regulation. (ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; ADH = antidiuretic hormone, arginine vasopressin; 
CRH = corticotrophin-releasing hormone; FSH = follicle-stimulating hormone; GH = growth hormone; GHRH = growth hormone-releasing hormone; 
GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; IGF-1 = insulin-like growth factor-1; IGF-BP3 = IGF-binding protein-3; LH = luteinising hormone: 
T3 = triiodothyronine; T4 = thyroxine; TRH = thyrotrophin-releasing hormone; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone). 
Regulation
Circadian
rhythm
Stress
Cortisol
Osmolality
Intravascular
volume
Oestrogen
Progesterone
Androgen
Prolactin
Inhibin
T3
IGF-1
GnRH
TRH
Dopamine
GHRH
Somatostatin
CRH
ADH
Oxytocin
Hypothalamus
TSH
Prolactin
GH
ACTH
Posterior
Pituitary
LH
FSH
Gonads:
testes or
ovaries
Thyroid
Breast
Liver
Adrenal
cortex
Distal
nephron
Uterus
Breast
Oestrogen
Progesterone
Androgen
T4
T3
IGF-1
IGF-BP3
Cortisol
Androgen
Glands/targets
Target
hormones
Function
Reproduction
Metabolism
Lactation
Growth
Stress
Water
balance
Parturition
Lactation
Oestrogen
Stress
Anterior
Hormone excess
• Primary gland over-production
• Secondary to excess trophic substance
Hormone deficiency
• Primary gland failure
• Secondary to deficient trophic hormone
Hormone hypersensitivity
• Failure of inactivation of hormone
• Target organ over-activity/hypersensitivity
Hormone resistance
• Failure of activation of hormone
• Target organ resistance
Non-functioning tumours
20.1  Classification of endocrine disease
Investigation of endocrine disease
Biochemical investigations play a central role in 
endocrinology. Most hormones can be measured in 
blood, but the circumstances in which the sample 
is taken are often crucial, especially for hormones 
with pulsatile secretion, such as growth hormone; 
those that show diurnal variation, such as cortisol; 
or those that demonstrate monthly variation, such 
as oestrogen or progesterone. Other investigations, such 
as imaging and biopsy, are more frequently reserved 
for patients who present with a tumour. The principles 
of investigation are shown in Box 20.2. The choice of 
test is often pragmatic, taking local access to reliable 
sampling facilities and laboratory measurements into 
account.
Timing of measurement
• Release of many hormones is rhythmical (pulsatile, circadian 
or monthly), so random measurement may be invalid and 
sequential or dynamic tests may be required
Choice of dynamic biochemical tests
• Abnormalities are often characterised by loss of normal 
regulation of hormone secretion
• If hormone deficiency is suspected, choose a stimulation test
• If hormone excess is suspected, choose a suppression test
• The more tests there are to choose from, the less likely it is 
that any single test is infallible, so avoid interpreting one 
result in isolation
Imaging
• Secretory cells also take up substrates, which can be 
labelled
• Most endocrine glands have a high prevalence of 
‘incidentalomas’, so do not scan unless the biochemistry 
confirms endocrine dysfunction or the primary problem is a 
tumour
Biopsy
• Many endocrine tumours are difficult to classify histologically 
(e.g. adrenal carcinoma and adenoma)
20.2  Principles of endocrine investigation
Presenting problems in  
endocrine disease
Endocrine diseases present in many different ways 
and to clinicians in many different disciplines. Classical 
syndromes are described in relation to individual 
glands in the following sections. Often, however, the 
Endocrine disease
20
738
100 µg/day is required to maintain thyroid function in 
adults. The thyroid secretes predominantly thyroxine 
(T4) and only a small amount of triiodothyronine (T3); 
approximately 85% of T3 in blood is produced from T4 
by a family of monodeiodinase enzymes which are 
active in many tissues, including liver, muscle, heart and 
kidney. Selenium is an integral component of these 
monodeiodinases. T4 can be regarded as a pro-hormone, 
since it has a longer half-life in blood than T3 (approxi-
mately 1 week compared with approximately 18 hours), 
and binds and activates thyroid hormone receptors less 
effectively than T3. T4 can also be converted to the inac-
tive metabolite, reverse T3.
T3 and T4 circulate in plasma almost entirely (> 99%) 
bound to transport proteins, mainly thyroxine-binding 
globulin (TBG). It is the unbound or free hormones 
which diffuse into tissues and exert diverse metabolic 
actions. Some laboratories use assays which measure 
total T4 and T3 in plasma, but it is increasingly common 
to measure free T4 and free T3. The advantage of the free 
hormone measurements is that they are not influenced 
by changes in the concentration of binding proteins; in 
pregnancy, for example, TBG levels are increased and 
total T3 and T4 may be raised, but free thyroid hormone 
levels are normal.
Production of T3 and T4 in the thyroid is stimulated 
by thyrotrophin (thyroid-stimulating hormone, TSH), a 
glycoprotein released from the thyrotroph cells of the 
anterior pituitary in response to the hypothalamic 
tripeptide, thyrotrophin-releasing hormone (TRH). A 
circadian rhythm of TSH secretion can be demonstrated 
with a peak at 0100 hrs and trough at 1100 hrs, but the 
variation is small so that thyroid function can be assessed 
reliably from a single blood sample taken at any time of 
day and does not usually require any dynamic stimula-
tion or suppression tests. There is a negative feedback of 
thyroid hormones on the hypothalamus and pituitary 
such that in thyrotoxicosis, when plasma concentrations 
of T3 and T4 are raised, TSH secretion is suppressed. 
Conversely, in hypothyroidism due to disease of the 
thyroid gland, low T3 and T4 are associated with high 
presentation is with non-specific symptoms (Box 20.3) 
or with asymptomatic biochemical abnormalities. In 
addition, endocrine diseases are encountered in the 
differential diagnosis of common complaints discussed 
in other chapters of this book, including electrolyte 
abnormalities (Ch. 16), hypertension (Ch. 18), obesity 
(Ch. 5) and osteoporosis (Ch. 25). Although diseases 
of the adrenal glands, hypothalamus and pituitary are 
relatively rare, their diagnosis often relies on astute 
clinical observation in a patient with non-specific com-
plaints, so it is important that clinicians are familiar with 
their key features.
THE THYROID GLAND
Diseases of the thyroid predominantly affect females 
and are common, occurring in about 5% of the popula-
tion. The thyroid axis is involved in the regulation of 
cellular differentiation and metabolism in virtually all 
nucleated cells, so that disorders of thyroid function 
have diverse manifestations. Structural diseases of the 
thyroid gland, such as goitre, commonly occur in 
patients with normal thyroid function. Diseases of the 
thyroid are summarised in Box 20.4.
Functional anatomy, physiology  
and investigations
Thyroid physiology is illustrated in Figure 20.3. The 
parafollicular C cells secrete calcitonin, which is of 
no apparent physiological significance in humans. The 
follicular epithelial cells synthesise thyroid hormones 
by incorporating iodine into the amino acid tyrosine on 
the surface of thyroglobulin (Tg), a protein secreted into 
the colloid of the follicle. Iodide is a key substrate for 
thyroid hormone synthesis; a dietary intake in excess of 
Primary
Secondary
Hormone excess
Graves’ disease
Multinodular goitre
Adenoma
Subacute thyroiditis
TSHoma
Hormone 
deficiency
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Atrophic hypothyroidism
Hypopituitarism
Hormone 
hypersensitivity
–
Hormone 
resistance
Thyroid hormone 
resistance syndrome
5′-monodeiodinase 
deficiency
Non-functioning 
tumours
Differentiated 
carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
Lymphoma
20.4  Classification of thyroid disease
Symptom
Most likely endocrine disorder(s)
Lethargy and 
depression
Hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, 
hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, 
adrenal insufficiency, Cushing’s syndrome
Weight gain
Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome
Weight loss
Thyrotoxicosis, adrenal insufficiency, 
diabetes mellitus
Polyuria and 
polydipsia
Diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, 
hyperparathyroidism, hypokalaemia 
(Conn’s syndrome)
Heat intolerance
Thyrotoxicosis, menopause
Palpitations
Thyrotoxicosis, phaeochromocytoma
Headache
Acromegaly, pituitary tumour, 
phaeochromocytoma
Muscle weakness 
(usually proximal)
Thyrotoxicosis, Cushing’s syndrome, 
hypokalaemia (e.g. Conn’s syndrome), 
hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism
Coarsening of 
features
Acromegaly, hypothyroidism
20.3  Examples of non-specific presentations of 
endocrine disease
The thyroid gland
20
739
Fig. 20.3  Structure and function of the thyroid gland. (1) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is synthesised and secreted into the colloid of the follicle. (2) Inorganic 
iodide (I−) is actively transported into the follicular cell (‘trapping’). (3) Iodide is transported on to the colloidal surface by a transporter (pendrin, defective in 
Pendred’s syndrome) and ‘organified’ by the thyroid peroxidase enzyme, which incorporates it into the amino acid tyrosine on the surface of Tg to form 
monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT). (4) Iodinated tyrosines couple to form T3 and T4. (5) Tg is endocytosed. (6) Tg is cleaved by proteolysis 
to free the iodinated tyrosine and thyroid hormones. (7) Iodinated tyrosine is dehalogenated to recycle the iodide. (8) T4 is converted to T3 by 
5′-monodeiodinase. 
Colloid
Follicular
cell
Extracellular
fluid
T4
MIT
DIT
T4
T3
Stimulates all
steps
+ hyperplasia
Iodide
TSH
T3  T4
MIT Tg
DIT
T3
Iodide
MIT Tg
DIT
Tg
1
8
7
8
2
4
1
3
6
5
Protein-bound
T4, T3 ( > 99%)
Increased metabolic rate
Mimic β-adrenergic action,
e.g. on heart rate, gut motility
CNS activation
Bone demineralisation
Cellular differentiation
etc.
rT3
T4
T3
8
Blood
Target tissues
HO
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Tyrosine
Monoiodotyrosine (MIT)
Diiodotyrosine (DIT)
HO
O
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Triiodothyronine (T3)
HO
O
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Thyroxine (T4)
HO
O
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Reverse T3 (rT3)
Negative
feedback
3
4
HO
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
HO
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Parafollicular (C) cells
Colloid
Follicular
epithelium
Red blood cells
Free T4,T3
( < 1%)
TSH
T4
T3
Most likely interpretation(s)
U.D.
Raised
Raised
Primary thyrotoxicosis
U.D.
Normal1
Raised
Primary T3-toxicosis
U.D. 
Normal1
Normal1
Subclinical thyrotoxicosis
U.D. or low
Raised
Low or normal
Non-thyroidal illness, amiodarone therapy
U.D.
Low
Low
Secondary hypothyroidism4
Transient thyroiditis in evolution
Normal
Low
Low2
Secondary hypothyroidism4
Mildly elevated 5–20 mU/L
Low
Low2
Primary hypothyroidism
Secondary hypothyroidism4
Elevated > 20 mU/L
Low
Low2
Primary hypothyroidism
Mildly elevated 5–20 mU/L
Normal3
Normal2
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Elevated 20–500 mU/L
Normal
Normal
Artefact
Endogenous IgG antibodies which interfere with TSH assay
Elevated
Raised
Raised
Non-compliance with T4 replacement – recent ‘loading’ dose
Secondary thyrotoxicosis4
Thyroid hormone resistance
1Usually upper part of reference range. 2T3 is not a sensitive indicator of hypothyroidism and should not be requested.
3Usually lower part of reference range. 4i.e. Secondary to pituitary or hypothalamic disease. Note that TSH assays may report detectable TSH.
20.5  How to interpret thyroid function test results
(U.D. = undetectable)
Endocrine disease
20
740
circulating TSH levels. The anterior pituitary is very sen-
sitive to minor changes in thyroid hormone levels within 
the reference range. Although the reference range for 
free T4 is 9–21 pmol/L (700–1632 pg/dL), a rise or fall 
of 5 pmol/L in an individual in whom the level is 
usually 15 pmol/L would be associated on the one hand 
with undetectable TSH, and on the other hand with a 
raised TSH. For this reason, TSH is usually regarded as 
the most useful investigation of thyroid function. 
However, interpretation of TSH values without consid-
ering thyroid hormone levels may be misleading in 
patients with pituitary disease (see Box 20.58, p. 787). 
Moreover, TSH may take several weeks to ‘catch up’ 
with T4 and T3 levels, for example, when prolonged 
suppression of TSH in thyrotoxicosis is relieved by 
anti­thyroid therapy. Heterophilic antibodies can also 
interfere with the TSH assay and cause a spuriously high 
measurement. Common patterns of abnormal thyroid 
function test results and their interpretation are shown 
in Box 20.5.
Other modalities commonly employed in the inves­
tigation of thyroid disease include measurement of anti-
bodies against the TSH receptor or other thyroid antigens 
(see Box 20.8, p. 741), radioisotope imaging, fine needle 
aspiration biopsy and ultrasound. Their use is described 
below.
Presenting problems in thyroid disease
The most common presentations are hyperthyroidism 
(thyrotoxicosis), hypothyroidism and enlargement of 
the thyroid (goitre or thyroid nodule). Widespread 
availability of thyroid function tests has led to the 
increasingly frequent identification of patients with 
abnormal results who are either asymptomatic or 
have non-specific complaints such as tiredness and 
weight gain.
Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis describes a constellation of clinical fea-
tures arising from elevated circulating levels of thyroid 
hormone. The most common causes are Graves’ disease, 
multinodular goitre and autonomously functioning 
thyroid nodules (toxic adenoma) (Box 20.6). Thyroiditis 
is more common in parts of the world where relevant 
viral infections occur, such as North America.
Clinical assessment
The clinical manifestations of thyrotoxicosis are shown 
in Box 20.7 and an approach to differential diagnosis 
is given in Figure 20.4. The most common symptoms 
are weight loss with a normal or increased appetite, 
heat intolerance, palpitations, tremor and irritability. 
Tachycardia, palmar erythema and lid lag are common 
signs. Not all patients have a palpable goitre, but expe-
rienced clinicians can discriminate the diffuse soft goitre 
of Graves’ disease from the irregular enlargement 
of a multinodular goitre. All causes of thyrotoxicosis 
can cause lid retraction and lid lag, due to potentiation 
of sympathetic innervation of the levator palpebrae 
muscles, but only Graves’ disease causes other features 
of ophthalmopathy, including periorbital oedema, con-
junctival irritation, exophthalmos and diplopia. Pretibial 
myxoedema (p. 751) and the rare thyroid acropachy (a 
Cause
Frequency1 (%)
Graves’ disease
76
Multinodular goitre
14
Solitary thyroid adenoma
5
Thyroiditis
Subacute (de Quervain’s)2
3
Post-partum2
0.5
Iodide-induced
Drugs (amiodarone)2
1
Radiographic contrast media2
–
Iodine prophylaxis programme2
–
Extrathyroidal source of thyroid hormone
Factitious thyrotoxicosis2
0.2
Struma ovarii2,3
–
TSH-induced
TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma
0.2
Choriocarcinoma and hydatidiform mole4
–
Follicular carcinoma ± metastases
0.1
1ln a series of 2087 patients presenting to the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh 
over a 10-year period.
2Characterised by negligible radio-isotope uptake.
3i.e. Ovarian teratoma containing thyroid tissue.
4Human chorionic gonadotrophin has thyroid-stimulating activity.
20.6  Causes of thyrotoxicosis and their 
relative frequencies
periosteal hypertrophy, indistinguishable from finger 
clubbing) are also specific to Graves’ disease.
Investigations
The first-line investigations are serum T3, T4 and TSH. If 
abnormal values are found, the tests should be repeated 
and the abnormality confirmed in view of the likely need 
for prolonged medical treatment or destructive therapy. 
In most patients, serum T3 and T4 are both elevated, but 
T4 is in the upper part of the reference range and T3 
raised (T3 toxicosis) in about 5%. Serum TSH is undetect-
able in primary thyrotoxicosis, but values can be raised 
in the very rare syndrome of secondary thyrotoxicosis 
caused by a TSH-producing pituitary adenoma. When 
bio­chemical thyrotoxicosis has been confirmed, further 
investigations should be undertaken to determine the 
underlying cause, including measurement of TSH recep-
tor antibodies (TRAb, elevated in Graves’ disease, Box 
20.8) and isotope scanning, as shown in Figure 20.4. 
Other non-specific abnormalities are common (Box 20.9). 
An ECG may demonstrate sinus tachycardia or atrial 
fibrillation.
Radio-iodine uptake tests measure the proportion 
of isotope that is trapped in the whole gland, but have 
been largely superseded by 99mtechnetium scintigraphy 
scans, which also indicate trapping, are quicker to 
perform with a lower dose of radioactivity, and provide 
a higher-resolution image. In low-uptake thyrotoxicosis, 
the cause is usually a transient thyroiditis (p. 751). Occa-
sionally, patients induce ‘factitious thyrotoxicosis’ by 
consuming excessive amounts of a thyroid hormone 
preparation, most often levothyroxine. The exogenous 
thyroxine suppresses pituitary TSH secretion and hence 
iodine uptake, serum thyroglobulin and release of 
endogenous thyroid hormones. The T4:T3 ratio (typically 
The thyroid gland
20
741
Thyrotoxicosis
Hypothyroidism
Symptoms
Signs
Symptoms
Signs
Common
Weight loss despite normal or 
increased appetite
Heat intolerance, sweating
Palpitations, tremor
Dyspnoea, fatigue
Irritability, emotional lability
Weight loss
Tremor
Palmar erythema
Sinus tachycardia
Lid retraction, lid lag
Weight gain
Cold intolerance
Fatigue, somnolence
Dry skin
Dry hair
Menorrhagia
Weight gain
Less common
Osteoporosis (fracture, loss of 
height)
Diarrhoea, steatorrhoea
Angina
Ankle swelling
Anxiety, psychosis
Muscle weakness
Periodic paralysis 
(predominantly in Chinese)
Pruritus, alopecia
Amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea
Infertility, spontaneous 
abortion
Loss of libido, impotence
Excessive lacrimation
Goitre with bruit1
Atrial fibrillation2
Systolic hypertension/
increased pulse pressure
Cardiac failure2
Hyper-reflexia
Ill-sustained clonus
Proximal myopathy
Bulbar myopathy2
Constipation
Hoarseness
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Alopecia
Aches and pains
Muscle stiffness
Deafness
Depression
Infertility
Hoarse voice
Facial features:
Purplish lips
Malar flush
Periorbital oedema
Loss of lateral eyebrows
Anaemia
Carotenaemia
Erythema ab igne
Bradycardia hypertension
Delayed relaxation of reflexes
Dermal myxoedema
Rare
Vomiting
Apathy
Anorexia
Exacerbation of asthma
Gynaecomastia
Spider naevi
Onycholysis
Pigmentation
Psychosis (myxoedema 
madness)
Galactorrhoea
Impotence
Ileus, ascites
Pericardial and pleural effusions
Cerebellar ataxia
Myotonia
1ln Graves’ disease only. 2Features found particularly in elderly patients.
20.7  Clinical features of thyroid dysfunction
Antibodies to:
Thyroid 
peroxidase1
Thyroglobulin
TSH 
receptor2
Normal 
population
8–27
5–20
0
Graves’ disease
50–80
50–70
80–95
Autoimmune 
hypothyroidism
90–100
80–90
10–20
Multinodular 
goitre
∼30–40
∼30–40
0
Transient 
thyroiditis
∼30–40
∼30–40
0
1Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies are the principal component of what 
was previously measured as thyroid ‘microsomal’ antibodies.
2TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) can be agonists (stimulatory, causing 
Graves’ thyrotoxicosis) or antagonists (‘blocking’, causing hypothyroidism)
20.8  Prevalence of thyroid autoantibodies (%)
30 : 1 in conventional thyrotoxicosis) is increased to 
above 70 : 1 because circulating T3 in factitious thyro-
toxicosis is derived exclusively from the peripheral mon-
odeiodination of T4 and not from thyroid secretion. The 
combination of negligible iodine uptake, high T4:T3 ratio 
and a low or undetectable thyroglobulin is diagnostic.
Management
Definitive treatment of thyrotoxicosis depends on 
the underlying cause and may include antithyroid 
drugs, radioactive iodine or surgery. A non-selective β-­
adrenoceptor antagonist (β-blocker), such as propranolol 
Thyrotoxicosis
• Serum enzymes: raised alanine aminotransferase, γ-glutamyl 
transferase (GGT), and alkaline phosphatase from liver and 
bone
• Raised bilirubin
• Mild hypercalcaemia
• Glycosuria: associated diabetes mellitus, ‘lag storage’ 
glycosuria
Hypothyroidism
• Serum enzymes: raised creatine kinase, aspartate 
aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
• Hypercholesterolaemia
• Anaemia: normochromic normocytic or macrocytic
• Hyponatraemia
20.9  Non-specific laboratory abnormalities in 
thyroid dysfunction*
*These abnormalities are not useful in differential diagnosis, so the tests 
should be avoided and any further investigation undertaken only if 
abnormalities persist when the patient is euthyroid.
Endocrine disease
20
742
revert to sinus rhythm in about 50% of patients, but 
cardioversion may be required in the remainder.
Thyrotoxic crisis (‘thyroid storm’)
This is a rare but life-threatening complication of thyro-
toxicosis. The most prominent signs are fever, agitation, 
confusion, tachycardia or atrial fibrillation and, in the 
older patient, cardiac failure. It is a medical emergency, 
which has a mortality of 10% despite early recognition 
and treatment. Thyrotoxic crisis is most commonly pre-
cipitated by infection in a patient with previously unrec-
ognised or inadequately treated thyrotoxicosis. It may 
also develop shortly after subtotal thyroidectomy in an 
ill-prepared patient or within a few days of 131I therapy, 
when acute irradiation damage may lead to a transient 
rise in serum thyroid hormone levels.
Patients should be rehydrated and given propranolol, 
either orally (80 mg 4 times daily) or intravenously 
(1–5 mg 4 times daily). Sodium ipodate (500 mg per 
day orally) will restore serum T3 levels to normal in 
Fig. 20.4  Establishing the differential diagnosis in thyrotoxicosis. (1) Graves’ ophthalmopathy refers to clinical features of exophthalmos and 
periorbital and conjunctival oedema, not simply the lid lag and lid retraction which can occur in all forms of thyrotoxicosis. (2) TSH receptor antibodies  
are very rare in patients without autoimmune thyroid disease, but only occur in 80–95% of patients with Graves’ disease; a positive test is therefore 
confirmatory, but a negative test does not exclude Graves’ disease. Other thyroid antibodies (e.g. anti-peroxidase and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies) are 
unhelpful in the differential diagnosis since they occur frequently in the population and are found with several of the disorders which cause thyrotoxicosis. 
(3) Scintigraphy is not necessary in most cases of drug-induced thyrotoxicosis. (4) 99mTechnetium pertechnetate scans of patients with thyrotoxicosis. In 
low-uptake thyrotoxicosis, most commonly due to a viral, post-partum or iodine-induced thyroiditis, there is negligible isotope detected in the region of the 
thyroid, although uptake is apparent in nearby salivary glands (not shown here). In a toxic adenoma there is lack of uptake of isotope by the rest of the 
thyroid gland due to suppression of serum TSH. In multinodular goitre there is relatively low, patchy uptake within the nodules; such an appearance is not 
always associated with a palpable thyroid. In Graves’ disease there is diffuse uptake of isotope. 
↓TSH and ↑T3 ± T4
Scenario?
Clinically thyrotoxic
Repeat when acute
illness has resolved
Possible sick euthyroidism
Any features of non-Graves’
thyrotoxicosis?
• Recent (< 6 months) pregnancy
• Neck pain/flu-like illness
• Drugs (amiodarone, T4)3
• Palpable multinodular goitre
   or solitary nodule
Any features of Graves’ disease?
• Diffuse goitre with bruit
• Ophthalmopathy1
• Pretibial myxoedema
• Positive TSH receptor antibodies2
Yes
No
Yes
Thyroid scintigraphy4
Low-uptake thyrotoxicosis
• Transient thyroiditis
• Extrathyroidal T4 source
Toxic
multinodular goitre
Graves’
disease
Toxic
adenoma
No
(160 mg daily) or nadolol (40–80 mg daily), will alleviate 
but not abolish symptoms in most patients within 24–48 
hours. Beta-blockers should not be used for long-term 
treatment of thyrotoxicosis but are extremely useful in 
the short term, whilst patients are awaiting hospital con-
sultation or following 131I therapy.
Atrial fibrillation in thyrotoxicosis
Atrial fibrillation occurs in about 10% of patients with 
thyrotoxicosis. The incidence increases with age, so that 
almost half of all males with thyrotoxicosis over the age 
of 60 are affected. Moreover, subclinical thyrotoxicosis 
(p. 745) is a risk factor for atrial fibrillation. Characteristi-
cally, the ventricular rate is little influenced by digoxin, 
but responds to the addition of a β-blocker. Thromboem-
bolic vascular complications are particularly common 
in thyrotoxic atrial fibrillation so that anticoagulation 
with warfarin is required, unless contraindicated. Once 
thyroid hormone and TSH concentrations have been 
returned to normal, atrial fibrillation will spontaneously 
The thyroid gland
20
743
48–72 hours. This is a radiographic contrast medium 
which not only inhibits the release of thyroid hormones, 
but also reduces the conversion of T4 to T3 and is, there-
fore, more effective than potassium iodide or Lugol’s 
solution. Dexamethasone (2 mg 4 times daily) and amio-
darone have similar effects. Oral carbimazole 40–60 mg 
daily (p. 748) should be given to inhibit the synthesis of 
new thyroid hormone. If the patient is unconscious or 
uncooperative, carbimazole can be administered rectally 
with good effect, but no preparation is available for 
parenteral use. After 10–14 days the patient can usually 
be maintained on carbimazole alone.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is a common condition with vari­
ous causes (Box 20.10), but autoimmune disease 
(Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) and thyroid failure following 
131I or surgical treatment of thyrotoxicosis account for 
over 90% of cases, except in areas where iodine defi-
ciency is endemic. Women are affected approximately 
six times more frequently than men.
Clinical assessment
The clinical presentation depends on the duration and 
severity of the hypothyroidism. Those in whom com-
plete thyroid failure has developed insidiously over 
months or years may present with many of the clinical 
features listed in Box 20.7. A consequence of prolonged 
hypothyroidism is the infiltration of many body tissues 
by the mucopolysaccharides, hyaluronic acid and chon-
droitin sulphate, resulting in a low-pitched voice, poor 
hearing, slurred speech due to a large tongue, and com-
pression of the median nerve at the wrist (carpal tunnel 
syndrome). Infiltration of the dermis gives rise to non-
pitting oedema (myxoedema), which is most marked in 
the skin of the hands, feet and eyelids. The resultant 
periorbital puffiness is often striking and may be com-
bined with facial pallor due to vasoconstriction and 
anaemia, or a lemon-yellow tint to the skin caused by 
carotenaemia, along with purplish lips and malar flush. 
Most cases of hypothyroidism are not clinically obvious, 
however, and a high index of suspicion needs to be 
maintained so that the diagnosis is not overlooked in 
individuals complaining of non-specific symptoms such 
as tiredness, weight gain, depression or carpal tunnel 
syndrome.
The key discriminatory features in the history and 
examination are highlighted in Figure 20.5. Care must 
be taken to identify patients with transient hypo­
thyroidism, in whom life-long levothyroxine therapy is 
inappropriate. This is often observed during the first 
6 months after subtotal thyroidectomy or 131I treatment 
of Graves’ disease, in the post-thyrotoxic phase of sub­
acute thyroiditis and in post-partum thyroiditis. In these 
conditions, levothyroxine treatment is not always neces-
sary, as the patient may be asymptomatic during the 
short period of thyroid failure.
Investigations
In the vast majority of cases, hypothyroidism results 
from an intrinsic disorder of the thyroid gland (primary 
hypothyroidism). In this situation, serum T4 is low and 
TSH is elevated, usually in excess of 20 mU/L. Mea­
surements of serum T3 are unhelpful since they do 
not discriminate reliably between euthyroidism and 
hypothyroidism. Secondary hypothyroidism is rare and 
is caused by failure of TSH secretion in an individual 
with hypothalamic or anterior pituitary disease. Other 
non-specific abnormalities are shown in Box 20.9. In 
severe, prolonged hypothyroidism, the electrocardio-
gram (ECG) classically demonstrates sinus bradycardia 
with low-voltage complexes and ST segment and T-wave 
abnormalities. Measurement of thyroid peroxidase anti-
bodies is helpful but further investigations are rarely 
required (see Fig. 20.5).
Management
Treatment is with levothyroxine replacement. It is cus-
tomary to start with a low dose of 50 µg per day for 
3 weeks, increasing thereafter to 100 µg per day for a 
further 3 weeks and finally to a maintenance dose of 
100–150 µg per day. In younger patients, it is safe to 
initiate levothyroxine at a higher dose (for example, 
100 µg per day), to allow a more rapid normalisation of 
thyroid hormone levels. Levothyroxine has a half-life of 
7 days so it should always be taken as a single daily dose 
and at least 6 weeks should pass before repeating 
thyroid function tests and adjusting the dose, usually 
by 25 µg per day. Patients feel better within 2–3 weeks. 
Reduction in weight and periorbital puffiness occurs 
quickly, but the restoration of skin and hair texture and 
Causes
Anti-TPO 
antibodies1
Goitre2
Autoimmune
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
++
±
Spontaneous atrophic hypothyroidism
–
–
Graves’ disease with TSH receptor-
blocking antibodies
+
±
Iatrogenic
Radioactive iodine ablation
+
±
Thyroidectomy
+
–
Drugs
  Carbimazole, methimazole, 
propylthiouracil
+
±
  Amiodarone
+
±
  Lithium
–
±
Transient thyroiditis
Subacute (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis
+
±
Post-partum thyroiditis
+
±
Iodine deficiency, e.g. in mountainous 
regions
–
++
Congenital
Dyshormonogenesis
–
++
Thyroid aplasia
–
–
Infiltrative
Amyloidosis, Riedel’s thyroiditis, 
sarcoidosis etc.
+
++
Secondary hypothyroidism
TSH deficiency
–
–
1As shown in Box 20.8, thyroid autoantibodies are common in the healthy 
population, so might be present in anyone. ++ high titre; + more likely to 
be detected than in the healthy population; – not especially likely.
2Goitre: – absent; ± may be present; ++ characteristic.
20.10  Causes of hypothyroidism
Endocrine disease
20
744
resolution of any effusions may take 3–6 months. As 
illustrated in Figure 20.5, most patients do not require 
specialist review but will require life-long levothyroxine 
therapy.
The dose of levothyroxine should be adjusted to 
maintain serum TSH within the reference range. To 
achieve this, serum T4 often needs to be in the upper part 
of the reference range or even slightly raised, because 
the T3 required for receptor activation is derived exclu-
sively from conversion of T4 within the target tissues, 
without the usual contribution from thyroid secretion. 
Some physicians advocate combined replacement with 
T4 and T3 or preparations of animal thyroid extract, 
but this approach remains controversial and is not 
supported by robust evidence. Some patients remain 
symptomatic despite normalisation of TSH and may 
wish to take extra levothyroxine, which suppresses 
TSH. However, suppressed TSH is a risk factor for osteo­
porosis and atrial fibrillation (p. 745; subclinical thyro-
toxicosis), so this approach cannot be recommended.
It is important to measure thyroid function every 
1–2 years once the dose of levothyroxine is stabilised. 
This encourages patient compliance with therapy and 
allows adjustment for variable underlying thyroid activ-
ity and other changes in levothyroxine requirements 
Fig. 20.5  An approach to adults with suspected primary hypothyroidism. This scheme ignores congenital causes of hypothyroidism (see 
Box 20.10), such as thyroid aplasia and dyshormonogenesis (associated with nerve deafness in Pendred’s syndrome), which are usually diagnosed in 
childhood. (1) Immunoreactive TSH may be detected at normal or even modestly elevated levels in patients with pituitary failure; unless T4 is only marginally 
low, TSH should be > 20 mU/L to confirm the diagnosis of primary hypothyroidism. (2) The usual abnormality in sick euthyroidism is a low TSH but any 
pattern can occur. (3) Thyroid peroxidase antibodies are highly sensitive but not very specific for autoimmune thyroid disease (see Boxes 20.8 and 20.10). 
(4) Specialist advice is most appropriate where indicated. Secondary hypothyroidism is rare, but is suggested by deficiency of pituitary hormones or by 
clinical features of pituitary tumour such as headache or visual field defect (p. 789). Rare causes of hypothyroidism with goitre include dyshormonogenesis 
and infiltration of the thyroid (see Box 20.10). 
↑TSH and ↓T4
Scenario?
TSH < 20 mU/L1
Repeat when acute
illness has resolved
Possible sick euthyroidism2
Relevant drugs?
• Amiodarone
• Lithium
Any features of transient
 thyroiditis?
• Neck pain
• < 12 months post-partum
• Recent symptoms of
 thyrotoxicosis
• < 6 months since 131I or
 thyroidectomy
No
Yes
Permanent T4 replacement
Any features of secondary
hypothyroidism? 4
Thyroid ablation?
• > 6 months
  since 131I or
  thyroidectomy
No
Positive
antithyroid
peroxidase
antibodies?3
No
No
TSH > 20 mU/L
Consider
rare causes
and refer to
specialist4
Spontaneous
atrophic
hypothyroidism
Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis
Temporary T4 replacement4
• After 4 months with normal TSH,
   reduce to 50 µg/day for 6 weeks
 and repeat TSH
• If normal, stop T4 for 6 weeks
   and repeat
Yes
T4 replacement for
as long as other
drug is required
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Goitre?
(Box 20.11). Some patients have a persistent elevation of 
serum TSH despite an ostensibly adequate replacement 
dose of levothyroxine; most commonly, this is a conse-
quence of suboptimal compliance with therapy. There 
may be differences in bioavailability between the numer-
ous generic preparations of levothyroxine and so, if an 
individual is experiencing marked changes in serum 
TSH despite optimal compliance, the prescription of a 
branded preparation of levothyroxine could be consid-
ered. Levothyroxine absorption is maximal when the 
medication is taken before bed and may be further opti-
mised by taking a vitamin C supplement.
In some poorly compliant patients, levothyroxine is 
taken diligently or even in excess for a few days prior 
to a clinic visit, resulting in the seemingly anomalous 
combination of a high serum T4 and high TSH (see 
Box 20.5, p. 739).
Levothyroxine replacement in ischaemic  
heart disease
Hypothyroidism and ischaemic heart disease are 
common conditions that often occur together. Although 
angina may remain unchanged in severity or paradoxi-
cally disappear with restoration of metabolic rate, 
exacerbation of myocardial ischaemia, infarction and 
The thyroid gland
20
745
rate is 50% and survival depends on early recognition 
and treatment of hypothyroidism and other factors 
contributing to the altered consciousness level, such 
as medication, cardiac failure, pneumonia, dilutional 
hyponatraemia and respiratory failure.
Myxoedema coma is a medical emergency and treat-
ment must begin before biochemical confirmation of the 
diagnosis. Suspected cases should be treated with an 
intravenous injection of 20 µg triiodothyronine, fol-
lowed by further injections of 20 µg 3 times daily until 
there is sustained clinical improvement. In survivors, 
there is a rise in body temperature within 24 hours and, 
after 48–72 hours, it is usually possible to switch patients 
to oral levothyroxine in a dose of 50 µg daily. Unless 
it is apparent that the patient has primary hypo­
thyroidism, the thyroid failure should also be assumed 
to be secondary to hypothalamic or pituitary disease 
and treatment given with hydrocortisone 100 mg IM 
3 times daily, pending the results of T4, TSH and cortisol 
measurement (p. 787). Other measures include slow 
rewarming (p. 105), cautious use of intravenous fluids, 
broad-spectrum antibiotics and high-flow oxygen. Occa-
sionally, assisted ventilation may be necessary.
Symptoms of hypothyroidism with normal 
thyroid function tests
The classic symptoms of hypothyroidism are, by their 
very nature, non-specific (see Box 20.3). There is a wide 
differential diagnosis for symptoms such as ‘fatigue’, 
‘weight gain’ and ‘low mood’. As has been noted, 
outside the context of pituitary and hypothalamic 
disease, serum TSH is an excellent measure of an indi-
vidual’s thyroid hormone status. However, some indi-
viduals believe that they have hypothyroidism despite 
normal serum TSH concentrations. There are a large 
number of websites which claim that serum TSH is not 
a good measure of thyroid hormone status and suggest 
that other factors, such as abnormalities of T4 to T3 con-
version, may lead to low tissue levels of active thyroid 
hormones. Such websites often advocate a variety of 
tests of thyroid function of dubious scientific validity, 
including measurement of serum reverse T3, 24-hour 
urine T3, basal body temperature, skin iodine absorp-
tion, and levels of selenium in blood and urine. Indi-
viduals who believe they have hypothyroidism, despite 
normal conventional tests of thyroid function, can be 
difficult to manage. They require reassurance that their 
symptoms are being taken seriously and that organic 
disease has been carefully considered; if their symptoms 
persist, then referral to a team specialising in medically 
unexplained symptoms should be considered.
Asymptomatic abnormal thyroid 
function tests
One of the most common problems in medical practice 
is how to manage patients with abnormal thyroid 
function tests who have no obvious signs or symptoms 
of thyroid disease. These can be divided into three 
categories.
Subclinical thyrotoxicosis
Serum TSH is undetectable, and serum T3 and T4 are 
at the upper end of the reference range. This combina-
tion is most often found in older patients with multi­
nodular goitre. These patients are at increased risk of 
Increased dose required
Use of other medication
• Increase T4 clearance: phenobarbital, phenytoin, 
carbamazepine, rifampicin, sertraline*, chloroquine*
• Interfere with intestinal T4 absorption: colestyramine, 
sucralfate, aluminium hydroxide, ferrous sulphate, dietary 
fibre supplements, calcium carbonate
Pregnancy or oestrogen therapy
• Increases concentration of serum thyroxine-binding globulin
After surgical or 131I ablation of Graves’ disease
• Reduces thyroidal secretion with time
Malabsorption
Decreased dose required
Ageing
• Decreases T4 clearance
Graves’ disease developing in patient with long-standing 
primary hypothyroidism
• Switch from production of blocking to stimulating TSH 
receptor antibodies
*Mechanism not fully established.
20.11  Situations in which an adjustment of 
the dose of levothyroxine may be necessary
sudden death are recognised complications of levo­
thyroxine replacement, even using doses as low as 25 µg 
per day. In patients with known ischaemic heart disease, 
thyroid hormone replacement should be introduced at 
low dose and increased very slowly under specialist 
supervision. It has been suggested that T3 has an advan-
tage over T4, since T3 has a shorter half-life and any 
adverse effect will reverse more quickly, but the more 
distinct peak in hormone levels after each dose of T3 is 
a disadvantage. Coronary angioplasty or bypass surgery 
may be required if angina is exacerbated by levothyrox-
ine replacement therapy.
Hypothyroidism in pregnancy
Most pregnant women with primary hypothyroidism 
require an increase in the dose of levothyroxine of 
approximately 25–50 µg daily to maintain normal TSH 
levels. This may reflect increased metabolism of thyrox-
ine by the placenta and increased serum thyroxine-
binding globulin during pregnancy, resulting in an 
increase in the total thyroid hormone pool to maintain 
the same free T4 and T3 concentrations. Inadequate 
maternal T4 therapy may be associated with impaired 
cognitive development in an unborn child and so women 
are usually advised to increase their daily levothyroxine 
dose by 25 µg when pregnancy is confirmed. Serum TSH 
and free T4 should be measured during each trimester 
and the dose of levothyroxine adjusted to maintain a 
normal TSH. See also Box 20.20 (p. 756).
Myxoedema coma
This is a very rare presentation of hypothyroidism in 
which there is a depressed level of consciousness, 
usually in an elderly patient who appears myxoedema-
tous. Body temperature may be as low as 25°C, convul-
sions are not uncommon and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
pressure and protein content are raised. The mortality 
Endocrine disease
20
746
childhood or adolescence, particularly if there is a past 
history of head and neck irradiation, or one presenting 
in the elderly should heighten suspicion of a primary 
thyroid malignancy (p. 754). The presence of cervical 
lymphadenopathy also increases the likelihood of malig-
nancy. Rarely, a secondary deposit from a renal, breast 
or lung carcinoma presents as a painful, rapidly growing, 
solitary thyroid nodule. Thyroid nodules identified on 
PET scanning have an approximately 33% chance of 
being malignant.
Clinical assessment and investigations
Swellings in the anterior part of the neck most com-
monly originate in the thyroid and this can be confirmed 
by demonstrating that the swelling moves on swallow-
ing (p. 735). It is often possible to distinguish clinically 
between the three main causes of thyroid swelling. 
There is a broad differential diagnosis of anterior neck 
swellings, which includes lymphadenopathy, branchial 
cysts, dermoid cysts and thyroglossal duct cysts (the 
latter are classically located in the midline and move on 
protrusion of the tongue). An ultrasound scan should be 
performed urgently, if there is any doubt as to the aetiol-
ogy of an anterior neck swelling.
Serum T3, T4 and TSH should be measured in 
all patients with a goitre or solitary thyroid nodule. 
The finding of biochemical thyrotoxicosis or hypo­
thyroidism (both of which may be subclinical) should 
lead to investigations, as already described on pages 740 
and 743.
Thyroid scintigraphy
Thyroid scintigraphy with 99mtechnetium should be per-
formed in an individual with a low serum TSH and a 
nodular thyroid to confirm the presence of an autono-
mously functioning (‘hot’) nodule (see Fig. 20.4, p. 742). 
In such circumstances, further evaluation by fine needle 
aspiration is not necessary. ‘Cold nodules’ on scintigra-
phy have a much higher likelihood of malignancy, but 
the majority are benign and so scintigraphy is not rou-
tinely used in the evaluation of thyroid nodules when 
TSH is normal.
atrial fibrillation and osteoporosis, and hence the con-
sensus view is that they have mild thyrotoxicosis and 
require therapy, usually with 131I. Otherwise, annual 
review is essential, as the conversion rate to overt thyro­
toxicosis with elevated T4 and/or T3 concentrations is 5% 
each year.
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Serum TSH is raised, and serum T3 and T4 concentrations 
are at the lower end of the reference range. This may 
persist for many years, although there is a risk of 
progression to overt thyroid failure, particularly if 
antibodies to thyroid peroxidase are present or if the 
TSH rises above 10 mU/L. In patients with non-specific 
symptoms, a trial of levothyroxine therapy may be 
appropriate. In those with positive autoantibodies 
or TSH greater than 10 mU/L, it is better to treat 
the thyroid failure early rather than risk loss to 
follow-up and subsequent presentation with profound 
hypothyroidism. Levothyroxine should be given in a 
dose sufficient to restore the serum TSH concentration 
to normal.
Non-thyroidal illness (‘sick euthyroidism’)
This typically presents with a low serum TSH, raised T4 
and normal or low T3, in a patient with systemic illness 
who does not have clinical evidence of thyroid disease. 
These abnormalities are caused by decreased peripheral 
conversion of T4 to T3, altered levels of binding proteins 
and their affinity for thyroid hormones, and often 
reduced secretion of TSH. During convalescence, serum 
TSH concentrations may increase to levels found in 
primary hypothyroidism. As thyroid function tests are 
difficult to interpret in patients with non-thyroidal 
illness, it is wise to avoid performing thyroid function 
tests unless there is clinical evidence of concomitant 
thyroid disease. If an abnormal result is found, treat-
ment should only be given with specialist advice and the 
diagnosis should be re-evaluated after recovery.
Thyroid lump or swelling
A lump or swelling in the thyroid gland can be a source 
of considerable anxiety for patients. There are numerous 
causes but, broadly speaking, a thyroid swelling is either 
a solitary nodule, a multinodular goitre or a diffuse 
goitre (Box 20.12). Nodular thyroid disease is more 
common in women and occurs in approximately 30% 
of the adult female population. The majority of thyroid 
nodules are impalpable but may be identified when 
imaging of the neck is performed for another reason, 
such as during Doppler ultrasonography of the carotid 
arteries or computed tomographic pulmonary angiogra-
phy. Increasingly, thyroid nodules are identified during 
staging of patients with cancer with computed tomog-
raphy (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or posi-
tron emission tomography (PET) scans. Palpable thyroid 
nodules occur in 4–8% of adult women and 1–2% of 
adult men, and classically present when the individual 
(or a friend or relative) notices a lump in the neck. Multi-
nodular goitres and solitary nodules sometimes present 
with acute painful enlargement due to haemorrhage into 
a nodule.
Patients with thyroid nodules often worry that they 
have cancer, but the reality is that only 5–10% of thyroid 
nodules are malignant. A solitary nodule presenting in 
Diffuse goitre
• Simple goitre
• Hashimoto’s thyroiditis1 
• Graves’ disease
• Drugs
Iodine, amiodarone, 
lithium
• Iodine deficiency (endemic 
goitre)1
• Suppurative thyroiditis2
• Transient thyroiditis2
• Dyshormonogenesis1
• Infiltrative
Amyloidosis, sarcoidosis 
etc.
• Riedel’s thyroiditis2
Multinodular goitre
Solitary nodule
• Colloid cyst
• Hyperplastic nodule
• Follicular adenoma
• Papillary carcinoma
• Follicular carcinoma
• Medullary cell carcinoma
• Anaplastic carcinoma
• Lymphoma
• Metastasis
1Goitre likely to shrink with levothyroxine therapy. 2Usually tender.
20.12  Causes of thyroid enlargement
The thyroid gland
20
747
individuals with an indeterminate biopsy (Box 20.13). 
Nodules in which malignancy is confirmed by formal 
histology are treated as described on page 754. Those 
which have benign cytology and a reassuring ultra-
sound appearance may by observed by interval ultra-
sound scans. In parts of the world with borderline low 
iodine intake, there is evidence that levothyroxine 
therapy, in doses that suppress serum TSH, may reduce 
the size of some nodules. This should not be routine 
practice in iodine-sufficient populations.
A diffuse or multinodular goitre may also require 
surgical treatment for cosmetic reasons or if there is 
compression of local structures (resulting in stridor or 
dysphagia). Levothyroxine therapy may shrink the 
goitre of Hashimoto’s disease, particularly if serum TSH 
is elevated.
Autoimmune thyroid disease
Thyroid diseases are amongst the most prevalent 
antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases and are asso-
ciated with other organ-specific autoimmunity (Ch. 4 
and p. 795). Autoantibodies may produce inflammation 
and destruction of thyroid tissue, resulting in hypo­
thyroidism, goitre (in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) or some-
times even transient thyrotoxicosis (‘Hashitoxicosis’), or 
they may stimulate the TSH receptor to cause thyrotoxi-
cosis (in Graves’ disease). There is overlap between 
these conditions, since some patients have multiple 
autoantibodies.
Graves’ disease
Graves’ disease can occur at any age but is unusual 
before puberty and most commonly affects women 
aged 30–50 years. The most common manifestation 
is thyrotoxicosis with or without a diffuse goitre. The 
clinical features and differential diagnosis are described 
on page 740. Graves’ disease also causes ophthalmo­
pathy and, rarely, pretibial myxoedema (p. 734). These 
extrathyroidal features usually occur in thyrotoxic 
patients, but can occur in the absence of thyroid 
dysfunction.
Graves’ thyrotoxicosis
Pathophysiology
The thyrotoxicosis results from the production of IgG 
antibodies directed against the TSH receptor on the 
thyroid follicular cell, which stimulate thyroid hormone 
production and proliferation of follicular cells, leading 
to goitre in the majority of patients. These antibodies 
Thyroid ultrasound
If thyroid function tests are normal, an ultrasound scan 
will determine the nature of the thyroid swelling. Ultra-
sound can establish whether there is generalised or 
localised swelling of the thyroid. Inflammatory disor-
ders causing a diffuse goitre, such as Graves’ disease 
and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, demonstrate a diffuse 
pattern of hypoechogenicity and, in the case of Graves’ 
disease, increased thyroid blood flow may be seen on 
colour flow Doppler. The presence of thyroid autoanti-
bodies will support the diagnosis of Graves’ disease or 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, while their absence in a younger 
patient with a diffuse goitre and normal thyroid func-
tion suggests a diagnosis of ‘simple goitre’ (p. 752).
Ultrasound can also readily determine the size and 
number of nodules within the thyroid and can distin-
guish solid nodules from those with a cystic element. 
It cannot reliably distinguish benign from malignant 
nodules but, in experienced hands, there are some 
ultrasound characteristics which are associated with a 
higher likelihood of malignancy. These include: hyper-
vascularity of the nodule, the presence of microcalcifica-
tion and irregular, infiltrative margins. A pure cystic 
nodule is highly unlikely to be malignant and a ‘spongi-
form’ appearance is also highly predicative of a benign 
aetiology.
Fine needle aspiration
Cytological examination of a thyroid nodule, following 
fine needle aspiration, is recommended for most thyroid 
nodules over 1 cm in size. Smaller nodules should be 
aspirated if there is a high suspicion of malignancy on 
clinical or ultrasound grounds, while some clinicians 
will be happy to observe a nodule up to 2 cm in size 
with a spongiform appearance. Individuals with a 
multinodular goitre have the same risk of malignancy 
as those with a solitary nodule. Sometimes, one of the 
nodules in a multinodular goitre is much larger than 
any other (a ‘dominant’ nodule), but ultimately the 
choice of nodule to biopsy should be based on ultra-
sound characteristics.
Fine needle aspiration of a thyroid nodule can be 
performed in the outpatient clinic using a standard 
21-gauge needle and a 20 mL syringe, usually making 
several passes through different parts of the lesion. 
Ultrasound-guided needle aspiration is necessary for 
impalpable nodules and to permit targeting of the solid 
component of a mixed cystic/solid nodule. Aspiration 
may be therapeutic in the small proportion of patients 
in whom the swelling is a cyst, although recurrence on 
more than one occasion is an indication for surgery. 
Cytological examination can differentiate benign (80%) 
from definitely malignant or indeterminate nodules 
(20%), of which 25–50% are confirmed as cancers at 
surgery. The limitations of fine needle aspiration are that 
it cannot differentiate between follicular adenoma and 
carcinoma, and that in 10–20% of cases an inadequate 
specimen is obtained.
Management
Solitary nodules with a solid component in which cytol-
ogy either is inconclusive or shows malignant cells are 
treated by surgical excision. Molecular techniques may, 
in the future, improve the diagnostic accuracy of thyroid 
cytology and allow a more conservative strategy for 
‘Between 60 and 70% of differentiated thyroid cancers have  
at least one somatic gene mutation. Using a microarray of 
messenger RNA transcripts from 167 genes on cytologically 
indeterminate thyroid nodules, the negative predictive value for 
lesions with a low likelihood for cancer was 94–95%. Use of this 
technology could, in theory, avoid unnecessary surgery.’
• Alexander EK, et al. N Engl J Med 2012; 367:705–715.
For further information: 
www.thyroid.org
20.13  Molecular techniques in cytologically 
indeterminate thyroid nodules
Endocrine disease
20
748
are termed thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins or 
TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) and can be detected in 
the serum of 80–95% of patients with Graves’ disease. 
The concentration of TRAb in the serum is presumed to 
fluctuate to account for the natural history of Graves’ 
thyrotoxicosis (Fig. 20.6). The thyroid failure seen in 
some patients may result from the presence of blocking 
antibodies against the TSH receptor, and from tissue 
destruction by cytotoxic antibodies and cell-mediated 
immunity.
Fig. 20.6  Natural history of the thyrotoxicosis of Graves’ disease.
 A and  B The majority (60%) of patients have either prolonged periods 
of thyrotoxicosis of fluctuating severity, or periods of alternating relapse 
and remission.  C It is the minority who experience a single short-lived 
episode followed by prolonged remission and, in some cases, by the 
eventual onset of hypothyroidism. 
Time in years
0
1
2
3
4
5
Thyrotoxic
Euthyroid
Hypothyroid
A
B
C
Management
Common indications
Contraindications
Disadvantages/complications
Antithyroid drugs 
(carbimazole, 
propylthiouracil)
First episode in patients < 40 yrs
Breastfeeding (propylthiouracil 
suitable)
Hypersensitivity rash 2%
Agranulocytosis 0.2%
Hepatotoxicity (with propylthiouracil) 
– very rare but potentially fatal
> 50% relapse rate usually within 
2 yrs of stopping drug
Subtotal 
thyroidectomy1
Large goitre
Poor drug compliance, especially 
in young patients
Recurrent thyrotoxicosis after 
course of antithyroid drugs in 
young patients
Previous thyroid surgery
Dependence on voice, e.g. opera 
singer, lecturer2
Hypothyroidism (~25%)
Transient hypocalcaemia (10%)
Permanent hypoparathyroidism 
(1%)
Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy2 
(1%)
Radio-iodine
Patients > 40 yrs3
Recurrence following surgery 
irrespective of age
Other serious comorbidity
Pregnancy or planned pregnancy 
within 6 mths of treatment
Active Graves’ ophthalmopathy4
Hypothyroidism, ~40% in first year, 
80% after 15 yrs
Most likely treatment to result in 
exacerbation of ophthalmopathy4
1A near-total thyroidectomy is now the favoured operation for Graves’ thyrotoxicosis in many institutions and is associated with a higher risk of some 
complications, including hypothyroidism (nearly 100%), but a reduced risk of persistent or recurrent thyrotoxicosis.
2lt is not only vocal cord palsy due to recurrent laryngeal nerve damage which alters the voice following thyroid surgery; the superior laryngeal nerves are 
frequently transected and this results in minor changes in voice quality.
3ln many institutions, 131I is used more liberally and is prescribed for much younger patients.
4The extent to which radio-iodine exacerbates ophthalmopathy is controversial and practice varies; some use prednisolone to reduce this risk.
20.14  Comparison of treatments for the thyrotoxicosis of Graves’ disease
Graves’ disease has a strong genetic component. 
There is 50% concordance for thyrotoxicosis between 
monozygotic twins but only 5% concordance between 
dizygotic twins. Genome-wide association studies have 
identified polymorphisms at the MHC, CTLA4, PTPN22, 
TSHR1 and FCRL3 loci as predisposing genetic vari-
ants. Many of these loci have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of other autoimmune diseases.
A suggested trigger for the development of thyrotoxi-
cosis in genetically susceptible individuals may be infec-
tion with viruses or bacteria. Certain strains of the gut 
organisms Escherichia coli and Yersinia enterocolitica 
possess cell membrane TSH receptors and it has been 
suggested that antibodies to these microbial antigens 
may cross-react with the TSH receptors on the host 
thyroid follicular cell. In regions of iodine deficiency 
(p. 752), iodine supplementation can precipitate thyro-
toxicosis, but only in those with pre-existing subclinical 
Graves’ disease. Smoking is weakly associated with 
Graves’ thyrotoxicosis but strongly linked with the 
development of ophthalmopathy.
Management
Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis respond to β-blockade 
(p. 741) but definitive treatment requires control of 
thyroid hormone secretion. The different options are 
compared in Box 20.14. For patients under 40 years of 
age, most clinicians adopt the empirical approach of 
prescribing a course of carbimazole and recommending 
surgery if relapse occurs, while 131I is employed as first- 
or second-line treatment in those aged over 40. A number 
of observational studies have linked therapeutic 131I with 
increased incidence of some malignancies, particularly 
of the thyroid and gastrointestinal tract, but the results 
have been inconsistent; the association may be with 
Graves’ disease rather than its therapy, and the magni-
tude of the effect, if any, is small. Experience from the 
The thyroid gland
20
749
of hypoparathyroidism, but maximises the potential 
for cure of thyrotoxicosis.
Radioactive iodine.  131I is administered orally as a single 
dose, and is trapped and organified in the thyroid (see 
Fig. 20.3, p. 739). Although 131I decays within a few 
weeks, it has long-lasting inhibitory effects on survival 
and replication of follicular cells. The variable radio-
iodine uptake and radiosensitivity of the gland means 
that the choice of dose is empirical; in most centres, 
approximately 400 MBq (10 mCi) is given orally. 
This regimen is effective in 75% of patients within 
4–12 weeks. During the lag period, symptoms can be 
controlled by a β-blocker or, in more severe cases, by 
carbimazole. However, carbimazole reduces the efficacy 
of 131I therapy because it prevents organification of 131I in 
the gland, and so should be avoided until 48 hours after 
radio-iodine administration. If thyrotoxicosis persists 
after 6 months, a further dose of 131I can be given. The 
disadvantage of 131I treatment is that the majority of 
patients eventually develop hypothyroidism. 131I is 
usually avoided in patients with Graves’ ophthalmo­
pathy and evidence of significant active orbital inflam-
mation. It can be administered with caution in those 
with mild or ‘burnt-out’ eye disease, when it is custom-
ary to cover the treatment with a 6-week tapering course 
of oral prednisolone. In women of reproductive age, 
pregnancy must be excluded before administration of 
131I and avoided for 6 months thereafter; men are also 
advised against fathering children for 6 months after 
receiving 131I.
Thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy
The coexistence of pregnancy and thyrotoxicosis is 
unusual, as anovulatory cycles are common in thyro-
toxic patients and autoimmune disease tends to remit 
during pregnancy, when the maternal immune response 
is suppressed. Thyroid function tests must be inter-
preted in the knowledge that thyroid-binding globulin, 
and hence total T4 and T3 levels, are increased in preg-
nancy and that TSH reference ranges may be lower (see 
Box 20.20, p. 756); a fully suppressed TSH with elevated 
free thyroid hormone levels indicates thyrotoxicosis. 
The thyrotoxicosis is almost always caused by Graves’ 
disease. Both mother and fetus must be considered, 
since maternal thyroid hormones, TRAb and antithyroid 
drugs can all cross the placenta to some degree, expos-
ing the fetus to the risks of thyrotoxicosis, iatrogenic 
hypothyroidism and goitre. Poorly controlled maternal 
thyrotoxicosis can result in fetal tachycardia, intra­
uterine growth retardation, prematurity, stillbirth and 
possibly even congenital malformations.
Antithyroid drugs are the treatment of choice for 
thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy. Carbimazole has been 
associated with rare cases of embryopathy, particularly 
a skin defect known as aplasia cutis, and should be 
avoided in the first trimester. Propylthiouracil should 
be used in its place but, because of its potential hepato-
toxicity, should be replaced with carbimazole from the 
beginning of the second trimester. Both drugs cross 
the placenta and will effectively treat thyrotoxicosis in 
the fetus caused by transplacental passage of TRAb. To 
avoid fetal hypothyroidism (which could affect brain 
development) and a resultant goitre, it is important to 
use the smallest dose of antithyroid drug (optimally, less 
than 150 mg propylthiouracil or 15 mg carbimazole per 
Chernobyl disaster suggests that younger people are 
more sensitive to radiation-induced thyroid cancer. In 
many centres, however, 131I is used extensively, even in 
young patients.
Antithyroid drugs.  The most commonly used are carbi-
mazole and its active metabolite, methimazole (not 
available in the UK). Propylthiouracil is equally effec-
tive. These drugs reduce the synthesis of new thyroid 
hormones by inhibiting the iodination of tyrosine (see 
Fig. 20.3, p. 739). Carbimazole also has an immunosup-
pressive action, leading to a reduction in serum TRAb 
concentrations, but this is not enough to influence the 
natural history of the thyrotoxicosis significantly.
Antithyroid drugs should be introduced at high 
doses (carbimazole 40–60 mg daily or propylthiouracil 
400–600 mg daily). Usually, this results in subjective 
improvement within 10–14 days and renders the patient 
clinically and biochemically euthyroid at 3–4 weeks. At 
this point, the dose can be reduced and titrated to main-
tain T4 and TSH within their reference range. In most 
patients, carbimazole is continued at 5–20 mg per day 
for 12–18 months in the hope that remission will occur. 
Patients with thyrotoxicosis relapse in at least 50% of 
cases, usually within 2 years of stopping treatment. 
Rarely, T4 and TSH levels fluctuate between those of 
thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism at successive review 
appointments, despite good drug compliance, presum-
ably due to rapidly changing concentrations of TRAb. In 
these patients, satisfactory control can be achieved by 
blocking thyroid hormone synthesis with carbimazole 
30–40 mg daily and adding levothyroxine 100–150 µg 
daily as replacement therapy (a ‘block and replace’ 
regime).
Antithyroid drugs can have adverse effects. The most 
common is a rash. Agranulocytosis is a rare but poten-
tially serious complication that cannot be predicted by 
routine measurement of white blood cell count, but 
which is reversible on stopping treatment. Patients 
should be warned to stop the drug and seek medical 
advice immediately, should a severe sore throat or fever 
develop whilst on treatment. Propylthiouracil is associ-
ated with a small but definite risk of hepatotoxicity, 
which, in some instances, has resulted in liver failure 
requiring liver transplantation, and even in death. It 
should, therefore, be considered second-line therapy to 
carbimazole and only be used during pregnancy or 
breastfeeding (see below), or if an adverse reaction to 
carbimazole has occurred.
Thyroid surgery.  Patients should be rendered euthyroid 
with antithyroid drugs before operation. Potassium 
iodide, 60 mg 3 times daily orally, is often added for 
2 weeks before surgery to inhibit thyroid hormone 
release and reduce the size and vascularity of the gland, 
making surgery technically easier. Traditionally, a ‘sub-
total’ thyroidectomy is performed, in which a portion 
of one lobe of the thyroid is left in situ, with the aim 
of rendering the patient euthyroid post-operatively. 
While complications of surgery are rare and 80% of 
patients are euthyroid, 15% are permanently hypo­
thyroid and 5% remain thyrotoxic. As a consequence, 
many endocrine surgeons now opt to perform a ‘near-
total’ thyroidectomy, leaving behind only a small portion 
of gland adjacent to the recurrent laryngeal nerves. 
This strategy invariably results in permanent hypo­
thyroidism and is probably associated with a higher risk 
Endocrine disease
20
750
control of thyroid function, especially hypothyroidism. 
The most frequent presenting symptoms are related to 
increased exposure of the cornea, resulting from prop-
tosis and lid retraction. There may be excessive lacrima-
tion made worse by wind and bright light, a ‘gritty’ 
sensation in the eye, and pain due to conjunctivitis or 
corneal ulceration. In addition, there may be reduction 
of visual acuity and/or visual fields as a consequence of 
corneal oedema or optic nerve compression. Other signs 
of optic nerve compression include reduced colour 
vision and a relative afferent pupillary defect (pp. 735 
and 1169). If the extraocular muscles are involved and 
do not act in concert, diplopia results.
The majority of patients require no treatment other 
than reassurance. Smoking cessation should be actively 
encouraged. Methylcellulose eye drops and gel counter 
the gritty discomfort of dry eyes, and tinted glasses or 
side shields attached to spectacle frames reduce the 
excessive lacrimation triggered by sun or wind. In 
patients with mild Graves’ ophthalmopathy, oral sele-
nium (100 µg twice daily for 6 months) improves 
quality of life, reduces ocular involvement and slows 
progression of disease; the mechanism of action is not 
known but may relate to an antioxidant effect (Box 
20.16). More severe inflammatory episodes are treated 
with glucocorticoids (e.g. daily oral prednisolone or 
pulsed IV methylprednisolone) and sometimes orbital 
radiotherapy. There is also an increasing trend to use 
immunosuppressant therapies, such as ciclosporin, in 
combination with glucocorticoids. Loss of visual acuity 
Fig. 20.7  Graves’ disease. A Bilateral ophthalmopathy in a 
42-year-old man. The main symptoms were diplopia in all directions of 
gaze and reduced visual acuity in the left eye. The periorbital swelling is 
due to retrobulbar fat prolapsing into the eyelids, and increased interstitial 
fluid as a result of raised intraorbital pressure.  B Transverse CT of the 
orbits, showing the enlarged extraocular muscles. This is most obvious at 
the apex of the left orbit (arrow), where compression of the optic nerve 
caused reduced visual acuity. 
A
B
• Presentation: may present with a deterioration in school 
performance or symptoms suggestive of attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder.
• Anti-thyroid drug therapy: prolonged courses may be 
required because remission rates following an 18-month 
course of therapy are much lower than in adults.
• Compliance: compliance with anti-thyroid drug therapy is 
often suboptimal, resulting in poor disease control which may 
adversely affect performance at school.
• Radio-iodine therapy: usually avoided in adolescents 
because of concerns about risk of future malignancy.
20.15  Thyrotoxicosis in adolescence
day) that will maintain maternal (and presumably fetal) 
free T4, T3 and TSH within their respective reference 
ranges. Frequent review of mother and fetus (monitor-
ing heart rate and growth) is important. TRAb levels can 
be measured in the third trimester to predict the likeli-
hood of neonatal thyrotoxicosis. When TRAb levels are 
not elevated, the antithyroid drug can be discontinued 
4 weeks before the expected date of delivery to minimise 
the risk of fetal hypothyroidism at the time of maximum 
brain development. After delivery, if antithyroid drug 
is required and the patient wishes to breastfeed, then 
propylthiouracil is the drug of choice, as it is excreted in 
the milk to a much lesser extent than carbimazole. 
Thyroid function should be monitored periodically in 
the breastfed child.
If thyroid surgery is necessary because of poor drug 
compliance or drug hypersensitivity, it is most safely 
performed in the second trimester. Radioactive iodine is 
absolutely contraindicated, as it invariably induces fetal 
hypothyroidism.
Thyrotoxicosis in adolescence
Thyrotoxicosis can occasionally occur in adolescence 
and is almost always due to Graves’ disease. The pres-
entation may be atypical and management challenging, 
as summarised in Box 20.15.
Graves’ ophthalmopathy
This condition is immunologically mediated but the 
autoantigen has not been identified. Within the orbit 
(and the dermis) there is cytokine-mediated prolifer­
ation of fibroblasts which secrete hydrophilic glycos­
aminoglycans. The resulting increase in interstitial fluid 
content, combined with a chronic inflammatory cell 
infiltrate, causes marked swelling and ultimately fibrosis 
of the extraocular muscles (Fig. 20.7) and a rise in retro-
bulbar pressure. The eye is displaced forwards (propto-
sis, exophthalmos; p. 735) and in severe cases there is 
optic nerve compression.
Ophthalmopathy, like thyrotoxicosis (see Fig. 20.6), 
typically follows an episodic course and it is helpful to 
distinguish patients with active inflammation (peri­
orbital oedema and conjunctival inflammation with 
changing orbital signs) from those in whom the inflam-
mation has ‘burnt out’. Eye disease is detectable in up 
to 50% of thyrotoxic patients at presentation, but active 
ocular inflammation may occur before or after thyro-
toxic episodes (exophthalmic Graves’ disease). It is more 
common in cigarette smokers and is exacerbated by poor 
The thyroid gland
20
751
Transient thyroiditis
Subacute (de Quervain’s) 
thyroiditis
In its classical painful form, subacute thyroiditis is a 
transient inflammation of the thyroid gland occurring 
after infection with Coxsackie, mumps or adenoviruses. 
There is pain in the region of the thyroid that may 
radiate to the angle of the jaw and the ears, and is made 
worse by swallowing, coughing and movement of the 
neck. The thyroid is usually palpably enlarged and 
tender. Systemic upset is common. Affected patients are 
usually females aged 20–40 years. Painless transient thy-
roiditis can also occur after viral infection and in patients 
with underlying autoimmune disease. The condition can 
also be precipitated by drugs, including interferon-α 
and lithium.
Irrespective of the clinical presentation, inflammation 
in the thyroid gland occurs and is associated with release 
of colloid and stored thyroid hormones, but also 
with damage to follicular cells and impaired synthesis 
of new thyroid hormones. As a result, T4 and T3 levels 
are raised for 4–6 weeks until the pre-formed colloid 
is depleted. Thereafter, there is usually a period of 
hypothyroidism of variable severity before the follicular 
cells recover and normal thyroid function is restored 
within 4–6 months (Fig. 20.8). In the thyrotoxic phase, 
the iodine uptake is low, because the damaged follicular 
cells are unable to trap iodine and because TSH secretion 
is suppressed. Low-titre thyroid autoantibodies appear 
transiently in the serum, and the erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate (ESR) is usually raised. High-titre autoantibod-
ies suggest an underlying autoimmune pathology and 
greater risk of recurrence and ultimate progression to 
hypothyroidism.
The pain and systemic upset usually respond to 
simple measures such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs). Occasionally, however, it may be 
necessary to prescribe prednisolone 40 mg daily for 
3–4 weeks. The thyrotoxicosis is mild and treatment 
with a β-blocker is usually adequate. Antithyroid drugs 
are of no benefit because thyroid hormone synthesis 
is impaired rather than enhanced. Careful monitoring 
of thyroid function and symptoms is required so that 
is an indication for urgent surgical decompression of 
the orbit. In ‘burnt-out’ disease, surgery to the eyelids 
and/or ocular muscles may improve conjunctival expo-
sure, cosmetic appearance and diplopia.
Pretibial myxoedema
This infiltrative dermopathy occurs in fewer than 10% 
of patients with Graves’ disease and has similar patho-
logical features as occur in the orbit. It takes the form of 
raised pink-coloured or purplish plaques on the anterior 
aspect of the leg, extending on to the dorsum of the foot 
(p. 734). The lesions may be itchy and the skin may have 
a ‘peau d’orange’ appearance with growth of coarse 
hair; less commonly, the face and arms are affected. 
Treatment is rarely required, but in severe cases topical 
glucocorticoids may be helpful.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is characterised by destructive 
lymphoid infiltration of the thyroid, ultimately leading 
to a varying degree of fibrosis and thyroid enlargement. 
There is an increased risk of thyroid lymphoma (p. 755), 
although this is exceedingly rare. The nomenclature 
of autoimmune hypothyroidism is confusing. Some 
authorities reserve the term ‘Hashimoto’s thyroiditis’  
for patients with positive antithyroid peroxidase 
autoantibodies and a firm goitre who may or may not 
be hypothyroid, and use the term ‘spontaneous atrophic 
hypothyroidism’ for hypothyroid patients without a 
goitre in whom TSH receptor-blocking antibodies may 
be more important than antiperoxidase antibodies. 
However, these syndromes can both be considered as 
variants of the same underlying disease process.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis increases in incidence with 
age and affects approximately 3.5 per 1000 women and 
0.8 per 1000 men each year. Many present with a small 
or moderately sized diffuse goitre, which is characteris-
tically firm or rubbery in consistency. The goitre may be 
soft, however, and impossible to differentiate from 
simple goitre (p. 752) by palpation alone. Around 25% 
of patients are hypothyroid at presentation. In the 
remainder, serum T4 is normal and TSH normal or 
raised, but these patients are at risk of developing overt 
hypothyroidism in future years. Antithyroid peroxidase 
antibodies are present in the serum in more than 90% of 
patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. In those under 
the age of 20 years, antinuclear factor (ANF) may also 
be positive.
Levothyroxine therapy is indicated as treatment for 
hypothyroidism (p. 743), and also to shrink an associ-
ated goitre. In this context, the dose of thyroxine should 
be sufficient to suppress serum TSH to low but detect-
able levels.
Fig. 20.8  Thyroid function tests in an episode of transient 
thyroiditis. This pattern might be observed in classical subacute 
(de Quervain’s) thyroiditis, painless thyroiditis or post-partum thyroiditis. 
The duration of each phase varies between patients. 
Thyrotoxic
Hypothyroid
Euthyroid
Reference
range
0
2
4
6
Months
T4, T3
TSH
‘Selenium therapy for 6 months was associated with 
improvement of both the appearance score and the visual-
functioning score. The benefits persisted 6 months following 
cessation of therapy.’
• Marcocci C, et al. N Engl J Med 2012; 364:1920–1931.
For further information: 
www.thyroid.org
20.16  Effects of selenium supplementation in 
mild Graves’ ophthalmopathy
Endocrine disease
20
752
levothyroxine can be prescribed temporarily in the 
hypothyroid phase. Care must be taken to identify 
patients presenting with hypothyroidism who are in the 
later stages of a transient thyroiditis, since they are 
unlikely to require life-long levothyroxine therapy (see 
Fig. 20.5, p. 744).
Post-partum thyroiditis
The maternal immune response, which is modified 
during pregnancy to allow survival of the fetus, is 
enhanced after delivery and may unmask previously 
unrecognised subclinical autoimmune thyroid disease. 
Surveys have shown that transient biochemical distur-
bances of thyroid function occur in 5–10% of women 
within 6 months of delivery (see Box 20.20, p. 756). Those 
affected are likely to have anti-thyroid peroxidase anti-
bodies in the serum in early pregnancy. Symptoms of 
thyroid dysfunction are rare and there is no association 
between postnatal depression and abnormal thyroid 
function tests. However, symptomatic thyrotoxicosis 
presenting for the first time within 12 months of child-
birth is likely to be due to post-partum thyroiditis and 
the diagnosis is confirmed by a negligible radio-isotope 
uptake. The clinical course and treatment are similar to 
those of painless subacute thyroiditis (see above). Post-
partum thyroiditis tends to recur after subsequent preg-
nancies, and eventually patients progress over a period 
of years to permanent hypothyroidism.
Iodine-associated thyroid disease
Iodine deficiency
Thyroid enlargement is extremely common in certain 
mountainous parts of the world, such as the Andes, the 
Himalayas and central Africa, where there is dietary 
iodine deficiency (endemic goitre). Most patients are 
euthyroid with normal or raised TSH levels, although 
hypothyroidism can occur with severe iodine deficiency. 
Iodine supplementation programmes have abolished 
this condition in most developed countries.
Iodine-induced thyroid dysfunction
Iodine has complex effects on thyroid function. Very 
high concentrations of iodine inhibit thyroid hormone 
release and this forms the rationale for iodine treatment 
of thyroid storm (p. 742) and prior to thyroid surgery for 
thyrotoxicosis (p. 748). Iodine administration initially 
enhances, but then inhibits, iodination of tyrosine and 
thyroid hormone synthesis (see Fig. 20.3, p. 739). The 
resulting effect of iodine on thyroid function varies 
according to whether the patient has an iodine-deficient 
diet or underlying thyroid disease. In iodine-deficient 
parts of the world, transient thyrotoxicosis may be pre-
cipitated by prophylactic iodinisation programmes. In 
iodine-sufficient areas, thyrotoxicosis can be precipi-
tated by radiographic contrast medium or expectorants 
in individuals who have underlying thyroid disease pre-
disposing to thyrotoxicosis, such as multinodular goitre 
or Graves’ disease in remission. Induction of thyrotoxi-
cosis by iodine is called the Jod–Basedow effect. Chronic 
excess iodine administration can, however, result in 
hypothyroidism. Increased iodine within the thyroid 
gland down-regulates iodine trapping, so that uptake is 
low in all circumstances.
Fig. 20.9  The structure of amiodarone. Note the similarities to T4 
(see Fig. 20.3, p. 739). 
C4H9
O
I
C
CH2 CH2 N
O
C2H5
C2H5
I
O
Amiodarone
The anti-arrhythmic agent amiodarone has a structure 
that is analogous to that of T4 (Fig. 20.9) and contains 
huge amounts of iodine; a 200 mg dose contains 75 mg 
iodine, compared with a daily dietary requirement of 
just 125 µg. Amiodarone also has a cytotoxic effect on 
thyroid follicular cells and inhibits conversion of T4 to 
T3. Most patients receiving amiodarone have normal 
thyroid function, but up to 20% develop hypothyroidism 
or thyrotoxicosis and so thyroid function should be 
monitored regularly. The ratio of T4:T3 is elevated and 
TSH provides the best indicator of thyroid function.
The thyrotoxicosis can be classified as either:
•	 type I: iodine-induced excess thyroid hormone 
synthesis in patients with an underlying thyroid 
disorder, such as nodular goitre or latent Graves’ 
disease
•	 type II: thyroiditis due to a direct cytotoxic effect if 
amiodarone administration results in a transient 
thyrotoxicosis.
These patterns can overlap and can be difficult to 
distinguish clinically, as iodine uptake is low in both. 
There is no widely accepted management algorithm, 
although the iodine excess renders the gland resistant to 
radio-iodine. Antithyroid drugs may be effective in 
patients with the type I form, but are ineffective in type 
II thyrotoxicosis. Prednisolone is beneficial in the type II 
form. A pragmatic approach is to commence combina-
tion therapy with an antithyroid drug and glucocorti-
coid in patients with significant thyrotoxicosis. A rapid 
response (within 1–2 weeks) usually indicates a type II 
picture and permits withdrawal of the antithyroid 
therapy; a slower response suggests a type I picture, 
when antithyroid drugs may be continued and pred-
nisolone withdrawn. Potassium perchlorate can also be 
used to inhibit iodine trapping in the thyroid. If the 
cardiac state allows, amiodarone should be discontin-
ued, but it has a long half-life (50–60 days) and so its 
effects are long-lasting. To minimise the risk of type I 
thyrotoxicosis, thyroid function should be measured in 
all patients prior to commencement of amiodarone 
therapy, and amiodarone should be avoided if TSH is 
suppressed.
Hypothyroidism should be treated with levo­
thyroxine, which can be given while amiodarone is 
continued.
Simple and multinodular goitre
These terms describe diffuse or multinodular enlarge-
ment of the thyroid, which occurs sporadically and is of 
unknown aetiology.
The thyroid gland
20
753
dysfunction or positive autoantibodies (i.e. with ‘simple 
goitre’, see above) as young adults may progress to 
develop nodules. These nodules grow at varying rates 
and secrete thyroid hormone ‘autonomously’, thereby 
suppressing TSH-dependent growth and function in the 
rest of the gland. Ultimately, complete suppression of 
TSH occurs in about 25% of cases, with T4 and T3 levels 
often within the reference range (subclinical thyrotoxi-
cosis, p. 745) but sometimes elevated (toxic multinodu-
lar goitre; see Fig. 20.4, p. 742).
Clinical features and investigations
Multinodular goitre is usually diagnosed in patients 
presenting with thyrotoxicosis, a large goitre with or 
without tracheal compression, or sudden painful swell-
ing caused by haemorrhage into a nodule or cyst. The 
goitre is nodular or lobulated on palpation and may 
extend retrosternally; however, not all multinodular 
goitres causing thyrotoxicosis are easily palpable. Very 
large goitres may cause mediastinal compression with 
stridor (Fig. 20.11), dysphagia and obstruction of the 
superior vena cava. Hoarseness due to recurrent laryn-
geal nerve palsy can occur, but is far more suggestive of 
thyroid carcinoma.
The diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasonography 
and/or thyroid scintigraphy (see Fig. 20.4, p. 742). In 
patients with large goitres, a flow-volume loop is a good 
screening test for significant tracheal compression (see 
Fig. 20.11). If intervention is contemplated, a CT or MRI 
of the thoracic inlet should be performed to quantify 
the degree of tracheal displacement or compression and 
the extent of retrosternal extension. Nodules should be 
evaluated for the possibility of thyroid neoplasia, as 
described on page 754.
Management
If the goitre is small, no treatment is necessary but 
annual thyroid function testing should be arranged, as 
the natural history is progression to a toxic multinodular 
goitre. Thyroid surgery is indicated for large goitres 
which cause mediastinal compression or which are 
cosmetically unattractive. 131I can result in a significant 
reduction in thyroid size and may be of value in 
Simple diffuse goitre
This form of goitre usually presents between the ages of 
15 and 25 years, often during pregnancy, and tends to 
be noticed by friends and relatives rather than the 
patient. Occasionally, there is a tight sensation in the 
neck, particularly when swallowing. The goitre is soft 
and symmetrical, and the thyroid enlarged to two or 
three times normal. There is no tenderness, lymphaden-
opathy or overlying bruit. Concentrations of T3, T4 and 
TSH are normal and no thyroid autoantibodies are 
detected in the serum. No treatment is necessary and the 
goitre usually regresses. In some, however, the unknown 
stimulus to thyroid enlargement persists and, as a result 
of recurrent episodes of hyperplasia and involution 
during the following 10–20 years, the gland becomes 
multinodular with areas of autonomous function.
Multinodular goitre
The natural history is shown in Figure 20.10. Patients 
with thyroid enlargement in the absence of thyroid 
Fig. 20.10  Natural history of simple goitre. 
Age (in years)
Goitre
Tracheal
compression/
deviation
T3, T4
TSH
15–25
35–55
> 55
Diffuse
Nodular
Nodular
No
Minimal
Yes
Normal
Normal
Raised
Normal
Normal or
undetectable Undetectable
Fig. 20.11  Multinodular goitre with tracheal compression.  A A flow-volume loop (p. 653) showing a square-shaped inspiratory curve indicating 
extrathoracic airflow obstruction.  B A CT scan of the neck showing a large retrosternal goitre (black arrows) with marked deviation and compression of 
the trachea (white arrow). 
0
2
4
Volume (L)
Expiration (L/sec)
Inspiration (L/sec)
6
2
4
–4
–2
–6
A
B
Endocrine disease
20
754
(T3 thyrotoxicosis). 131I (400–800 MBq (10–20 mCi)) is 
highly effective and is an ideal treatment since the 
atrophic cells surrounding the nodule do not take up 
iodine and so receive little or no radiation. For this 
reason, permanent hypothyroidism is unusual. A surgi-
cal hemithyroidectomy is an alternative.
Differentiated carcinoma
Papillary carcinoma
This is the most common of the malignant thyroid 
tumours and accounts for 90% of irradiation-induced 
thyroid cancer. It may be multifocal and spread is ini-
tially to regional lymph nodes. Some patients present 
with cervical lymphadenopathy and no apparent thyroid 
enlargement; in such instances, the primary lesion may 
be less than 10 mm in diameter.
Follicular carcinoma
This is always a single encapsulated lesion. Spread to 
cervical lymph nodes is rare. Metastases are blood-borne 
and are most often found in bone, lungs and brain.
Management
This is usually by total thyroidectomy followed by a 
large dose of 131I (3700 MBq (approximately 100 mCi)) 
in order to ablate any remaining thyroid tissue, normal 
or malignant. Recent data indicate that a 131I dose of 
1100 MBq (approximately 30 mCi) may be equally as 
effective at thyroid ablation (Box 20.18). Thereafter, 
long-term treatment with levothyroxine in a dose 
sufficient to suppress TSH (usually 150–200 µg daily) 
is important, as there is evidence that growth of differ­
entiated thyroid carcinomas is TSH-dependent. Follow-­
­up is by measurement of serum thyroglobulin, which 
should be undetectable in patients whose normal 
thyroid has been ablated and who are taking a sup-
pressive dose of levothyroxine. Detectable thyroglobu-
lin is suggestive of tumour recurrence or metastases, 
which may be localised by ultrasound, CT, MRI or 
whole-body scanning with 131I, and may respond to 
further radio-iodine therapy. Radio-iodine treatment in 
thyroid cancer and isotope scanning both require serum 
TSH concentrations to be elevated (> 20 mU/L). This 
may be achieved by stopping levothyroxine for 
4–6 weeks, inducing symptomatic hypothyroidism, or 
by administering intramuscular injections of recom-
binant human TSH. Patients usually find the latter 
approach preferable but it is more expensive. Clinical 
elderly patients. Levothyroxine therapy is of no benefit 
in shrinking multinodular goitres in iodine-sufficient 
countries and may simply aggravate any associated 
thyrotoxicosis.
In toxic multinodular goitre, treatment is usually 
with 131I. The iodine uptake is lower than in Graves’ 
disease, so a higher dose may be administered (up 
to 800 Mbq (approximately 20 mCi)) and hypo­
thyroidism is less common. In thyrotoxic patients with 
a large goitre, thyroid surgery may be indicated. 
Long-term treatment with antithyroid drugs is not 
usually employed, as relapse is invariable after drug 
withdrawal.
Asymptomatic patients with subclinical thyrotoxico-
sis (p. 745) are increasingly being treated with 131I on the 
grounds that a suppressed TSH is a risk factor for atrial 
fibrillation and, particularly in post-menopausal women, 
osteoporosis.
Thyroid neoplasia
Patients with thyroid tumours usually present with a 
solitary nodule (p. 746). Most are benign and a few of 
these, called ‘toxic adenomas’, secrete excess thyroid 
hormones. Primary thyroid malignancy is rare, account-
ing for less than 1% of all carcinomas, and has an inci-
dence of 25 per million per annum. As shown in Box 
20.17, it can be classified according to the cell type of 
origin. With the exception of medullary carcinoma, 
thyroid cancer is more common in females.
Toxic adenoma
A solitary toxic nodule is the cause of less than 5% of 
all cases of thyrotoxicosis. The nodule is a follicular 
adenoma, which autonomously secretes excess thyroid 
hormones and inhibits endogenous TSH secretion, with 
subsequent atrophy of the rest of the thyroid gland. The 
adenoma is usually greater than 3 cm in diameter.
Most patients are female and over 40 years of age. 
Although many nodules are palpable, the diagnosis can 
be made with certainty only by thyroid scintigraphy (see 
Fig. 20.4, p. 742). The thyrotoxicosis is usually mild and 
in almost 50% of patients the plasma T3 alone is elevated 
‘Ablative radioactive iodine has been associated with an 
increased risk of second malignancies. Two randomised 
controlled clinical trials have shown that 1100 MBq radio-iodine 
(30 mCi) is as effective at ablating thyroid tissue as 3700 MBq 
(100 mCi). Both trials also showed that preparation of patients 
for radio-iodine treatment with recombinant TSH was as 
effective as levothyroxine withdrawal.’
• Schlumberger M, et al. N Engl J Med 2012; 366:1663–1673.
• Mallick U, et al. N Engl J Med 2012; 366:1674–1685.
For further information: 
www.thyroid.org
20.18  Ablative radio-iodine following 
thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancer
Type of tumour
Frequency 
(%)
Age at 
presentation 
(years)
10-year 
survival 
(%)
Follicular cells
Differentiated 
carcinoma
  Papillary
75–85
20–40
98
  Follicular
10–20
40–60
94
Anaplastic
< 5
> 60
9
Parafollicular C cells
Medullary carcinoma
5–8
> 40*
78
Lymphocytes
Lymphoma
< 5
> 60
45
*Patients with medullary carcinoma as part of MEN type 2 (p. 795) may 
present in childhood.
20.17  Malignant thyroid tumours
The thyroid gland
20
755
trials are currently ongoing with novel anti-cancer 
agents, such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors, in patients 
with advanced papillary and follicular carcinoma that is 
refractive to radio-iodine.
Prognosis
Most patients with papillary and thyroid cancer will be 
cured with appropriate treatment. Adverse prognostic 
factors include older age at presentation, the presence 
of distant metastases, male sex and the identification 
of certain histological subtypes. However, radio-iodine 
therapy can be effective in treating even those with 
distant metastases, particularly small-volume disease in 
the lungs, and so prolonged survival is quite common.
Anaplastic carcinoma  
and lymphoma
These two conditions are difficult to distinguish clini-
cally but are distinct cytologically and histologically. 
Patients are usually over 60 years of age and present 
with rapid thyroid enlargement over 2–3 months. The 
goitre is hard and there may be stridor due to tracheal 
compression and hoarseness due to recurrent laryngeal 
nerve palsy. There is no effective treatment for anaplas-
tic carcinoma, although surgery and radiotherapy may 
be considered in some circumstances. In older patients, 
median survival is only 7 months.
The prognosis for lymphoma, which may arise from 
pre-existing Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, is better (p. 1041), 
with a median survival of 9 years. Some 98% are non-
Hodgkin’s lymphomas, usually the diffuse large B-cell 
subtype. Treatment is with combination chemotherapy, 
such as the CHOP regime (p. 1045), and external beam 
radiotherapy.
Medullary carcinoma
This tumour arises from the parafollicular C cells of the 
thyroid. In addition to calcitonin, the tumour may 
secrete 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin), various 
peptides of the tachykinin family, adrenocortico-
trophic hormone (ACTH) and prostaglandins. As a con-
sequence, carcinoid syndrome (p. 784) and Cushing’s 
syndrome (p. 773) may occur.
Patients usually present in middle age with a firm 
thyroid mass. Cervical lymph node involvement is 
common but distant metastases are rare initially. Serum 
calcitonin levels are raised and are useful in monitoring 
response to treatment. Despite the very high levels of 
calcitonin found in some patients, hypocalcaemia is 
extremely rare; however, hypercalcitoninaemia can be 
associated with severe, watery diarrhoea.
Treatment is by total thyroidectomy with removal 
of regional cervical lymph nodes. Since the C cells do 
not concentrate iodine and are not responsive to TSH, 
there is no role for 131I therapy or TSH suppression 
with levothyroxine. External beam radiotherapy may 
be considered in some patients at high risk of local 
recurrence. Vandetanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is 
licensed for patients with advanced medullary cancer. 
The prognosis is less good than for papillary and 
follicular carcinoma, but individuals can live for many 
decades with persistent disease which behaves in an 
indolent fashion.
Thyrotoxicosis
• Causes: commonly due to multinodular goitre.
• Clinical features: apathy, anorexia, proximal myopathy, 
atrial fibrillation and cardiac failure predominate.
• Non-thyroidal illness: thyroid function tests are performed 
more frequently in the elderly, but interpretation may be 
altered by intercurrent illness.
Hypothyroidism
• Clinical features: non-specific features, such as physical 
and mental slowing, are often attributed to increasing age 
and the diagnosis is delayed.
• Myxoedema coma (p. 745): more likely in the elderly.
• Levothyroxine dose: to avoid exacerbating latent or 
established heart disease, the starting dose should be 25 µg 
daily. Levothyroxine requirements fall with increasing age 
and few patients need more than 100 µg daily.
• Other medication (see Box 20.11, p. 745): may interfere 
with absorption or metabolism of levothyroxine, necessitating 
an increase in dose.
20.19  The thyroid gland in old age
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid may occur 
sporadically, or in families as part of the MEN type 2 
syndrome (p. 795).
Riedel’s thyroiditis
This is not a form of thyroid cancer, but the presentation 
is similar and the differentiation can usually only be 
made by thyroid biopsy. It is an exceptionally rare 
condition of unknown aetiology, in which there is 
extensive infiltration of the thyroid and surrounding 
structures with fibrous tissue. There may be associated 
mediastinal and retroperitoneal fibrosis. Presentation 
is with a slow-growing goitre which is irregular and 
stony-hard. There is usually tracheal and oesophageal 
compression necessitating partial thyroidectomy. Other 
recognised complications include recurrent laryn­
geal nerve palsy, hypoparathyroidism and eventually 
hypothyroidism.
Congenital thyroid disease
Early treatment with levothyroxine is essential to 
prevent irreversible brain damage in children (cretin-
ism) with congenital hypothyroidism. Routine screening 
of TSH levels in heelprick blood samples obtained 
5–7 days after birth (as part of the Guthrie test) has 
revealed an incidence of approximately 1 in 3000, result-
ing from thyroid agenesis, ectopic or hypoplastic glands, 
or dyshormonogenesis. Congenital hypothyroidism is 
thus six times more common than phenylketonuria. It is 
now possible to start thyroid replacement therapy 
within 2 weeks of birth. Developmental assessment of 
infants treated at this early stage has revealed no differ-
ences between cases and controls in most children.
Dyshormonogenesis
Several autosomal recessive defects in thyroid hormone 
synthesis have been described; the most common 
results from deficiency of the intrathyroidal peroxidase 
Endocrine disease
20
756
different tissues. For that reason, other tissues may or 
may not share the resistance to thyroid hormone and 
there may be features of thyrotoxicosis (e.g. tachycar-
dia). This condition can be difficult to distinguish from 
an equally rare TSH-producing pituitary tumour (see 
Box 20.5, p. 739); administration of TRH results in eleva-
tion of TSH in thyroid hormone resistance and not in 
TSHoma, but an MRI scan of the pituitary may be neces-
sary to exclude a macroadenoma.
THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Clinical practice in reproductive medicine is shared 
between several specialties, including gynaecology, 
urology, paediatrics, psychiatry and endocrinology. The 
following section is focused on disorders managed by 
endocrinologists.
Functional anatomy, physiology  
and investigations
The physiology of male and female reproductive func-
tion is illustrated in Figures 20.12 and 20.13 respectively. 
enzyme. Homozygous individuals present with con-
genital hypothyroidism; heterozygotes present in the 
first two decades of life with goitre, normal thyroid 
hormone levels and a raised TSH. The combination of 
dyshormonogenetic goitre and nerve deafness is known 
as Pendred’s syndrome and is due to mutations in 
pendrin, the protein which transports iodide to the 
luminal surface of the follicular cell (see Fig. 20.3, p. 739).
Thyroid hormone resistance
This is a rare disorder in which the pituitary and 
hypothalamus are resistant to feedback suppression of 
TSH by T3, sometimes due to mutations in the thyroid 
hormone receptor β or because of defects in mono­
deiodinase activity. The result is high levels of TSH, T4 
and T3, often with a moderate goitre which may not be 
noted until adulthood. Thyroid hormone signalling is 
highly complex and involves different isozymes of both 
monodeiodinases and thyroid hormone receptors in 
Fig. 20.12  Male reproductive physiology. (FSH = follicle-stimulating 
hormone; LH = luteinising hormone). 
Negative
feedback
LH
FSH
Interstitial
(Leydig)
cells
Sertoli cells
in seminiferous
tubules
Inhibin
Spermatogenesis
Testosterone
• Facial, axillary and body hair growth
• Scalp balding
• Skin sebum production
• Penis and scrotal development
• Prostate development and function
• Laryngeal enlargement
• Muscle power
• Bone metabolism/epiphyseal closure
• Libido
• Aggression
Testis
Normal pregnancy
• Trimester-specific reference ranges: should be used to 
interpret thyroid function test results in pregnancy. In the first 
trimester, TSH is lower and free T4 and T3 higher, in part due 
to thyroid stimulation by human chorionic gonadotrophin 
(hCG). In later pregnancy, free T4 and T3 are lower. Binding 
globulin levels are induced by oestrogen, so total T4 and T3 
levels are invariably high.
• Iodine requirements: increased in pregnancy. The World 
Health Organization (WHO) recommends minimum intake of 
200 µg/day.
• Screening of thyroid function and autoantibodies: not 
recommended for every woman, but should be performed in 
the first trimester in those with a personal or family history of 
thyroid disease, goitre, other autoimmune disease including 
type 1 diabetes, or when there is clinical suspicion of thyroid 
dysfunction.
Thyrotoxicosis
• Hyperemesis gravidarum: associated with thyrotoxic 
biochemistry, sometimes requiring antithyroid drugs.
• Subclinical thyrotoxicosis: not usually treated, to avoid fetal 
hypothyroidism.
• Antithyroid drugs: propylthiouracil should be used in the 
first trimester, with carbimazole substituted in the second 
and third trimesters.
Hypothyroidism
• Preterm labour and impaired cognitive development in 
the offspring: may be associated with even subclinical 
hypothyroidism.
• Levothyroxine replacement therapy dose requirements: 
increase by 30–50% from early in pregnancy. Monitoring to 
maintain TSH results within the trimester-specific reference 
range is recommended in early pregnancy and at least once 
in each trimester.
Post-partum thyroiditis
• Screening: not recommended for every woman, but thyroid 
function should be tested 4–6 weeks post-partum in those 
with a personal history of thyroid disease, goitre or other 
autoimmune disease including type 1 diabetes, those known 
to have positive anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies, or when 
there is clinical suspicion of thyroid dysfunction.
20.20  Thyroid disease in pregnancy
The reproductive system
20
757
Fig. 20.13  Female reproductive physiology and the normal menstrual cycle. 
Feedback
LH
FSH
Inhibin
Oestradiol
• Endometrial
   proliferation
• Genital
   development
   and lubrication
• Breast
   proliferation
• Bone epiphyseal
   closure and
   mineral content
• Brain
• Body fat
   distribution
• Skin sebum
Progesterone
• Endometrial
   secretory change
• Increased
   myometrial
   contractility
• Thermogenesis
• Breast swelling
0
7
14
21
28
Days after start of last menstrual period
FSH
LH
Oestradiol
Progesterone
Ovulation
Luteal phase
Follicular phase
Primary
Dominant
vesicular
Mature
Haemorrhagic
Mature Regressing
Oestradiol
Oestradiol
Oestradiol
Progesterone
Oestradiol
Progesterone
Corpus luteum
Ovary
Menses
Follicle
Pathways for synthesis of sex steroids are shown in 
Figure 20.18 (p. 772).
The male
In the male, the testis subserves two principal functions: 
synthesis of testosterone by the interstitial Leydig cells 
under the control of luteinising hormone (LH), and 
spermatogenesis by Sertoli cells under the control of 
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (but also requiring 
adequate testosterone). Negative feedback suppression 
of LH is mediated principally by testosterone, while 
secretion of another hormone by the testis, inhibin, 
suppresses FSH. The axis can be assessed easily by a 
random blood sample for testosterone, LH and FSH. 
Testosterone levels are higher in the morning and there-
fore, if testosterone is marginally low, sampling should 
be repeated in the early morning (0900 hrs). Testoster-
one is largely bound in plasma to sex hormone-binding 
globulin, and this can also be measured to calculate 
the ‘free androgen index’ or the ‘bioavailable’ testoster-
one. Testicular function can also be tested by semen 
analysis.
There is no equivalent of the menopause in men, 
although testosterone concentrations decline slowly 
from the fourth decade onwards.
The female
In the female, physiology varies during the normal men-
strual cycle. FSH stimulates growth and development of 
ovarian follicles during the first 14 days after the menses. 
This leads to a gradual increase in oestradiol production 
from granulosa cells, which initially suppresses FSH 
secretion (negative feedback) but then, above a certain 
level, stimulates an increase in both the frequency and 
amplitude of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
pulses, resulting in a marked increase in LH secretion 
(positive feedback). The mid-cycle ‘surge’ of LH induces 
ovulation. After release of the ovum, the follicle differ-
entiates into a corpus luteum, which secretes proges­
terone. Unless pregnancy occurs during the cycle, the 
corpus luteum regresses and the fall in progesterone 
levels results in menstrual bleeding. Circulating levels 
of oestrogen and progesterone in pre-menopausal 
women are, therefore, critically dependent on the time 
of the cycle. The most useful ‘test’ of ovarian function 
is a careful menstrual history: if menses are regular, 
measurement of gonadotrophins and oestrogen is not 
necessary. In addition, ovulation can be confirmed by 
measuring plasma progesterone levels during the luteal 
phase (‘day 21 progesterone’).
Cessation of menstruation (the menopause) occurs at 
an average age of approximately 50 years in developed 
countries. In the 5 years before, there is a gradual 
increase in the number of anovulatory cycles and this is 
referred to as the climacteric. Oestrogen and inhibin 
secretion falls and negative feedback results in increased 
pituitary secretion of LH and FSH (typically to levels 
above 30 U/L (3.3 µg/L)).
The pathophysiology of male and female reproduc-
tive dysfunction is summarised in Box 20.21.
Endocrine disease
20
758
• Aetiology: in boys the most common cause is constitutional 
delay, whereas in girls there is invariably an underlying 
structural or functional cause.
• Psychological effects: whatever the underlying cause, 
delayed puberty is often associated with substantial 
psychological distress.
• Investigations: a karyotype should be performed in all 
adolescents with hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism, to 
exclude Turner’s and Klinefelter’s syndromes, unless there is 
an obvious precipitating cause.
• Medical induction of puberty: if this is being considered, it 
needs to be managed carefully and be carried out in a 
controlled fashion, to avoid premature fusion of the 
epiphyses.
20.23  Delayed puberty
Primary
Secondary
Hormone excess
Polycystic ovarian 
syndrome
Granulosa cell 
tumour
Leydig cell tumour
Teratoma
Pituitary 
gonadotrophinoma
Hormone 
deficiency
Menopause
Hypogonadism 
(see Box 20.22)
Turner’s syndrome
Klinefelter’s 
syndrome
Hypopituitarism
Kallmann’s 
syndrome (isolated 
GnRH deficiency)
Severe systemic 
illness, including 
anorexia nervosa
Hormone 
hypersensitivity
Idiopathic hirsutism
Hormone 
resistance
Androgen resistance syndromes
Complete (‘testicular feminisation’)
Partial (Reifenstein’s syndrome)
5α-reductase type 2 deficiency
Non-functioning 
tumours
Ovarian cysts
Carcinoma
Teratoma
Seminoma
20.21  Classification of diseases of 
the reproductive system
Presenting problems in  
reproductive disease
Delayed puberty
Puberty is considered to be delayed if the onset of the 
physical features of sexual maturation has not occurred 
by a chronological age that is 2.5 standard deviations 
(SD) above the national average. In the UK, this is by the 
age of 14 in boys and 13 in girls. Genetic factors have a 
major influence in determining the timing of the onset 
of puberty, such that the age of menarche (the onset of 
menstruation) is often comparable within sibling and 
mother–daughter pairs and within ethnic groups. 
However, because there is also a threshold for body 
weight that acts as a trigger for normal puberty, the 
onset of puberty can be influenced by other factors 
including nutritional status and chronic illness (p. 110).
Clinical assessment
The differential diagnosis is shown in Box 20.22. The 
key issue is to determine whether the delay in puberty 
is simply because the ‘clock is running slow’ (con­
stitutional delay of puberty) or because there is pathol-
ogy in the hypothalamus/pituitary (hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism) or the gonads (hypergonadotrophic 
hypogonadism). A general history and physical exami-
nation should be performed with particular reference 
to previous or current medical disorders, social cir­
cumstances and family history. Body proportions, sense 
of smell and pubertal stage should be carefully docu-
mented and, in boys, the presence or absence of testes 
in the scrotum noted. Current weight and height may be 
plotted on centile charts, along with parental heights. 
Previous growth measurements in childhood, which can 
usually be obtained from health records, are extremely 
useful. Healthy growth usually follows a centile. Usually, 
children with constitutional delay have always been 
small, but have maintained a normal growth velocity 
that is appropriate for bone age. Poor linear growth, 
with ‘crossing of the centiles’, is more likely to be associ-
ated with acquired disease. Issues that are commonly 
encountered in the management of adolescents with 
delayed puberty are summarised in Box 20.23.
Constitutional delay of puberty
This is the most common cause of delayed puberty. 
Affected children are healthy and have usually been 
more than 2 SD below the mean height for their age 
Constitutional delay
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
• Structural hypothalamic/pituitary disease (see Box 20.59, 
p. 787)
• Functional gonadotrophin deficiency
Chronic systemic illness (e.g. asthma, malabsorption, 
coeliac disease, cystic fibrosis, renal failure)
Psychological stress
Anorexia nervosa
Excessive physical exercise
Hyperprolactinaemia
Other endocrine disease (e.g. Cushing’s syndrome, 
primary hypothyroidism)
• Isolated gonadotrophin deficiency (Kallmann’s syndrome)
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism
• Acquired gonadal damage
Chemotherapy/radiotherapy to gonads
Trauma/surgery to gonads
Autoimmune gonadal failure
Mumps orchitis
Tuberculosis
Haemochromatosis
• Developmental/congenital gonadal disorders
Steroid biosynthetic defects
Anorchidism/cryptorchidism in males
Klinefelter’s syndrome (47XXY, male phenotype)
Turner’s syndrome (45XO, female phenotype)
20.22  Causes of delayed puberty and 
hypogonadism
The reproductive system
20
759
throughout childhood. There is often a history of delayed 
puberty in siblings or parents. Since sex steroids are 
essential for fusion of the epiphyses, ‘bone age’ can be 
estimated by X-rays of epiphyses, usually in the wrist 
and hand; in constitutional delay, bone age is lower 
than chronological age. Constitutional delay of puberty 
should be considered as a normal variant, as puberty 
will commence spontaneously. However, affected chil-
dren can experience significant psychological distress 
because of their lack of physical development, particu-
larly when compared with their peers.
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
This may be due to structural, inflammatory or infiltra-
tive disorders of the pituitary and/or hypothalamus (see 
Box 20.59, p. 787). In such circumstances, other pituitary 
hormones, such as growth hormone, are also likely to be 
deficient.
‘Functional’ gonadotrophin deficiency is caused by a 
variety of factors, including low body weight, chronic 
systemic illness (as a consequence of the disease itself or 
secondary malnutrition), endocrine disorders and pro-
found psychosocial stress.
Isolated gonadotrophin deficiency is usually due to a 
genetic abnormality that affects the synthesis of either 
GnRH or gonadotrophins. The most common form is 
Kallmann’s syndrome, in which there is primary GnRH 
deficiency and, in most affected individuals, agenesis or 
hypoplasia of the olfactory bulbs, resulting in anosmia 
or hyposmia. If isolated gonadotrophin deficiency is left 
untreated, the epiphyses fail to fuse, resulting in tall 
stature with disproportionately long arms and legs 
relative to trunk height (eunuchoid habitus).
Cryptorchidism (undescended testes) and gynaeco-
mastia are commonly observed in all forms of hypo­
gonadotrophic hypogonadism.
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism associated with 
delayed puberty is usually due to Klinefelter’s syn-
drome in boys and Turner’s syndrome in girls (pp. 765 
and 766). Other causes of primary gonadal failure are 
shown in Box 20.22.
Investigations
Key measurements are LH and FSH, testosterone (in 
boys) and oestradiol (in girls). Chromosome analysis 
should be performed if gonadotrophin concentrations 
are elevated. If gonadotrophin concentrations are low, 
then the differential diagnosis lies between constitu-
tional delay and hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. A 
plain X-ray of the wrist and hand may be compared with 
a set of standard films to obtain a bone age. Full blood 
count, renal function, liver function, thyroid function 
and coeliac disease autoantibodies (p. 880) should be 
measured, but further tests may be unnecessary if the 
blood tests are normal and the child has all the clinical 
features of constitutional delay. If hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism is suspected, neuroimaging and further 
investigations are required (p. 786).
Management
Puberty can be induced using low doses of oral oestrogen 
in girls (for example, ethinylestradiol 2 µg daily) or testo-
sterone in boys (testosterone gel or depot testosterone 
esters). Higher doses carry a risk of early fusion of 
epiphyses. This therapy should be given in a specialist 
clinic where the progress of puberty and growth can be 
carefully monitored. In children with constitutional 
delay, this ‘priming’ therapy can be discontinued when 
endogenous puberty is established, usually in less than a 
year. In children with hypogonadism, the underlying 
cause should be treated and reversed if possible. If 
hypogonadism is permanent, sex hormone doses are 
gradually increased during puberty and full adult 
replacement doses given when development is complete.
Amenorrhoea
Primary amenorrhoea describes the condition of a 
female patient who has never menstruated; this usually 
occurs as a manifestation of delayed puberty but may 
also be a consequence of anatomical defects of the female 
reproductive system, such as endometrial hypoplasia or 
vaginal agenesis. Secondary amenorrhoea describes the 
cessation of menstruation. The causes of this common 
presentation are shown in Box 20.24. In non-pregnant 
women, secondary amenorrhoea is almost invariably a 
consequence of either ovarian or hypothalamic/pituitary 
dysfunction. Premature ovarian failure (premature 
menopause) is defined, arbitrarily, as occurring before 
40 years of age. Rarely, endometrial adhesions (Asher-
man’s syndrome) can form after uterine curettage, 
surgery or infection with tuberculosis or schistosomia-
sis, preventing endometrial proliferation and shedding.
Clinical assessment
The underlying cause can often be suspected from 
associated clinical features and the patient’s age. 
Hypothalamic/pituitary disease and premature ovarian 
failure result in oestrogen deficiency, which causes a 
variety of symptoms usually associated with the meno-
pause (Box 20.25). A history of galactorrhoea should be 
sought. Significant weight loss of any cause can cause 
amenorrhoea by suppression of gonadotrophins. Weight 
gain may suggest hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome 
or, very rarely, a hypothalamic lesion. Hirsutism, obesity 
and long-standing irregular periods suggest polycystic 
ovarian syndrome (PCOS, p. 764). The presence of other 
autoimmune disease raises the possibility of auto­
immune premature ovarian failure.
Investigations
Pregnancy should be excluded in women of reproduc-
tive age by measuring urine or serum human chorionic 
Physiological
• Pregnancy
• Menopause
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.22)
Ovarian dysfunction
• Hypergonadotrophic 
hypogonadism (see  
Box 20.22)
• Polycystic ovarian 
syndrome
• Androgen-secreting 
tumours
Uterine dysfunction
• Asherman’s syndrome
20.24  Causes of secondary amenorrhoea
Endocrine disease
20
760
of endometrial cancer. Cyclical hormone replacement 
therapy (HRT) regimens typically involve giving oestro-
gen on days 1–21 and progestogen on days 14–21 of the 
cycle and this can be conveniently administered as the 
oral contraceptive pill. If oestrogenic side-effects (fluid 
retention, weight gain, hypertension and thrombosis) 
are a concern, then lower-dose oral or transdermal HRT 
may be more appropriate.
The timing of the discontinuation of oestrogen 
replacement therapy is still a matter of debate. In post-
menopausal women, HRT has been shown to relieve 
menopausal symptoms and to prevent osteoporotic frac-
tures but is associated with adverse effects, which are 
related to the duration of therapy and to the patient’s 
age (Box 20.26). In patients with premature menopause, 
HRT should be continued up to the age of around 
50 years, but only continued beyond this age if there 
are continued symptoms of oestrogen deficiency on 
discontinuation.
Management of infertility in oestrogen-deficient 
women is described on page 760.
Male hypogonadism
The clinical features of both hypo- and hypergonado-
trophic hypogonadism include loss of libido, lethargy 
with muscle weakness, and decreased frequency of 
shaving. Patients may also present with gynaecomastia, 
infertility, delayed puberty, osteoporosis or anaemia of 
chronic disease. The causes of hypogonadism are listed 
in Box 20.22.
Investigations
Male hypogonadism is confirmed by demonstrating a 
low serum testosterone level. The distinction between 
hypo- and hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism is by 
measurement of random LH and FSH. Patients with 
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism should be investi-
gated as described for pituitary disease on page 786. 
Biochemical hypogonadism is associated with central 
obesity and the metabolic syndrome (p. 805); postulated 
mechanisms are complex and include reduction in sex 
hormone binding globulin by insulin resistance and 
reduction in GnRH and gonadotrophin secretion 
by cytokines or oestrogen released by adipose tissue. 
Testosterone levels also fall gradually with age 
in men (see Box 20.34, p. 766) and this is associated 
with gonadotrophin levels that are low or inappropri-
ately within the ‘normal’ range. There is an increasing 
trend to measure testosterone in older men, typically as 
part of an assessment of erectile dysfunction. Patients 
with hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism should have 
the testes examined for cryptorchidism or atrophy, 
Vasomotor effects
• Hot flushes
• Sweating
Psychological
• Anxiety
• Irritability
• Emotional lability
Genitourinary
• Dyspareunia
• Urgency of micturition
• Vaginal infections
20.25  Symptoms of oestrogen deficiency
gonadotrophin (hCG). Serum LH, FSH, oestradiol, pro-
lactin, testosterone, T4 and TSH should be measured 
and, in the absence of a menstrual cycle, can be taken 
at any time. Investigation of hyperprolactinaemia is 
described on page 791. High concentrations of LH and 
FSH with low or low-normal oestradiol suggest primary 
ovarian failure. Ovarian autoantibodies may be positive 
when there is an underlying autoimmune aetiology, and 
a karyotype should be performed in younger women to 
exclude mosaic Turner’s syndrome. Elevated LH, pro­
lactin and testosterone levels with normal oestradiol 
are common in PCOS. Low levels of LH, FSH and oestra-
diol suggest hypothalamic or pituitary disease, and a 
pituitary MRI is indicated.
There is some overlap in gonadotrophin and oestro-
gen concentrations between women with hypogonado-
trophic hypogonadism and PCOS. If there is doubt as to 
the underlying cause of secondary amenorrhoea, then 
the response to 5 days of treatment with an oral pro-
gestogen (e.g. medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg twice 
daily) can be assessed. In women with PCOS, the pro-
gestogen will cause maturation of the endometrium and 
menstruation will occur a few days after the progestogen 
is stopped. In women with hypogonadotrophic hypo­
gonadism, menstruation does not occur following 
progestogen withdrawal because the endometrium is 
atrophic as a result of oestrogen deficiency. If doubt 
persists in distinguishing oestrogen deficiency from 
a uterine abnormality, the capacity for menstruation 
can be tested with 1 month of treatment with cyclical 
oestrogen and progestogen (usually administered as a 
combined oral contraceptive pill).
Assessment of bone mineral density by dual energy 
X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA, p. 1065) may be appropri-
ate in patients with low androgen and oestrogen levels.
Management
Where possible, the underlying cause should be treated. 
For example, women with functional amenorrhoea due 
to excessive exercise and low weight should be encour-
aged to reduce their exercise and regain some weight. 
The management of structural pituitary and hypo­
thalamic disease is described on page 790 and that of 
PCOS on page 764.
In oestrogen-deficient women, replacement therapy 
may be necessary to treat symptoms and/or to prevent 
osteoporosis. Women who have had a hysterectomy can 
be treated with oestrogen alone, but those with a uterus 
should be treated with combined oestrogen/progestogen 
therapy, since unopposed oestrogen increases the risk 
‘Administering HRT for 5 years to 10 000 women aged  
50–79 years prevents 5 hip fractures and 6 cases of colorectal 
cancer, while inducing 8 extra cases of breast cancer, 8 of 
pulmonary embolism, 7 of coronary heart disease and 8 of 
stroke. The risks increase with age.’
• Writing Group for the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. JAMA 2002: 
288:321–333.
20.26  Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) in 
post-menopausal women
The reproductive system
20
761
causing subfertility is present, and in a large proportion 
no cause can be identified.
Clinical assessment
A history of previous pregnancies, relevant infections 
and surgery is important in both men and women. A 
sexual history must be explored sensitively, as some 
couples have intercourse infrequently or only when they 
consider the woman to be ovulating, and psychosexual 
difficulties are common. Irregular and/or infrequent 
menstrual periods are an indicator of anovulatory cycles 
in the woman, in which case causes such as PCOS should 
Route of administration
Preparation
Dose
Frequency
Comments
Intramuscular
Testosterone 
enantate
50–250 mg
Every 3–4 wks
Produces peaks and troughs of testosterone levels 
which are outside the physiological range and may be 
symptomatic
Testosterone 
undecanoate
1000 mg
Every 3 mths
Smoother profile than testosterone enantate, less 
frequent injections
Subcutaneous
Testosterone 
pellets
600–800 mg
Every 4–6 mths
Smoother profile than testosterone enantate but 
implantation causes scarring and infection
Transdermal
Testosterone 
patch
5–10 mg
Daily
Stable testosterone levels but high incidence of skin 
hypersensitivity
Testosterone gel
50–100 mg
Daily
Stable testosterone levels; transfer of gel can occur 
following skin-to-skin contact with another person
Oral
Testosterone 
undecanoate
40–120 mg
Twice daily
Very variable testosterone levels; risk of hepatotoxicity
20.27  Options for androgen replacement therapy
Female factor (35–40%)
• Ovulatory dysfunction
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.22)
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.22)
• Tubular dysfunction
Pelvic inflammatory disease (chlamydia, gonorrhoea)
Endometriosis
Previous sterilisation
Previous pelvic or abdominal surgery
• Cervical and/or uterine dysfunction
Congenital abnormalities
Fibroids
Treatment for cervical carcinoma
Asherman’s syndrome
Male factor (35–40%)
• Reduced sperm quality or production
Y chromosome microdeletions
Varicocoele
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.22)
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.22)
• Tubular dysfunction
Varicocoele
Congenital abnormality of vas deferens/epididymis
Previous sexually transmitted infection (chlamydia, 
gonorrhoea)
Previous vasectomy
Unexplained or mixed factor (20–35%)
20.28  Causes of infertility
and a karyotype performed (to identify Klinefelter’s 
syndrome).
Management
Testosterone replacement is clearly indicated in younger 
men with significant hypogonadism to prevent osteo­
porosis and to restore muscle power and libido. 
Debate exists as to whether replacement therapy is of 
benefit in mild hypogonadism associated with ageing 
and central obesity, particularly in the absence of struc-
tural pituitary/hypothalamic disease or other pituitary 
hormone deficiency. In such instances, a therapeutic 
trial of testosterone therapy may be considered if symp-
toms are present, but the benefits of therapy must be 
carefully weighed against the potential for harm.
Routes of testosterone administration are shown in 
Box 20.27. First-pass hepatic metabolism of testosterone 
is highly efficient, so bioavailability of ingested prepara-
tions is poor. Doses of systemic testosterone can be 
titrated against symptoms; circulating testosterone 
levels may provide only a rough guide to dosage 
because they may be highly variable (see Box 20.27). 
Testosterone therapy can aggravate prostatic carcinoma; 
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) should be measured 
before commencing testosterone therapy in men older 
than 50 years and monitored annually thereafter. 
Haemoglobin concentration should also be monitored in 
older men, as androgen replacement can cause poly-
cythaemia. Testosterone replacement inhibits spermato­
genesis; treatment for fertility is described below.
Infertility
Infertility affects around 1 in 7 couples of reproductive 
age, often causing psychological distress. The main 
causes are listed in Box 20.28. In women, it may result 
from anovulation or abnormalities of the reproductive 
tract that prevent fertili­sation or embryonic implanta-
tion, often damaged fallopian tubes from previous infec-
tion. In men, infertility may result from impaired sperm 
quality (for example, reduced motility) or reduced 
sperm number. Azoospermia or oligospermia is usually 
idiopathic, but may be a consequence of hypo­gonadism 
(see Box 20.22). Microdeletions of the Y chromosome are 
increasingly recognised as a cause of severely abnormal 
spermatogenesis. In many couples, more than one factor 
Endocrine disease
20
762
infertility. The success of IVF depends on age, with low 
success rates in women over 40 years.
Men with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism who 
wish fertility are usually given injections of hCG several 
times a week (recombinant FSH may also be required in 
men with hypogonadism of pre-pubertal origin); it may 
take up to 2 years to achieve satisfactory sperm counts. 
Surgery is rarely an option in primary testicular disease 
but removal of a varicocoele can improve semen quality. 
Extraction of sperm from the epididymis for IVF, and 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI, when single 
spermatozoa are injected into each oöcyte) are being 
used increasingly in men with oligospermia or poor 
sperm quality who have primary testicular disease. 
Azoospermic men may opt to use donated sperm but 
this may be in short supply.
Gynaecomastia
Gynaecomastia is the presence of glandular breast tissue 
in males. Normal breast development in women is 
oestrogen-dependent, while androgens oppose this 
effect. Gynaecomastia results from an imbalance between 
androgen and oestrogen activity, which may reflect 
androgen deficiency or oestrogen excess. Causes are 
listed in Box 20.29. The most common are physiological: 
for example, in the newborn baby (due to maternal and 
placental oestrogens), in pubertal boys (in whom oestra-
diol concentrations reach adult levels before testoster-
one) and in elderly men (due to decreasing testosterone 
concentrations). Prolactin excess alone does not cause 
gynaecomastia (p. 790).
Clinical assessment
A drug history is important. Gynaecomastia is often 
asymmetrical and palpation may allow breast tissue to 
be distinguished from the prominent adipose tissue 
around the nipple that is often observed in obesity. Fea-
tures of hypogonadism should be sought (see above) 
and the testes examined for evidence of cryptorchidism, 
atrophy or a tumour.
Investigations
If a clinical distinction between gynaecomastia and 
adipose tissue cannot be made, then ultrasonography or 
mammography is required. A random blood sample 
be considered. In men, the testes should be examined to 
confirm that both are in the scrotum and to identify any 
structural abnormality, such as small size, absent vas 
deferens or the presence of a varicocoele.
Investigations
Investigations should generally be performed after a 
couple has failed to conceive despite unprotected inter-
course for 12 months, unless there is an obvious abnor-
mality like amenorrhoea. Both partners need to be 
investigated. The male partner needs a semen analysis 
to assess sperm count and quality. Home testing for 
ovulation (by commercial urine dipstick kits, tempera-
ture measurement, or assessment of cervical mucus) is 
not recommended, as the information is often counter-
balanced by increased anxiety if interpretation is incon-
clusive. In women with regular periods, ovulation can 
be confirmed by an elevated serum progesterone con-
centration on day 21 of the menstrual cycle. Transvagi-
nal ultrasound can be used to assess uterine and ovarian 
anatomy. Tubal patency may be examined at laparos-
copy or by hysterosalpingography (HSG; a radio-opaque 
medium is injected into the uterus and should normally 
outline the fallopian tubes). In vitro assessments of 
sperm survival in cervical mucus may be done in cases 
of unexplained infertility but are rarely helpful.
Management
Couples should be advised to have regular sexual inter-
course, ideally every 2–3 days throughout the menstrual 
cycle. It is not uncommon for ‘spontaneous’ pregnancies 
to occur in couples undergoing investigations for 
infertility or with identified causes of male or female 
subfertility.
In women with anovulatory cycles secondary to 
PCOS (p. 764), clomifene, which has partial anti-
oestrogen action, blocks negative feedback of oestrogen 
on the hypothalamus/pituitary, causing gonadotrophin 
secretion and thus ovulation. In women with gonado-
trophin deficiency or in whom anti-oestrogen therapy is 
unsuccessful, ovulation may be induced by direct stimu-
lation of the ovary by daily injection of FSH and an 
injection of hCG to induce follicular rupture at the 
appropriate time. In hypothalamic disease, pulsatile 
GnRH therapy with a portable infusion pump can be 
used to stimulate pituitary gonadotrophin secretion 
(note that non-pulsatile administration of GnRH or its 
analogues paradoxically suppresses LH and FSH secre-
tion). Whatever method of ovulation induction is 
employed, monitoring of response is essential to avoid 
multiple ovulation. For clomifene, ultrasound monitor-
ing is recommended for at least the first cycle. During 
gonadotrophin therapy, closer monitoring of follicular 
growth by transvaginal ultrasonography and blood 
oestradiol levels is mandatory. ‘Ovarian hyperstimula-
tion syndrome’ is characterised by grossly enlarged 
ovaries and capillary leak with circulatory shock, pleural 
effusions and ascites. Anovulatory women who fail to 
respond to ovulation induction or who have primary 
ovarian failure may wish to consider using donated eggs 
or embryos, surrogacy and adoption.
Surgery to restore fallopian tube patency can be effec-
tive but in vitro fertilisation (IVF) is normally recom-
mended. IVF is widely used for many causes of infertility 
and in unexplained cases of prolonged (> 3 years) 
Idiopathic
Physiological
Drug-induced
• Cimetidine
• Digoxin
• Anti-androgens (cyproterone acetate, spironolactone)
• Some exogenous anabolic steroids (diethylstilbestrol)
• Cannabis
Hypogonadism (see Box 20.22)
Androgen resistance syndromes
Oestrogen excess
• Liver failure (impaired steroid metabolism)
• Oestrogen-secreting tumour (for example, of testis)
• hCG-secreting tumour (for example, of testis or lung)
20.29  Causes of gynaecomastia
The reproductive system
20
763
Clinical assessment
The severity of hirsutism is subjective. Some women 
suffer profound embarrassment from a degree of hair 
growth which others would not consider remarkable. 
Important observations are a drug and menstrual 
history, calculation of body mass index, measurement 
of blood pressure, and examination for virilisation 
(clitoromegaly, deep voice, male-pattern balding, breast 
atrophy) and associated features, including acne vul-
garis or Cushing’s syndrome (p. 773). Hirsutism of 
recent onset associated with virilisation is suggestive 
of an androgen-secreting tumour but this is rare.
Investigations
A random blood sample should be taken for testoster-
one, prolactin, LH and FSH. If there are clinical features 
of Cushing’s syndrome, further investigations should be 
performed (p. 774).
If testosterone levels are more than twice the upper 
limit of normal for females, idiopathic hirsutism and 
PCOS are less likely, especially if LH and FSH levels are 
low. Under these circumstances, other causes of andro-
gen excess should be sought. Congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency is diagnosed by 
a short ACTH stimulation test with measurement of 
17OH-progesterone (p. 782). In patients with androgen-
secreting tumours, serum testosterone does not sup-
press following dexamethasone (either as an overnight 
or a 48-hour low-dose suppression test) or oestrogen 
should be taken for testosterone, LH, FSH, oestradiol, 
prolactin and hCG. Elevated oestrogen concentrations 
are found in testicular tumours and hCG-producing 
neoplasms.
Management
An adolescent with gynaecomastia who is progressing 
normally through puberty may be reassured that the 
gynaecomastia will usually resolve once development is 
complete. If puberty does not proceed in a harmonious 
manner, then there may be an underlying abnormality 
that requires investigation (p. 758). Gynaecomastia may 
cause significant psychological distress, especially in 
adolescent boys, and surgical excision may be justified 
for cosmetic reasons. Androgen replacement will usually 
improve gynaecomastia in hypogonadal males and any 
other identifiable underlying cause should be addressed 
if possible. The anti-oestrogen tamoxifen may also be 
effective in reducing the size of the breast tissue.
Hirsutism
Hirsutism refers to the excessive growth of thick termi-
nal hair in an androgen-dependent distribution in 
women (upper lip, chin, chest, back, lower abdomen, 
thigh, forearm) and is one of the most common presenta-
tions of endocrine disease. It should be distinguished 
from hypertrichosis, which is generalised excessive 
growth of vellus hair. The aetiology of androgen excess 
is shown in Box 20.30.
Cause
Clinical features
Investigation findings
Treatment
Idiopathic
Often familial
Mediterranean or Asian 
background
Normal
Cosmetic measures
Anti-androgens
Polycystic ovarian 
syndrome
Obesity
Oligomenorrhoea or secondary 
amenorrhoea
Infertility
LH : FSH ratio > 2.5 : 1
Minor elevation of androgens*
Mild hyperprolactinaemia
Weight loss
Cosmetic measures
Anti-androgens
(Metformin, glitazones may be 
useful)
Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
(95% 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency)
Pigmentation
History of salt-wasting in 
childhood, ambiguous genitalia, 
or adrenal crisis when stressed
Jewish background
Elevated androgens* which 
suppress with dexamethasone
Abnormal rise in 17OH-progesterone 
with ACTH
Glucocorticoid replacement 
administered in reverse rhythm to 
suppress early morning ACTH
Exogenous androgen 
administration
Athletes
Virilisation
Low LH and FSH
Analysis of urinary androgens may 
detect drug of misuse
Stop steroid misuse
Androgen-secreting 
tumour of ovary or 
adrenal cortex
Rapid onset
Virilisation: clitoromegaly, deep 
voice, balding, breast atrophy
High androgens* which do not 
suppress with dexamethasone or 
oestrogen
Low LH and FSH
CT or MRI usually demonstrates a 
tumour
Surgical excision
Cushing’s syndrome
Clinical features of Cushing’s 
syndrome (p. 773)
Normal or mild elevation of adrenal 
androgens*
See investigations (p. 774)
Treat the cause (p. 775)
*e.g. Serum testosterone levels in women: < 2 nmol/L (< 58 ng/dL) is normal; 2–5 nmol/L (58–144 ng/dL) is minor elevation; > 5 nmol/L (> 144 ng/dL) is high 
and requires further investigation.
20.30  Causes of hirsutism
Endocrine disease
20
764
Menstrual irregularity and infertility
Most women with PCOS have oligomenorrhoea, with 
irregular, heavy menstrual periods. This may not require 
treatment unless fertility is desired. Metformin (p. 821), 
by reducing insulin resistance, may restore regular ovu-
latory cycles in overweight women, although it is less 
effective than clomifene (p. 762) at restoring fertility as 
measured by successful pregnancy (Box 20.32). Thiazo-
lidinediones (p. 823) also enhance insulin sensitivity and 
restore menstrual regularity in PCOS, but are contra­
indicated in women planning pregnancy.
In women who have very few periods each year or 
are amenorrhoeic, the high oestrogen concentrations 
associated with PCOS can cause endometrial hyperpla-
sia. Progestogens can be administered on a cyclical basis 
to induce regular shedding of the endometrium and a 
withdrawal bleed, or a progestogen-impregnated intra-
uterine coil can be fitted.
Hirsutism
For hirsutism, most patients will have used cosmetic 
measures, such as shaving, bleaching and waxing, before 
consulting a doctor. Electrolysis and laser treatment 
are effective for small areas like the upper lip and 
for chest hair but are expensive. Eflornithine cream 
inhibits ornithine decarboxylase in hair follicles and 
may reduce hair growth when applied daily to affected 
areas of the face.
(30 µg daily for 7 days). The tumour should then be 
sought by CT or MRI of the adrenals and ovaries.
Management
This depends on the cause (see Box 20.30). Options for 
the treatment of PCOS and idiopathic hirsutism are 
similar and are described below.
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) affects up to 10% 
of women of reproductive age. It is a heterogenous dis-
order (Box 20.31), often associated with obesity, for 
which the primary cause remains uncertain. Genetic 
factors probably play a role, since PCOS often affects 
several family members. The severity and clinical fea-
tures of PCOS vary markedly between individual 
patients but diagnosis is usually made during the inves-
tigation of hirsutism (p. 763) or amenorrhoea/oligo­
menorrhoea (p. 759). Infertility may also be present 
(p. 761). There is no universally accepted definition, but 
it has been recommended that a diagnosis of PCOS 
requires the presence of two of the following three 
features:
•	 menstrual irregularity
•	 clinical or biochemical androgen excess
•	 multiple cysts in the ovaries (most readily  
detected by transvaginal ultrasound;  
Fig. 20.14).
Women with PCOS are at increased risk of glucose 
intolerance and some authorities recommend screening 
for type 2 diabetes and other cardiovascular risk factors 
associated with the metabolic syndrome (p. 805).
Management
This should be directed at the presenting complaint, but 
all PCOS patients who are overweight should be encour-
aged to lose weight, as this can improve several symp-
toms, including menstrual irregularity, and reduces the 
risk of type 2 diabetes.
Fig. 20.14  Polycystic ovary. A transvaginal ultrasound scan showing 
multiple cysts (some indicated by small arrows) in the ovary (highlighted by 
bigger arrows) of a woman with polycystic ovarian syndrome. 
Mechanisms*
Manifestations
Pituitary dysfunction
High serum LH
High serum prolactin
Anovulatory menstrual 
cycles
Oligomenorrhoea
Secondary amenorrhoea
Cystic ovaries
Infertility
Androgen excess
Hirsutism
Acne
Obesity
Hyperglycaemia
Elevated oestrogens
Insulin resistance
Dyslipidaemia
Hypertension
*These mechanisms are interrelated; it is not known which, if any, is 
primary. PCOS probably represents the common end point of several 
different pathologies.
20.31  Features of polycystic ovarian syndrome
‘In one randomised controlled clinical trial, 626 infertile women 
with PCOS were randomised to receive clomifene, metformin or 
combination therapy. After 6 months, the live birth rates were 
22.5%, 7.2% and 26.8% respectively. Multiple births occurred in 
6% of women receiving clomifene and none of those receiving 
metformin.’
• RS Legro, et al. New Engl J Med 2008; 356:551–566.
20.32  Treatment of infertility in women 
with PCOS
The reproductive system
20
765
Mechanism of action
Drug
Dose
Hazards
Androgen receptor antagonists
Cyproterone acetate
2, 50 or 100 mg on days 1–11 of 
28-day cycle with ethinylestradiol 
30 µg on days 1–21
Hepatic dysfunction
Feminisation of male fetus
Progesterone receptor agonist 
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
Spironolactone
100–200 mg daily
Electrolyte disturbance
Flutamide
Not recommended
Hepatic dysfunction
5α-reductase inhibitors
(prevent conversion of testosterone 
to active dihydrotestosterone)
Finasteride
5 mg daily
Limited clinical experience; 
possibly less efficacious than 
other treatments
Suppress ovarian steroid 
production and elevate sex 
hormone-binding globulin
Oestrogen
See combination with cyproterone 
acetate above
or
Conventional oestrogen-containing 
contraceptive
Venous thromboembolism
Hypertension
Weight gain
Dyslipidaemia
Increased breast and endometrial 
carcinoma
20.33  Anti-androgen therapy
If conservative measures are unsuccessful, anti-
androgen therapy is given (Box 20.33). The life cycle of 
a hair follicle is at least 3 months and no improvement 
is likely before this time, when follicles have shed their 
hair and replacement hair growth has been suppressed. 
Metformin and thiazolidinediones are less effective at 
treating hirsutism than at restoring menstrual regular-
ity. Unless weight is lost, hirsutism will return if therapy 
is discontinued. The patient should know that prolonged 
exposure to some agents may not be desirable and they 
should be stopped before pregnancy.
Turner’s syndrome
Turner’s syndrome affects around 1 in 2500 females. It 
is classically associated with a 45XO karyotype but other 
cytogenetic abnormalities may be responsible, including 
mosaic forms (e.g. 45XO/46XX or 45XO/46XY) and 
partial deletions of an X chromosome.
Clinical features
These are shown in Figure 20.15.
Fig. 20.15  Clinical features of Turner’s syndrome (45XO). (IGT = impaired glucose tolerance). 
Psychological problems
Impaired visuospatial processing
Reduced IQ (ring chromosome X)
Low-set ears
Sensorineural/conduction
hearing loss
Webbing of neck (25–40%)
Widely spaced nipples
Shield chest
Type 2 diabetes/IGT (10–30%)
Wide carrying angle of elbows
Lymphoedema of hands
and feet ( 30%)
Reduced bone mineral density
Inflammatory bowel
disease (0.2–0.3%)
Horseshoe kidneys and other
renal and collecting system
abnormalities
Bicuspid aortic valve
Aortic root dilatation
Coronary artery disease
Autoimmune thyroid disease (20%)
Streak gonads
Gonadoblastoma (XY mosaic)
Abnormal LFTs (30 – 80%)
Short stature
Fish-like mouth
High-arched palate
Coarctation of aorta
Hypertension
Endocrine disease
20
766
Individuals with Turner’s syndrome invariably have 
short stature from an early age and this is often the initial 
presenting symptom. It is probably due to haploinsuf-
ficiency of the SHOX gene, one copy of which is found 
on both the X and Y chromosomes, which encodes a 
protein that is predominantly found in bone fibroblasts.
The genital tract and external genitalia in Turner’s 
syndrome are female in character, since this is the default 
developmental outcome in the absence of testes. Ovarian 
tissue develops normally until the third month of gesta-
tion, but thereafter there is gonadal dysgenesis with 
accelerated degeneration of oöcytes and increased 
ovarian stromal fibrosis, resulting in ‘streak ovaries’. 
The inability of ovarian tissue to produce oestrogen 
results in loss of negative feedback and elevation of FSH 
and LH concentrations.
There is a wide variation in the spectrum of associ-
ated somatic abnormalities. The severity of the pheno-
type is, in part, related to the underlying cytogenetic 
abnormality. Mosaic individuals may have only mild 
short stature and may enter puberty spontaneously 
before developing gonadal failure.
Diagnosis and management
The diagnosis of Turner’s syndrome can be confirmed 
by karyotype analysis. Short stature, although not 
directly due to growth hormone deficiency, responds to 
high doses of growth hormone. Prophylactic gonad­
ectomy is recommended for individuals with 45XO/46XY 
mosaicism because there is an increased risk of gonado-
blastoma. Pubertal development can be induced with 
oestrogen therapy but causes fusion of the epiphyses 
and cessation of growth. Therefore, the timing of puber-
tal induction needs to be carefully planned. Adults with 
Turner’s syndrome require long-term oestrogen replace-
ment therapy and should be monitored periodically for 
the development of aortic root dilatation, hearing loss 
and other somatic complications.
Klinefelter’s syndrome
Klinefelter’s syndrome affects approximately 1 in 
1000 males and is usually associated with a 47XXY 
karyotype. However, other cytogenetic variants may be 
responsible, especially 46XY/47XXY mosaicism. The 
principal pathological abnormality is dysgenesis of the 
seminiferous tubules. This is evident from infancy (and 
possibly even in utero) and progresses with age. By ado-
lescence, hyalinisation and fibrosis are present within 
the semini­ferous tubules and Leydig cell function is 
impaired, resulting in hypogonadism.
Clinical features
The diagnosis is typically made in adolescents who have 
presented with gynaecomastia and failure to progress 
normally through puberty. Affected individuals usually 
have small, firm testes. Tall stature is apparent from 
early childhood, reflecting characteristically long leg 
length associated with 47XXY, and may be exacerbated 
by androgen deficiency with lack of epiphyseal closure 
in puberty. Other clinical features may include learning 
difficulties and behavioural disorders, as well as an 
increased risk of breast cancer and type 2 diabetes in 
later life. The spectrum of clinical features is wide and 
some individuals, especially those with 46XY/47XXY 
mosaicism, may pass through puberty normally and be 
identified only during investigation for infertility.
Diagnosis and management
Klinefelter’s syndrome is suggested by the typical pheno­
type in a patient with hypergonadotrophic hypo­
gonadism and can be confirmed by karyotype analysis. 
Individuals with clinical and biochemical evidence of 
androgen deficiency require androgen replacement (see 
Box 20.27, p. 761).
THE PARATHYROID GLANDS
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) plays a key role in the regu-
lation of calcium and phosphate homeostasis and 
vitamin D metabolism, as shown in Figure 25.55  
(p. 1125). The consequences of altered function of this 
axis in gut and renal disease are covered in Chapters 22 
and 17, respectively. Other metabolic bone diseases are 
explored in Chapter 25. Here, the investigation of hyper-
calcaemia and hypocalcaemia and disorders of the para­
thyroid glands are discussed.
Functional anatomy, physiology  
and investigations
The four parathyroid glands lie behind the lobes of 
the thyroid and weigh between 25 and 40 mg. The 
parathyroid chief cells respond directly to changes in 
calcium concentrations via a G-protein-coupled cell 
surface receptor (the calcium-sensing receptor) located 
on the cell surface (see Fig. 25.55). When serum 
ionised calcium levels fall, PTH secretion rises. PTH 
is a single-chain polypeptide of 84 amino acids. It 
acts on the renal tubules to promote reabsorption 
of calcium and reduce reabsorption of phosphate, 
and on the skeleton to increase osteoclastic bone 
resorption and bone formation. PTH also promotes 
conversion of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol to the active 
metabolite 
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol; 
the 
1,25- 
dihydroxycholecalciferol, in turn, enhances calcium 
absorption from the gut.
• Post-menopausal osteoporosis: a major public health issue 
due to the high incidence of associated fragility fractures, 
especially of hip.
• Hormone replacement therapy: should only be prescribed 
above the age of 50 for the short-term relief of symptoms of 
oestrogen deficiency.
• Sexual activity: many older people remain sexually active.
• ‘Male menopause’: does not occur, although testosterone 
concentrations do fall with age. Testosterone therapy in 
mildly hypogonadal men may be of benefit for body 
composition, muscle and bone. Large randomised trials are 
required to determine whether benefits outweigh potentially 
harmful effects on the prostate and cardiovascular system.
• Androgens in older women: hirsutism and balding occur. 
In the rare patients in whom androgen levels are elevated, 
this may be pathological, e.g. from an ovarian tumour.
20.34  Gonadal function in old age
The parathyroid glands
20
767
More than 99% of total body calcium is in bone. Pro-
longed exposure of bone to high levels of PTH is associ-
ated with increased osteoclastic activity and new bone 
formation, but the net effect is to cause bone loss with 
mobilisation of calcium into the extracellular fluid. In 
contrast, pulsatile release of PTH causes net bone gain, 
an effect that is exploited therapeutically in the treat-
ment of osteoporosis (p. 1124).
The differential diagnosis of disorders of calcium 
metabolism requires measurement of calcium phos-
phate, alkaline phosphatase, renal function, PTH and 
25(OH)D. Although the parathyroid glands detect and 
respond to ionised calcium levels, most clinical labora-
tories only measure total serum calcium levels and about 
50% of total calcium is bound to organic ions, such as 
citrate or phosphate, and to proteins, especially albumin. 
Accordingly, if the serum albumin level is reduced, total 
calcium concentrations should be ‘corrected’ by adjust-
ing the value for calcium upwards by 0.02 mmol/L 
(0.4 mg/dL) for each 1 g/L reduction in albumin below 
40 g/L. If albumin concentrations are significantly low, 
as in severe acute illness and other chronic illness such 
as liver cirrhosis, this correction is less accurate and 
measurement of ionised calcium is needed.
Calcitonin is secreted from the parafollicular C cells 
of the thyroid gland. Although it is a useful tumour 
marker in medullary carcinoma of thyroid (p. 755) and 
can be given therapeutically in Paget’s disease of bone 
(p. 1129), its release from the thyroid is of no clinical 
relevance to calcium homeostasis in humans.
Disorders of the parathyroid glands are summarised 
in Box 20.35.
(CASR = calcium-sensing receptor)
Primary
Secondary
Hormone 
excess
Primary 
hyperparathyroidism
Parathyroid adenoma
Parathyroid carcinoma1
Parathyroid 
hyperplasia2
Tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism
Following prolonged 
secondary 
hyperparathyroidism
Secondary 
hyperparathyroidism
Chronic kidney 
disease
Malabsorption
Vitamin D 
deficiency
Hormone 
deficiency
Hypoparathyroidism
Post-surgical
Autoimmune
Inherited
Hormone 
hypersensitivity
Autosomal dominant 
hypercalciuric 
hypocalcaemic 
(CASR-activating mutation)
Hormone 
resistance
Pseudohypoparathyroidism 
Familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia
Non-
functioning 
tumours
Parathyroid carcinoma1
1Parathyroid carcinomas may or may not produce PTH. 2ln multiple 
endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes (p. 794)
20.35  Classification of diseases of 
the parathyroid glands
With normal or elevated PTH levels
• Primary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism
• Lithium-induced hyperparathyroidism
• Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
With low PTH levels
• Malignancy (lung, breast, myeloma, renal, lymphoma, 
thyroid)
• Elevated 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D (vitamin D intoxication, 
sarcoidosis, HIV, other granulomatous disease)
• Thyrotoxicosis
• Paget’s disease with immobilisation
• Milk-alkali syndrome
• Thiazide diuretics
• Glucocorticoid deficiency
20.36  Causes of hypercalcaemia
Presenting problems in  
parathyroid disease
Hypercalcaemia
Hypercalcaemia is one of the most common biochemical 
abnormalities and is often detected during routine bio-
chemical analysis in asymptomatic patients. However, it 
can present with chronic symptoms, as described below, 
and occasionally as an acute emergency with severe 
hypercalcaemia and dehydration.
Causes of hypercalcaemia are listed in Box 20.36. Of 
these, primary hyperparathyroidism and malignant 
hypercalcaemia are by far the most common. Familial 
hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (FHH) is a rare but impor-
tant cause that needs differentiation from primary 
hyperparathyroidism (HPT). Lithium may cause hyper-
parathyroidism by reducing the sensitivity of the 
calcium-sensing receptor.
Clinical assessment
Symptoms and signs of hypercalcaemia include poly­
uria and polydipsia, renal colic, lethargy, anorexia, 
nausea, dyspepsia and peptic ulceration, constipation, 
depression, drowsiness and impaired cognition. Patients 
with malignant hypercalcaemia can have a rapid onset 
of symptoms and may have clinical features that help to 
localise the tumour.
The classic symptoms of primary hyperpara­
thyroidism are described by the adage ‘bones, stones 
and abdominal groans’, but few patients present in 
this way nowadays and the disorder is most often picked 
up as an incidental finding on biochemical testing. 
About 50% of patients with primary hyperpara­
thyroidism are asymptomatic while others have non-
specific symptoms such as fatigue, depression and 
generalised aches and pains. Some present with renal 
calculi and it has been estimated that 5% of first stone 
formers and 15% of recurrent stone formers have 
primary hyperpara­thyroidism (p. 769). Hypertension is 
a common feature of hyperparathyroidism. Parathyroid 
tumours are almost never palpable.
A family history of hypercalcaemia raises the possi-
bility of FHH or MEN (p. 794).
Endocrine disease
20
768
Investigations
The most discriminant investigation is measurement of 
PTH. If PTH levels are detectable or elevated in the 
presence of hypercalcaemia, then primary hyperpara­
thyroidism is the most likely diagnosis. High plasma 
phosphate and alkaline phosphatase accompanied by 
renal impairment suggest tertiary hyperparathyroidism. 
Hypercalcaemia may cause nephrocalcinosis and renal 
tubular impairment, resulting in hyperuricaemia and 
hyperchloraemia.
Patients with FHH can present with a similar bio-
chemical picture to primary hyperparathyroidism but 
typically have low urinary calcium excretion (a ratio 
of urinary calcium clearance to creatinine clearance 
of < 0.01). The diagnosis of FHH can be confirmed by 
screening family members for hypercalcaemia and/or 
a mutation in the gene encoding the calcium-sensing 
receptor.
If PTH is low and no other cause is apparent, then 
malignancy with or without bony metastases is likely. 
PTH-related peptide, which is often responsible for the 
hypercalcaemia associated with malignancy, is not 
detected by PTH assays, but can be measured by a spe-
cific assay (although this is not usually necessary). 
Unless the source is obvious, the patient should be 
screened for malignancy with a chest X-ray, myeloma 
screen (p. 1046) and CT as appropriate.
Management
Treatment of severe hypercalcaemia and primary hyper-
parathyroidism is described on pages 273 and 769, 
respectively. FHH does not require any specific 
intervention.
Hypocalcaemia
Aetiology
Hypocalcaemia is much less common than hypercalcae-
mia. The differential diagnosis is shown in Box 20.37. 
Total serum 
calcium
lonised 
serum 
calcium
Serum 
phosphate
Serum PTH
Comments
Hypoalbuminaemia
↓
↔
↔
↔
Adjust calcium upwards by 
0.02 mmol/L (0.1 mg/dL) for every 
1 g/L reduction in albumin below 
40 g/L
Alkalosis
↔
↓
↔
↔ or ↑
Ch. 16
Vitamin D deficiency
↓
↓
↓
↑
Ch. 25
Chronic renal failure
↓
↓
↑
↑
Due to impaired vitamin D 
hydroxylation
Serum creatinine ↑
Hypoparathyroidism
↓
↓
↑
↓
See text
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
↓
↓
↑
↑
Characteristic phenotype (see text)
Acute pancreatitis
↓
↓
↔ or ↓
↑
Usually clinically obvious
Serum amylase ↑
Hypomagnesaemia
↓
↓
Variable
↓ or ↔
Treatment of hypomagnesaemia 
may correct hypocalcaemia
(↑ = levels increased; ↓ = levels reduced; ↔ = levels normal)
20.37  Differential diagnosis of hypocalcaemia
The most common cause of hypocalcaemia is a low 
serum albumin with normal ionised calcium concentra-
tion. Conversely, ionised calcium may be low in the face 
of normal total serum calcium in patients with alkalosis: 
for example, as a result of hyperventilation.
Hypocalcaemia may also develop as a result of mag-
nesium depletion and should be considered in patients 
with malabsorption, on diuretic or proton pump inhibi-
tor therapy, and/or with a history of alcohol excess. 
Magnesium deficiency causes hypocalcaemia by impair-
ing the ability of the parathyroid glands to secrete PTH 
(resulting in PTH concentrations that are low or inap-
propriately in the reference range) and may also impair 
the actions of PTH on bone and kidney.
Clinical assessment
Mild hypocalcaemia is often asymptomatic but, with 
more profound reductions in serum calcium, tetany can 
occur. This is characterised by muscle spasms due to 
increased excitability of peripheral nerves.
Children are more liable to develop tetany than 
adults and present with a characteristic triad of carpo-
pedal spasm, stridor and convulsions, although one or 
more of these may be found independently of the others. 
In carpopedal spasm, the hands adopt a characteristic 
position with flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joints 
of the fingers and adduction of the thumb (‘main 
d’accoucheur’). Pedal spasm can also occur but is less 
frequent. Stridor is caused by spasm of the glottis. 
Adults can also develop carpopedal spasm in associa-
tion with tingling of the hands and feet and around the 
mouth, but stridor and fits are rare.
Latent tetany may be detected by eliciting Trous-
seau’s sign; inflation of a sphygmomanometer cuff on 
the upper arm to more than the systolic blood pressure 
is followed by carpal spasm within 3 minutes. Less spe-
cific is Chvostek’s sign, in which tapping over the 
branches of the facial nerve as they emerge from the 
parotid gland produces twitching of the facial muscles.
The parathyroid glands
20
769
Immediate management
• 10–20 mL 10% calcium gluconate IV over 10–20 mins
• Continuous IV infusion may be required for several hours 
(equivalent of 10 mL 10% calcium gluconate/hr)
• Cardiac monitoring is recommended
If associated hypomagnesaemia
• 50 mmol magnesium chloride IV over 24 hours
• Most parenteral magnesium will be excreted in the urine, so 
further doses may be required to replenish body stores
20.38  Management of severe hypocalcaemia
Type
Serum calcium
PTH
Primary
Raised
Not suppressed
Single adenoma (90%)
Multiple adenomas (4%)
Nodular hyperplasia (5%)
Carcinoma (1%)
Secondary
Low
Raised
Chronic renal failure
Malabsorption
Osteomalacia and rickets
Tertiary
Raised
Not suppressed
20.39  Hyperparathyroidism
(p. 1090). Skeletal X-rays are usually normal in mild 
primary hyperparathyroidism, but in patients with 
advanced disease characteristic changes are observed. 
In the early stages there is demineralisation, with sub-
periosteal erosions and terminal resorption in the 
phalanges. A ‘pepper-pot’ appearance may be seen on 
lateral X-rays of the skull. Reduced bone mineral density, 
resulting in either osteopenia or osteoporosis, is now the 
most common skeletal manifestation of hyperpara­
thyroidism. This is usually not evident radiographically 
and requires assessment by DEXA (p. 1065).
In nephrocalcinosis, scattered opacities may be visible 
within the renal outline. There may be soft tissue calci-
fication in arterial walls and hands and in the cornea.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be confirmed by finding a raised PTH 
level in the presence of hypercalcaemia, provided that 
FHH is excluded (p. 770). Parathyroid scanning by 99mTc-
sestamibi scintigraphy (Fig. 20.16) and/or ultrasound 
examination can be performed prior to surgery, in an 
attempt to localise an adenoma and allow a targeted 
resection. However, negative imaging does not exclude 
the diagnosis.
Management
The treatment of choice for primary hyperpara­
thyroidism is surgery, with excision of a solitary para­
thyroid adenoma or hyperplastic glands. Experienced 
surgeons will identify solitary tumours in more than 
90% of cases. Patients with parathyroid bone disease run 
a significant risk of developing hypocalcaemia post-
operatively, but the risk of this can be reduced by cor-
recting vitamin D deficiency pre-operatively.
Surgery is usually indicated for individuals aged less 
than 50 years, with clear-cut symptoms or documented 
complications (such as peptic ulceration, renal stones, 
renal impairment or osteoporosis), and (in asympto-
matic patients) significant hypercalcaemia (corrected 
serum calcium > 2.85 mmol/L (> 11.4 mg/dL)). Patients 
who are treated conservatively without surgery should 
have calcium biochemistry and renal function checked 
annually and bone density monitored periodically. They 
should be encouraged to maintain a high oral fluid 
intake to avoid renal stones.
Occasionally, primary hyperparathyroidism presents 
with severe life-threatening hypercalcaemia. This is 
often due to dehydration and should be managed medi-
cally with intravenous fluids and bisphosphonates, as 
Hypocalcaemia can cause papilloedema and prolon-
gation of the ECG QT interval, which may predispose 
to ventricular arrhythmias. Prolonged hypocalcaemia 
and hyperphosphataemia (as in hypoparathyroidism) 
may cause calcification of the basal ganglia, grand mal 
epilepsy, psychosis and cataracts. Hypocalcaemia asso-
ciated with hypophosphataemia, as in vitamin D defi-
ciency, causes rickets in children and osteomalacia in 
adults (p. 1125).
Management
Emergency management of hypocalcaemia associated 
with tetany is described in Box 20.38. Treatment of 
chronic hypocalcaemia is described on page 770.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Primary hyperparathyroidism is caused by autonomous 
secretion of PTH, usually by a single parathyroid 
adenoma, which can vary in diameter from a few mil-
limetres to several centimetres. It should be distin-
guished from secondary hyperparathyroidism, in which 
there is a physiological increase in PTH secretion to 
compensate for prolonged hypocalcaemia (such as in 
vitamin D deficiency, p. 1126), and from tertiary hyper-
parathyroidism, in which continuous stimulation of the 
parathyroids over a prolonged period of time results in 
adenoma formation and autonomous PTH secretion 
(Box 20.39). This is most commonly seen in individuals 
with advanced chronic kidney disease (p. 483).
The prevalence of primary hyperparathyroidism is 
about 1 in 800 and it is 2–3 times more common in 
women than men; 90% of patients are over 50 years 
of age. It also occurs in the familial MEN syndromes 
(p. 795), in which case hyperplasia or multiple adenomas 
of all four parathyroid glands are more likely than a 
solitary adenoma.
Clinical and radiological features
The clinical presentation of primary hyperpara­
thyroidism is described on page 769. Parathyroid bone 
disease is now rare due to earlier diagnosis and treat-
ment. Osteitis fibrosa results from increased bone 
resorption by osteoclasts with fibrous replacement in the 
lacunae. This may present as bone pain and tenderness, 
fracture and deformity. Chondrocalcinosis can occur 
due to deposition of calcium pyrophosphate crystals 
within articular cartilage. It typically affects the menisci 
at the knees and can result in secondary degenerative 
arthritis or predispose to attacks of acute pseudogout 
Endocrine disease
20
770
A
B
Fig. 20.16  99mTc-sestamibi scan of a 
patient with primary hyperparathyroidism 
secondary to a parathyroid adenoma.
 A After 1 hour, there is uptake in the thyroid 
gland (thick arrow) and the enlarged left inferior 
parathyroid gland (thin arrow).  B After 
3 hours, uptake is evident only in the 
parathyroid. 
described on page 273. If this is not effective, then urgent 
parathyroidectomy should be considered.
Cinacalcet is a calcimimetic which enhances the 
sensitivity of the calcium-sensing receptor, so reducing 
PTH levels, and is licensed for tertiary hyperpara­
thyroidism and as a treatment for patients with primary 
hyperparathyroidism who are unwilling to have surgery 
or are medically unfit.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
This autosomal dominant disorder is caused by an 
inactivating mutation in one of the alleles of the calcium-
sensing receptor gene, which reduces the ability of the 
parathyroid gland to ‘sense’ ionised calcium concentra-
tions. As a result, higher than normal calcium levels are 
required to suppress PTH secretion. The typical presen-
tation is with mild hypercalcaemia with PTH concentra-
tions that are ‘inappropriately’ at the upper end of the 
reference range or are slightly elevated. Calcium-sensing 
receptors in the renal tubules are also affected and this 
leads to increased renal tubular reabsorption of calcium 
and hypocalciuria. The hypercalcaemia of FHH is always 
asymptomatic and complications do not occur. The main 
risk of FHH is of the patient being subjected to an unnec-
essary (and ineffective) parathyroidectomy if misdiag-
nosed as having primary hyperparathyroidism. Testing 
of family members for hypercalcaemia is helpful in con-
firming the diagnosis and it is also possible to perform 
genetic testing. No treatment is necessary.
Hypoparathyroidism
The most common cause of hypoparathyroidism is 
damage to the parathyroid glands (or their blood supply) 
during thyroid surgery; post-operative hypocalcaemia 
develops in 5.5% of patients overall but 9% of patients 
undergoing total thyroidectomy. Rarely, hypopara­
thyroidism can occur as a result of infiltration of the 
glands with iron in haemochromatosis (p. 972) or copper 
in Wilson’s disease (p. 973).
There are a number of rare congenital or inherited 
forms of hypoparathyroidism. One form is associated 
with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 
(p. 795) and another with DiGeorge syndrome (p. 56). 
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (ADH) is 
the mirror image of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcae-
mia (see above), in that an activating mutation in the 
calcium-sensing receptor reduces PTH levels, resulting 
in hypocalcaemia and hypercalciuria.
• Osteoporosis: always exclude osteomalacia and 
hyperparathyroidism by checking vitamin D and calcium 
concentrations.
• Primary hyperparathyroidism: more common with ageing. 
Older people can often be observed without surgical 
intervention.
• Hypercalcaemia: may cause confusion.
• Vitamin D deficiency: common because of poor diet and 
limited exposure to the sun.
20.40  The parathyroid glands in old age
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
In this disorder, the individual is functionally hypopara­
thyroid but, instead of PTH deficiency, there is tissue 
resistance to the effects of PTH, such that PTH con­
centrations are markedly elevated. The PTH receptor 
itself is normal but the downstream signalling pathways 
are defective due to mutations that affect GNAS1, which 
encodes the Gsα protein, a molecule involved in signal 
transduction downstream of the PTH receptor and 
other G-protein-coupled receptors. There are several 
subtypes but the most common (pseudohypopara­
thyroidism type 1a) is characterised by hypocalcaemia 
and hyperphosphataemia, in association with short 
stature, short fourth metacarpals and metatarsals, 
rounded face, obesity and subcutaneous calcification; 
these features are collectively referred to as Albright’s 
hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO). Type 1a pseudo­
hypoparathyroidism occurs only when the GNAS1 
mutation is inherited on the maternal chromosome.
The term pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism is used 
to describe patients who have clinical features of AHO 
but normal serum calcium and PTH concentrations; it 
occurs when the GNAS1 mutation is inherited on the 
paternal chromosome. The inheritance of these disor-
ders is an example of genetic imprinting (p. 52). The 
difference in clinical features occurs as a result of the 
fact that renal cells exclusively express the maternal 
GNAS1 allele, whereas both maternal and paternal 
alleles are expressed in other cell types; this explains 
why maternal inheritance is associated with hypocal­
caemia and resistance to PTH (which regulates serum 
calcium and phosphate levels largely by an effect on the 
renal tubule), and why paternal inheritance is associated 
with skeletal and other abnormalities in the absence of 
hypocalcaemia and raised PTH values.
Management of hypoparathyroidism
Persistent hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypopara­
thyroidism are treated with oral calcium salts and 
The adrenal glands
20
771
rather than synapses. Most of the adrenal cortex is made 
up of cells which secrete cortisol and adrenal androgens, 
and form part of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal 
(HPA) axis. The small outer glomerulosa of the cortex 
secretes aldosterone under the control of the renin–
angiotensin system. These functions are important in the 
integrated control of cardiovascular, metabolic and 
immune responses to stress.
There is increasing evidence that subtle alterations in 
adrenal function contribute to the pathogenesis of 
common diseases such as hypertension, obesity and 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. However, classical syn-
dromes of adrenal hormone deficiency and excess are 
relatively rare.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Adrenal anatomy and function are shown in Figure 
20.17. Histologically, the cortex is divided into three 
zones, but these function as two units (zona glomeru-
losa and zonae fasciculata/reticularis) which produce 
vitamin D analogues, either 1α-hydroxycholecalciferol 
(alfacalcidol) or 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (calci-
triol). This therapy needs careful monitoring because of 
the risks of iatrogenic hypercalcaemia, hypercalciuria 
and nephrocalcinosis. Recombinant PTH is available 
as subcutaneous injection therapy for osteoporosis 
(p. 1120) and, although not currently licensed, has been 
used in hypoparathyroidism (but not in pseudo­
hypoparathyroidism). It is much more expensive than 
calcium and vitamin D analogue therapy but has the 
advantage that it is less likely to cause hypercalciuria. 
There is no specific treatment for AHO other than to try 
to maintain calcium levels within the reference range 
using active vitamin D metabolites.
THE ADRENAL GLANDS
The adrenals comprise several separate endocrine 
glands within a single anatomical structure. The adrenal 
medulla is an extension of the sympathetic nervous 
system which secretes catecholamines into capillaries 
Fig. 20.17  Structure and function of the adrenal glands. (ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; JGA = 
juxtaglomerular apparatus; MR = mineralocorticoid receptor). 
Sympathetic nervous
system
Medulla
Adrenaline
(epinephrine)
Noradrenaline
(norepinephrine)
β-adrenoceptor α-adrenoceptor
Vasodilatation
Tachycardia
Insulin resistance
Vasoconstriction
Sympathetic nervous system
Adrenal medulla
ACTH
Cortex
Zonae fasciculata
and reticularis
Hypothalamic – pituitary– adrenal axis
Adrenal cortex
Zonae fasciculata
and reticularis
Androgens
Cortisol
Androgen
receptor
Glucocorticoid
receptor
Pubic and
axillary hair
Libido, especially
females
Protein catabolism
Insulin resistance
Immune response
Hypertension
Increased appetite
Memory
Na retention
K wasting
Metabolic
alkalosis
Low renal perfusion
Low filtered Na
Sympathetic
activation
Angiotensin II
Cortex
Zona
glomerulosa
Aldosterone
Renin – angiotensin – aldosterone axis
Adrenal cortex
Zona glomerulosa
Angiotensin I
Angiotensinogen
Renin
ACE
MR
JGA
Adrenal
gland
Negative feedback
Endocrine disease
20
772
Fig. 20.18  The major pathways of synthesis of steroid hormones. (DHEA = dehydroepiandrosterone; HSD = hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; 
OHase = hydroxylase) 
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17OH
Pregnenolone
DHEA
Progesterone
17OH
Progesterone
Androstenedione
Oestrone
11-Deoxy-
corticosterone
11-Deoxy-
cortisol
Testosterone
Oestradiol
Corticosterone
Cortisol
Dihydro-
testosterone
Aldosterone
3β-HSD
17 OHase
17,20 lyase
21 OHase
17-βHSD
Aromatase
11β OHase
Aldo synthase
5α-reductase
Enzymes outside the adrenal
Enzymes in the adrenal
Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids
Androgens
Oestrogens
Progesterone
corticosteroids in response to humoral stimuli. Path-
ways for the biosynthesis of corticosteroids are shown 
in Figure 20.18. Investigation of adrenal function is 
described under specific diseases below. The different 
types of adrenal disease are shown in Box 20.41.
Glucocorticoids
Cortisol is the major glucocorticoid in humans. Levels 
are highest in the morning on waking and lowest in the 
middle of the night. Cortisol rises dramatically during 
stress, including any illness. This elevation protects key 
metabolic functions (such as the maintenance of cerebral 
glucose supply during starvation) and inhibits poten-
tially damaging inflammatory responses to infection 
and injury. The clinical importance of cortisol deficiency 
is, therefore, most obvious at times of stress.
More than 95% of circulating cortisol is bound to 
protein, principally cortisol-binding globulin, which is 
increased by oestrogens. It is the free fraction that 
is biologically active. Cortisol regulates cell function 
by binding to glucocorticoid receptors that regulate 
the transcription of many genes. Cortisol can also 
activate mineralocorticoid receptors, but it does not 
normally do so because most cells containing mineralo-
corticoid receptors also express an enzyme called 11 
β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11 β-HSD2), 
which inactivates cortisol by converting it to cortisone. 
Inhibitors of 11 β-HSD2 (such as liquorice) or mutations 
in the gene that encodes 11 β-HSD2 cause cortisol to 
act as a mineralocorticoid, resulting in sodium retention 
and hypertension (see Box 20.50, p. 780).
Mineralocorticoids
Aldosterone is the most important mineralocorticoid. It 
binds to mineralocorticoid receptors in the kidney and 
causes sodium retention and increased excretion of 
potassium and protons (Ch. 16). The principal stimulus 
to aldosterone secretion is angiotensin II, a peptide pro-
duced by activation of the renin–angiotensin system (see 
Fig. 20.17). Renin activity in the juxtaglomerular appa-
ratus of the kidney is stimulated by low perfusion pres-
sure in the afferent arteriole, low sodium filtration 
leading to low sodium concentrations at the macula 
densa, or increased sympathetic nerve activity. As a 
result, renin activity is increased in hypovolaemia and 
renal artery stenosis, and is approximately doubled 
when standing up from a recumbent position.
Catecholamines
In humans, only a small proportion of circulating 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) is derived from the 
adrenal medulla; much more is released from sympa-
thetic nerve endings. Conversion of noradrenaline to 
adrenaline (epinephrine) is catalysed by catechol-o-
methyltransferase (COMT), which is induced by gluco-
corticoids. Blood flow in the adrenal is centripetal, so 
that the medulla is bathed in high concentrations of cor-
tisol and is the major source of circulating adrenaline. 
However, after surgical removal of the adrenal medul-
lae, there appear to be no clinical consequences attribut-
able to deficiency of circulating catecholamines.
Primary
Secondary
Hormone 
excess
Non-ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s syndrome
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Phaeochromocytoma
ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s 
syndrome
Secondary 
hyperaldosteronism
Hormone 
deficiency
Addison’s disease
Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
Hypopituitarism
Hormone 
hypersensitivity
11 β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 2 
deficiency
Liddle’s syndrome
Hormone 
resistance
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
Glucocorticoid resistance 
syndrome
Non-
functioning 
tumours
Adenoma
Carcinoma (usually 
functioning)
Metastatic tumours
20.41  Classification of diseases of 
the adrenal glands
The adrenal glands
20
773
Adrenal androgens
Adrenal androgens are secreted in response to ACTH 
and are the most abundant steroids in the blood stream. 
They are probably important in the initiation of puberty 
(adrenarche). The adrenals are also the major source of 
androgens in adult females and may be important in 
female libido.
Presenting problems in adrenal disease
Cushing’s syndrome
Cushing’s syndrome is caused by excessive activation 
of glucocorticoid receptors. It is most commonly iatro-
genic, due to prolonged administration of synthetic 
glucocorticoids such as prednisolone. Endogenous 
Cushing’s syndrome is uncommon but is due to chronic 
over-production of cortisol by the adrenal glands, either 
as the result of an adrenal tumour or because of exces-
sive production of ACTH by a pituitary tumour or 
ectopic ACTH production by other tumours.
Aetiology
The causes are shown in Box 20.42. Amongst endo­
genous causes, pituitary-dependent cortisol excess (by 
convention, called Cushing’s disease) accounts for 
approximately 80% of cases. Both Cushing’s disease and 
cortisol-secreting adrenal tumours are four times more 
common in women than men. In contrast, ectopic ACTH 
ACTH-dependent – 80%
• Pituitary adenoma secreting ACTH (Cushing’s disease) – 70%
• Ectopic ACTH syndrome (bronchial carcinoid, small-cell lung 
carcinoma, other neuro-endocrine tumour) – 10%
Non-ACTH-dependent – 20%
• Adrenal adenoma – 15%
• Adrenal carcinoma – 5%
• ACTH-independent macronodular hyperplasia; primary 
pigmented nodular adrenal disease; McCune–Albright 
syndrome (together < 1%)
Hypercortisolism due to other causes (also referred to as 
pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome)
• Alcohol excess (biochemical and clinical features)
• Major depressive illness (biochemical features only, some 
clinical overlap)
• Primary obesity (mild biochemical features, some clinical 
overlap)
20.42  Classification of endogenous 
Cushing’s syndrome
syndrome (often due to a small-cell carcinoma of the 
bronchus) is more common in men.
Clinical assessment
The diverse manifestations of glucocorticoid excess are 
shown in Figure 20.19. Many of these are not specific 
to Cushing’s syndrome and, because spontaneous 
Cushing’s syndrome is rare, the positive predictive 
Fig. 20.19  Cushing’s syndrome.  A Clinical features common to all causes.  B A patient with Cushing’s disease before treatment.  C The same 
patient 1 year after the successful removal of an ACTH-secreting pituitary microadenoma by trans-sphenoidal surgery. 
Psychosis
Cataracts
Mild exophthalmos
Hair thinning
Hirsutism
Acne
Plethora
Moon face
Peptic ulcer
Hyperglycaemia
Menstrual
disturbance
May have
exuberant
callus with
fractures
Osteoporosis
Tendency to
infections
with poor wound
healing and little
inflammatory
response
Hypertension
Centripetal obesity
Striae
Wasting and weakness 
of proximal thigh 
muscles
Bruising
Loss of height
and back pain
from compression
fracture
Decreased skin
thickness
A
B
C
Endocrine disease
20
774
value of any single clinical feature alone is low. More­
over, some common disorders can be confused with 
Cushing’s syndrome because they are associated with 
alterations in cortisol secretion: for example, obesity 
and depression (see Box 20.42). Features which favour 
Cushing’s syndrome in an obese patient are bruising, 
myopathy and thin skin. Any clinical suspicion of 
cortisol excess is best resolved by further investigation.
It is vital to exclude iatrogenic causes in all patients 
with Cushing’s syndrome since even inhaled or topical 
glucocorticoids can induce the syndrome in susceptible 
individuals. A careful drug history must therefore be 
taken before embarking on complex investigations.
Some clinical features are more common in ectopic 
ACTH syndrome. Whilst ACTH-secreting pituitary 
tumours retain some negative feedback sensitivity to 
cortisol, this is absent in tumours that produce ectopic 
ACTH, typically resulting in higher levels of both ACTH 
and cortisol than are observed in pituitary-driven 
disease. The high ACTH levels are associated with 
marked pigmentation because of binding to melano­
cortin 1 receptors on melanocytes in the skin. The high 
cortisol levels also overcome the capacity of 11 β-HSD2 
to inactivate cortisol in the kidney (p. 772), causing 
hypokalaemic alkalosis which aggravates myopathy 
and hyperglycaemia (by inhibiting insulin secretion). 
Cushing’s syndrome suspected
Exclude exogenous
glucocorticoid exposure
Perform one of the following tests
Any abnormal result
Suggest additional evaluation,
repeat testing at interval
or seek further opinion
Normal result
Cushing’s syndrome
unlikely
Perform 1 or 2 other studies shown above
and consider repeating abnormal study
At least two concordant
abnormal tests
Discrepant test results
Cushing’s syndrome
Normal result
Cushing’s syndrome
unlikely
24-UFC (≥ 2 tests)
– Elevated if above
   reference range for assay
Late-night salivary cortisol
– Abnormal if above local
   reference range  
ONDST or LDDST
– Abnormal if serum cortisol > 50 nmol/L
Fig. 20.20  Sequence of investigations in suspected spontaneous Cushing’s syndrome. A serum cortisol of 50 nmol/L is equivalent to 
1.81 μg/dL. (LDDST = low-dose dexamethasone suppression test; ONDST = overnight dexamethasone suppression test; UFC = urinary free cortisol) 
When the tumour that is secreting ACTH is malignant, 
then the onset is usually rapid and may be associated 
with cachexia. For these reasons, the classical features 
of Cushing’s syndrome are less common in ectopic 
ACTH syndrome; if present, they suggest that a less 
aggressive tumour, such as a bronchial carcinoid, is 
responsible.
In Cushing’s disease, the pituitary tumour is usually 
a microadenoma (< 10 mm in diameter); hence other 
features of a pituitary macroadenoma (hypopituitarism, 
visual failure or disconnection hyperprolactinaemia, 
p. 787) are rare.
Investigations
The large number of tests available for Cushing’s syn-
drome reflects the fact that each one has limited specifi-
city and sensitivity in isolation. Accordingly, several 
tests are usually combined to establish the diagnosis. 
Testing for Cushing’s syndrome should be avoided 
under conditions of stress, such as an acute illness, 
because this activates the HPA axis, causing potentially 
spurious results. The diagnosis of Cushing’s is a two-
step process:
1.	
to establish whether the patient has Cushing’s 
syndrome (Fig. 20.20)
2.	
to define its cause (Fig. 20.21).
The adrenal glands
20
775
Some additional tests are useful in all cases of Cushing’s 
syndrome, including plasma electrolytes, glucose, 
glycosylated haemoglobin and bone mineral density 
measurement.
Establishing the presence of Cushing’s syndrome
Cushing’s syndrome is confirmed by using two of three 
main tests:
1.	
failure to suppress serum cortisol with low doses 
of oral dexamethasone
2.	
loss of the normal circadian rhythm of cortisol, 
with inappropriately elevated late-night serum or 
salivary cortisol
3.	
increased 24-hour urine free cortisol (see  
Fig. 20.20).
Dexamethasone is used for suppression testing 
because it does not cross-react in radioimmunoassays 
for cortisol. An overnight dexamethasone suppression 
test (ONDST) involves administration of 1 mg dexa­
methasone at 2300 hrs and measuring serum cortisol at 
0900 hrs the following day. In a low-dose dexametha-
sone suppression test (LDDST), serum cortisol is meas-
ured following administration of 0.5 mg dexamethasone 
4 times daily for 48 hours. It is important for any oestro-
gens to be stopped for 6 weeks prior to investigation 
to allow corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) levels 
to return to normal and to avoid false-positive res­
ponses, as most cortisol assays measure total cortisol, 
including that bound to CBG. Cyclicity of cortisol secre-
tion is a feature of all types of Cushing’s syndrome and, 
if very variable, can confuse diagnosis. Use of mul-
tiple salivary cortisol samples over weeks or months 
can be of use in diagnosis, but an elevated salivary 
cortisol alone should not be taken as proof of diagnosis. 
In iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, cortisol levels are 
low unless the patient is taking a corticosteroid (such 
as prednisolone) that cross-reacts in immunoassays 
with cortisol.
Determining the underlying cause
Once the presence of Cushing’s syndrome is confirmed, 
measurement of plasma ACTH is the key to establishing 
the differential diagnosis. In the presence of excess 
cortisol secretion, an undetectable ACTH (below 
1.1 pmol/L (5 pg/mL)) indicates an adrenal cause, 
while ACTH levels greater than 3.3 pmol/L (15 pg/mL) 
suggest a pituitary cause or ectopic ACTH. ACTH 
 BIPSS: ACTH central to
peripheral gradient > 2:1 at
baseline or > 3:1 at 5–10 mins
after 100 mg CRH IV
Cushing’s syndrome confirmed
Measure plasma ACTH
> 3.3 pmol/L
ACTH-independent
Cushing’s syndrome
Adrenal imaging
with CT
Adrenal
lesion
No adrenal
lesion
Adenoma
Carcinoma
AIMAH
PPNAD
Exogenous
glucocorticoid
Ectopic ACTH
Cushing’s disease
ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s syndrome
Pituitary MRI: adenoma > 6 mm
Positive CRH test: after 100 mg hCRH IV
(> 20% rise of cortisol; or 50% rise ACTH)
HDDST: > 50% suppression
in serum cortisol from baseline 
CT/MRI thorax
and abdomen ±
somatostatin
scintigraphy
< 1.1 pmol/L on more
than two occasions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Fig. 20.21  Determining the cause of confirmed Cushing’s syndrome. To convert pmol/L to ng/L, multiply by 4.541. (ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone; AIMAH = ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia; BIPSS = bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling; CRH = corticotrophin-releasing 
hormone; HDDST = high-dose dexamethasone suppression test; PPNAD = primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease) 
Endocrine disease
20
776
Therapeutic use of glucocorticoids
The remarkable anti-inflammatory properties of gluco-
corticoids have led to their use in a wide variety of clini-
cal conditions but the hazards are significant. Equivalent 
doses of commonly used glucocorticoids are listed in 
Box 20.43. Topical preparations (dermal, rectal and 
inhaled) can also be absorbed into the systemic circula-
tion, and although this rarely occurs to a sufficient 
degree to produce clinical features of Cushing’s syn-
drome, it can result in significant suppression of 
endogenous ACTH and cortisol secretion. Severe Cush-
ing’s syndrome can result if there is concomitant admin-
istration of inhaled glucocorticoids and inhibitors of the 
liver enzyme CYP450 3A4, such as the antiretroviral 
drug ritonavir (p. 407).
Adverse effects of glucocorticoids
The clinical features of glucocorticoid excess are illus-
trated in Figure 20.19. Adverse effects are related to 
dose, duration of therapy, and pre-existing conditions 
that might be worsened by corticosteroid therapy, such 
as diabetes mellitus or osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is a 
particularly important problem because, for a given 
bone mineral density, the fracture risk is greater in 
glucocorticoid-treated patients than in post-menopausal 
osteoporosis. Therefore, when systemic glucocorticoids 
are prescribed and the anticipated duration of steroid 
therapy is more than 3 months, bone-protective therapy 
should be considered, as detailed on page 1102. Rapid 
changes in glucocorticoid levels can also lead to marked 
mood disturbances, including depression, mania and 
insomnia.
The anti-inflammatory effect of glucocorticoids may 
mask signs of disease. For example, perforation of a 
viscus may be masked and the patient may show no 
febrile response to an infection. Although there is debate 
about whether or not corticosteroids increase the risk of 
peptic ulcer when used alone, they act synergistically 
with NSAIDs, including aspirin, to increase the risk of 
serious gastrointestinal adverse effects. Latent tubercu-
losis may be re-activated and patients on corticosteroids 
should be advised to avoid contact with varicella zoster 
virus if they are not immune.
Management of glucocorticoid withdrawal
All glucocorticoid therapy, even if inhaled or applied 
topically, can suppress the HPA axis. In practice, this is 
only likely to result in a crisis due to adrenal insuffi-
ciency on withdrawal of treatment if glucocorticoids 
have been administered orally or systemically for longer 
than 3 weeks, if repeated courses have been prescribed 
within the previous year, or if the dose is higher than 
the equivalent of 7.5 mg prednisolone per day. In these 
circumstances, the drug, when it is no longer required 
for the underlying condition, must be withdrawn slowly 
at a rate dictated by the duration of treatment. If 
levels between these values represent a ‘grey area’, and 
further evaluation by a specialist is required. Tests to 
discriminate pituitary from ectopic sources of ACTH 
rely on the fact that pituitary tumours, but not ectopic 
tumours, retain some features of normal regulation of 
ACTH secretion. Thus, in pituitary-dependent Cush-
ing’s disease, ACTH secretion is suppressed by high-
dose dexamethasone and ACTH is stimulated by 
corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH). In a high-dose 
dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST), serum corti-
sol is measured before and after administration of 2 mg 
of dexamethasone 4 times daily for 48 hours.
Techniques for localisation of tumours secreting 
ACTH or cortisol are listed in Figure 20.21. MRI detects 
around 60% of pituitary microadenomas secreting 
ACTH. If available, bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sam-
pling (BIPSS) with measurement of ACTH is the best 
means of confirming Cushing’s disease, unless MRI 
shows a tumour bigger than 6 mm. CT or MRI detects 
most adrenal tumours; adrenal carcinomas are usually 
large (> 5 cm) and have other features of malignancy 
(p. 779).
Management
Untreated severe Cushing’s syndrome has a 50% 5-year 
mortality. Most patients are treated surgically, but 
medical therapy may be given in severe cases for a few 
weeks prior to operation to improve the clinical state. A 
number of drugs are used to inhibit corticosteroid bio-
synthesis, including metyrapone and ketoconazole. The 
dose of these agents is best titrated against serum corti-
sol levels or 24-hour urine free cortisol.
Cushing’s disease
Trans-sphenoidal surgery carried out by an experienced 
surgeon with selective removal of the adenoma is the 
treatment of choice, with approximately 70% of patients 
going into immediate remission. Around 20% of patients 
suffer a recurrence, often years later, emphasising the 
need for life-long follow-up.
Laparoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy performed by 
an expert surgeon effectively cures ACTH-dependent 
Cushing’s syndrome, but in patients with pituitary-
dependent Cushing’s syndrome, this can result in 
Nelson’s syndrome, with an invasive pituitary macro­
adenoma and very high ACTH levels causing pigmenta-
tion. The risk of Nelson’s syndrome may be reduced by 
pituitary irradiation.
Adrenal tumours
Laparoscopic adrenal surgery is the treatment of choice 
for adrenal adenomas. Surgery offers the only prospect 
of cure for adrenocortical carcinomas, but in general, 
prognosis is poor with high rates of recurrence, even in 
patients with localised disease at presentation. Radio-
therapy to the tumour bed reduces the risk of local 
recurrence, and systemic therapy consists of the adreno-
lytic drug mitotane and chemotherapy, but responses 
are often poor.
Ectopic ACTH syndrome
Localised tumours, such as bronchial carcinoid, should 
be removed surgically. In patients with incurable malig-
nancy, it is important to reduce the severity of the 
Cushing’s syndrome using medical therapy (see above) 
or, if appropriate, bilateral adrenalectomy.
• Hydrocortisone: 20 mg
• Cortisone acetate: 25 mg
• Prednisolone: 5 mg
• Dexamethasone: 0.5 mg
20.43  Approximate equivalent doses of 
glucocorticoids
The adrenal glands
20
777
Congenital adrenal hyperplasias and Addison’s disease 
(primary adrenocortical failure) are rare causes.
Clinical assessment
The clinical features of adrenal insufficiency are shown 
in Box 20.46. In Addison’s disease, either glucocorticoid 
or mineralocorticoid deficiency may come first, but 
eventually all patients fail to secrete both classes of 
corticosteroid.
Patients may present with chronic features and/or 
in acute circulatory shock. With a chronic presenta-
tion, initial symptoms are often misdiagnosed as 
chronic fatigue syndrome or depression. Adrenocortical 
insufficiency should also be considered in patients 
with hyponatraemia, even in the absence of symptoms 
(p. 437).
Features of an acute adrenal crisis include circulatory 
shock with severe hypotension, hyponatraemia, hyper-
kalaemia and, in some instances, hypoglycaemia and 
hypercalcaemia. Muscle cramps, nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhoea and unexplained fever may be present. The crisis 
is often precipitated by intercurrent disease, surgery or 
infection.
Vitiligo occurs in 10–20% of patients with auto­
immune Addison’s disease (p. 734).
Investigations
Treatment should not be delayed to wait for results in 
patients with suspected acute adrenal crisis. Here, a 
random blood sample should be stored for subsequent 
measurement of cortisol and, if the patient’s clinical 
condition permits, it may be appropriate to spend 
30 minutes performing a short ACTH stimulation test 
(Box 20.47) before administering hydrocortisone. Inves-
tigations should be performed before treatment is given 
in patients who present with features suggestive of 
chronic adrenal insufficiency.
Assessment of glucocorticoids
Random plasma cortisol is usually low in patients with 
adrenal insufficiency but it may be within the reference 
glucocorticoid therapy has been prolonged, then it may 
take many months for the HPA axis to recover. All 
patients must be advised to avoid sudden drug with-
drawal. They should be issued with a steroid card and/
or wear an engraved bracelet (Box 20.44).
Recovery of the HPA axis is aided if there is no 
exogenous glucocorticoid present during the nocturnal 
surge in ACTH secretion. This can be achieved by giving 
glucocorticoid in the morning. Giving ACTH to stimu-
late adrenal recovery is of no value, as the pituitary 
remains suppressed.
In patients who have received glucocorticoids for 
longer than a few weeks, it is often valuable to confirm 
that the HPA axis is recovering during glucocorticoid 
withdrawal. Once the dose of glucocorticoid is reduced 
to a minimum (e.g. 4 mg prednisolone or 0.5 mg dexa­
methasone per day), then measure plasma cortisol at 
0900 hrs before the next dose. If this is detectable, then 
perform an ACTH stimulation test (see Box 20.47) to 
confirm that glucocorticoids can be withdrawn com-
pletely. Even once glucocorticoids have been success-
fully withdrawn, short-term replacement therapy is 
often advised during significant intercurrent illness 
occurring in subsequent months, as the HPA axis may 
not be able to respond fully to severe stress.
Adrenal insufficiency
Adrenal insufficiency results from inadequate secretion 
of cortisol and/or aldosterone. It is potentially fatal and 
notoriously variable in its presentation. A high index of 
suspicion is therefore required in patients with unex-
plained fatigue, hyponatraemia or hypotension. Causes 
are shown in Box 20.45. The most common is ACTH 
deficiency (secondary adrenocortical failure), usually 
because of inappropriate withdrawal of chronic gluco-
corticoid therapy or a pituitary tumour (p. 789). 
Intercurrent stress
• Febrile illness: double dose of hydrocortisone
Surgery
• Minor operation: hydrocortisone 100 mg IM with 
pre-medication
• Major operation: hydrocortisone 100 mg 4 times daily for 
24 hrs, then 50 mg IM 4 times daily until ready to take 
tablets
Vomiting
• Patients must have parenteral hydrocortisone if unable to 
take it by mouth
Steroid card
• Patient should carry this at all times; it should give 
information regarding diagnosis, steroid, dose and doctor
Bracelet and emergency pack
• Patients should be encouraged to buy one of these and have 
it engraved with the diagnosis, current treatment and a 
reference number for a central database
• Patients should be given a hydrocortisone emergency pack 
and trained in the self-administration of hydrocortisone 
100 mg IM; they should be advised to take the pack on 
holidays/trips abroad
20.44  Advice to patients on glucocorticoid 
replacement therapy
Secondary (↓ACTH)
• Withdrawal of suppressive glucocorticoid therapy
• Hypothalamic or pituitary disease
Primary (↑ACTH)
Addison’s disease
Common causes
• Autoimmune
Sporadic
Polyglandular syndromes 
(p. 795)
• Tuberculosis
• HIV/AIDS
• Metastatic carcinoma
• Bilateral adrenalectomy
Rare causes
• Lymphoma
• Intra-adrenal haemorrhage
(Waterhouse–
Friedrichsen syndrome 
following meningococcal 
septicaemia)
• Amyloidosis
• Haemochromatosis
Corticosteroid biosynthetic enzyme defects
• Congenital adrenal hyperplasias
• Drugs
Metyrapone, ketoconazole, etomidate
20.45  Causes of adrenocortical insufficiency
Endocrine disease
20
778
Glucocorticoid 
insufficiency
Mineralocorticoid 
insufficiency
ACTH excess
Adrenal androgen 
insufficiency
Withdrawal of exogenous 
glucocorticoid
+
–
–
+
Hypopituitarism
+
–
–
+
Addison’s disease
+
+
+
+
Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
(21 OHase deficiency)
+
+
+
–
Clinical features
Weight loss, anorexia
Malaise, weakness
Nausea, vomiting
Diarrhoea or 
constipation
Postural hypotension
Shock
Hypoglycaemia
Hyponatraemia 
(dilutional)
Hypercalcaemia
Hypotension
Shock
Hyponatraemia 
(depletional)
Hyperkalaemia
Pigmentation of:
Sun-exposed areas
Pressure areas (e.g. 
elbows, knees)
Palmar creases, 
knuckles
Mucous membranes
Conjunctivae
Recent scars
Decreased body hair 
and loss of libido, 
especially in female
20.46  Clinical and biochemical features of adrenal insufficiency
range, yet inappropriately low, for a seriously ill patient. 
Random measurement of plasma cortisol cannot there-
fore be used to confirm or refute the diagnosis, unless 
the value is above 500 nmol/L (> 18 µg/dL), which 
effectively excludes adrenal insufficiency.
More useful is the short ACTH stimulation test 
(also called the tetracosactrin or short Synacthen test) 
described in Box 20.47. Cortisol levels fail to increase in 
response to exogenous ACTH in patients with primary 
or secondary adrenal insufficiency. These can be distin-
guished by measurement of ACTH (which is low in 
ACTH deficiency and high in Addison’s disease).
Assessment of mineralocorticoids
Mineralocorticoid secretion in patients with suspected 
Addison’s disease cannot be adequately assessed by 
electrolyte measurements since hyponatraemia occurs in 
both aldosterone and cortisol deficiency (see Box 20.46 
and p. 437). Hyperkalaemia is common, but not univer-
sal, in aldosterone deficiency. Plasma renin and aldo­
sterone should be measured in the supine position. In 
mineralocorticoid deficiency, plasma renin activity is 
high, with plasma aldosterone being either low or in the 
lower part of the reference range.
Assessment of adrenal androgens
This is not necessary in men because testosterone from 
the testes is the principal androgen. In women, dehydro­
epiandrosterone (DHEA) and androstenedione may be 
measured in a random specimen of blood, though levels 
are highest in the morning.
Other tests to establish the cause
Patients with unexplained secondary adrenocortical 
insufficiency should be investigated as described on 
page 786. In patients with elevated ACTH, further tests 
are required to establish the cause of Addison’s disease. 
Adrenal autoantibodies are frequently positive in 
autoimmune adrenal failure. If antibody tests are nega-
tive, imaging of the adrenal glands with CT or MRI is 
indicated. Tuberculosis causes adrenal calcification, 
visible on plain X-ray or ultrasound scan. An HIV test 
should be performed if risk factors for infection are 
present (p. 391). Adrenal metastases are a rare cause of 
adrenal insufficiency. Patients with evidence of auto­
immune adrenal failure should be screened for other 
organ-specific autoimmune diseases, such as thyroid 
disease, pernicious anaemia and type 1 diabetes.
Management
Patients with adrenocortical insufficiency always need 
glucocorticoid replacement therapy and usually, but 
Use
• Diagnosis of primary or secondary adrenal insufficiency
• Assessment of HPA axis in patients taking suppressive 
glucocorticoid therapy
• Relies on ACTH-dependent adrenal atrophy in secondary 
adrenal insufficiency, so may not detect acute ACTH 
deficiency (for example, in pituitary apoplexy, p. 789)
Dose
• 250 µg ACTH1–24 (Synacthen) by IM injection at any time 
of day
Blood samples
• 0 and 30 mins for plasma cortisol
• 0 mins also for ACTH (on ice) if Addison’s disease is being 
considered (patient not known to have pituitary disease or to 
be taking exogenous glucocorticoids)
Results
• Normal subjects: plasma cortisol > 500 nmol/L (~18 µg/dL)* 
either at baseline or at 30 mins
• Incremental change in cortisol is not a criterion
20.47  How and when to do an ACTH 
stimulation test
*The exact cortisol concentration depends on the cortisol assay being used.
The adrenal glands
20
779
Correct volume depletion
• IV saline as required to normalise blood pressure and pulse
• In severe hyponatraemia (< 125 mmol/L) avoid increases 
of plasma Na > 10 mmol/L/day to prevent pontine 
demyelination (p. 437)
• Fludrocortisone is not required during the acute phase of 
treatment
Replace glucocorticoids
• IV hydrocortisone succinate 100 mg stat, and 100 mg  
4 times daily for first 12–24 hours
• Continue parenteral hydrocortisone (50–100 mg IM 4 times 
daily) until patient is well enough for reliable oral  
therapy
Correct other metabolic abnormalities
• Acute hypoglycaemia: IV 10% glucose
• Hyperkalaemia: should respond to volume replacement but 
occasionally requires specific therapy (see Box 16.17, p. 443)
Identify and treat underlying cause
• Consider acute precipitant, such as infection
• Consider adrenal or pituitary pathology (see Box 20.45)
20.48  Management of adrenal crisis
not always, mineralocorticoid therapy. There is some 
evidence that adrenal androgen replacement may also 
be beneficial in women. Other treatments depend on 
the underlying cause. The emergency management 
of adrenal crisis is described in Box 20.48.
Glucocorticoid replacement
Adrenal replacement therapy consists of oral hydrocor-
tisone (cortisol) 15–20 mg daily in divided doses, typi-
cally 10 mg on waking and 5 mg at around 1500 hrs. 
These are physiological replacement doses which 
should not cause Cushingoid side-effects. The dose may 
need to be adjusted for the individual patient but this is 
subjective. Excess weight gain usually indicates over-
replacement, whilst persistent lethargy or hyperpigmen-
tation may be due to an inadequate dose or lack of 
absorption. Measurement of plasma cortisol levels is not 
usually helpful. Advice to patients dependent on gluco-
corticoid replacement is given in Box 20.44.
Mineralocorticoid replacement
Fludrocortisone (9α-fluoro-hydrocortisone) is adminis-
tered at the usual dose of 0.05–0.15 mg daily, and ade-
quacy of replacement may be assessed by measurement 
of blood pressure, plasma electrolytes and plasma renin.
Androgen replacement
Androgen replacement with DHEA (50 mg/day) is 
occasionally given to women with primary adrenal 
insufficiency who have symptoms of reduced libido and 
fatigue, but the evidence in support of this is not robust 
and treatment may be associated with side-effects such 
as acne and hirsutism.
Incidental adrenal mass
It is not uncommon for a mass in the adrenal gland 
to be identified on a CT or MRI scan of the abdomen 
that has been performed for another indication. Such 
lesions are known as adrenal ‘incidentalomas’. They are 
present in up to 10% of adults and the prevalence 
increases with age.
Eighty-five per cent of adrenal incidentalomas are 
non-functioning adrenal adenomas. The remainder 
includes functional tumours of the adrenal cortex 
(secreting cortisol, aldosterone or androgens), phaeo-
chromocytomas, primary and secondary carcinomas, 
hamartomas and other rare disorders, including granu-
lomatous infiltrations.
Clinical assessment and investigations
There are two key questions to be resolved: is the lesion 
secreting hormones, and is it benign or malignant?
Patients with an adrenal incidentaloma are usually 
asymptomatic. However, clinical signs and symptoms of 
excess glucocorticoids (p. 772), mineralocorticoids (see 
below), catecholamines (p. 781) and, in women, andro-
gens (p. 763) should be sought. Investigations should 
include a dexamethasone suppression test, urine or 
plasma metanephrines and, in virilised women, meas-
urement of serum testosterone, DHEA and androstene-
dione. Patients with hypertension should be investigated 
for mineralocorticoid excess, as described below.
CT and MRI are equally effective in assessing the 
malignant potential of an adrenal mass, using the fol-
lowing parameters:
•	 Size. The larger the lesion, the greater the malignant 
potential. Around 90% of adrenocortical carcinomas 
are over 4 cm in diameter, but specificity is poor 
since only approximately 25% of such lesions are 
malignant.
•	 Configuration. Homogeneous and smooth lesions 
are more likely to be benign. The presence of 
metastatic lesions elsewhere increases the risk  
of malignancy, but as many as two-thirds of  
adrenal incidentalomas in patients with cancer  
are benign.
•	 Presence of lipid. Adenomas are usually lipid-rich, 
resulting in an attenuation of below 10 Hounsfield 
Units (HU) on an unenhanced CT, and in signal 
dropout on chemical shift MRI.
•	 Enhancement. Benign lesions demonstrate rapid 
washout of contrast, whereas malignant lesions 
tend to retain contrast.
Histology in a sample obtained by CT-guided biopsy 
is rarely indicated, and is not useful in distinguishing an 
adrenal adenoma from an adrenal carcinoma. Biopsy is 
• Adrenocortical insufficiency: often insidious and difficult 
to spot.
• Glucocorticoid therapy: especially hazardous in older 
people, who are already relatively immunocompromised and 
susceptible to osteoporosis, diabetes, hypertension and other 
complications.
• ‘Physiological’ glucocorticoid replacement therapy: 
increased risk of adrenal crisis because compliance may be 
poor and there is a greater incidence of intercurrent illness. 
Patient and carer education, with regular reinforcement of 
the principles described in Box 20.44, is crucial.
20.49  Glucocorticoids in old age
Endocrine disease
20
780
occasionally helpful in confirming adrenal metastases 
from other cancers, but should be avoided if either 
phaeochromocytoma or primary adrenal cancer is sus-
pected in order to avoid precipitation of a hypertensive 
crisis or seeding of tumour cells, respectively.
Management
Functional lesions and tumours of more than 4 cm in 
diameter should be considered for removal by adrenal 
surgery. In patients with radiologically benign, non-
functioning lesions of less than 4 cm in diameter, surgery 
is only required if serial imaging suggests tumour 
growth. Optimal management of patients with low-
grade cortisol secretion, as demonstrated by the dexa­
methasone suppression test, remains to be established.
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Estimates of the prevalence of primary hyperaldo­
steronism vary according to the screening tests 
employed, but it may occur in as many as 10% of people 
with hypertension. Indications to test for mineralocorti-
coid excess in hypertensive patients include hypokalae-
mia (including hypokalaemia induced by thiazide 
diuretics), poor control of blood pressure with conven-
tional therapy, a family history of early-onset hyperten-
sion, or presentation at a young age.
Causes of excessive activation of mineralocorticoid 
receptors are shown in Box 20.50. It is important to 
differentiate primary hyperaldosteronism, caused by 
an intrinsic abnormality of the adrenal glands resulting 
in aldosterone excess, from secondary hyperaldo­
steronism, which is usually a consequence of enhanced 
activity of renin in response to inadequate renal per-
fusion and hypotension. Most individuals with primary 
hyperaldosteronism have bilateral adrenal hyperplasia 
(idiopathic hyperaldosteronism), while only a minority 
have an aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA; Conn’s 
syndrome). 
Glucocorticoid-suppressible 
hyperaldo­
steronism is a rare autosomal dominant condition in 
which aldosterone is secreted ‘ectopically’ from the 
adrenal fasciculata/reticularis in response to ACTH. 
Rarely, the mineralocorticoid receptor pathway in the 
distal nephron is activated, even though aldosterone 
concentrations are low.
Clinical features
Individuals with primary hyperaldosteronism are 
usually asymptomatic but may have features of sodium 
retention or potassium loss. Sodium retention may cause 
oedema, while hypokalaemia may cause muscle weak-
ness (or even paralysis, especially in Chinese), polyuria 
(secondary to renal tubular damage, which produces 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus) and occasionally tetany 
(because of associated metabolic alkalosis and low 
ionised calcium). Blood pressure is elevated but acceler-
ated phase hypertension is rare.
Investigations
Biochemical
Routine blood tests may show a hypokalaemic alkalosis. 
Sodium is usually at the upper end of the reference 
range in primary hyperaldosteronism, but is character-
istically low in secondary hyperaldosteronism (because 
low plasma volume stimulates antidiuretic hormone 
(ADH) release and high angiotensin II levels stimulate 
thirst). The key measurements are plasma renin and 
aldosterone (see Box 20.50), and in many centres, the 
aldosterone : renin ratio (ARR) is employed as a screen-
ing test for primary hyperaldosteronism in hypertensive 
patients. Almost all antihypertensive drugs interfere 
with this ratio (β-blockers inhibit whilst thiazide diuret-
ics stimulate renin secretion). Thus, individuals with an 
elevated ARR require further testing after stopping anti-
hypertensive drugs for at least 2 weeks. If necessary, 
antihypertensive agents that have minimal effects on the 
renin–angiotensin system, such as calcium antagonists 
and α-blockers, may be substituted. Oral potassium sup-
plementation may also be required, as hypokalaemia 
itself suppresses renin activity. If, on repeat testing, 
plasma renin is low and aldosterone concentrations are 
elevated, then further investigation under specialist 
supervision may include suppression tests (sodium 
loading) and/or stimulation tests (captopril or furo­
semide administration) to differentiate angiotensin 
II-dependent aldosterone secretion in idiopathic hyper-
plasia from autonomous aldosterone secretion typical of 
an APA.
Imaging and localisation
Imaging with CT or MRI will identify most APAs 
(Fig. 20.22), but it is important to recognise the risk of 
false-positives (non-functioning adrenal adenomas are 
common) and false-negatives (imaging may have insuf-
ficient resolution to identify adenomas with diameter of 
less than 0.5 cm). If the imaging is inconclusive and 
there is an intention to proceed with surgery on the basis 
of strong biochemical evidence of an APA, then adrenal 
vein catheterisation with measurement of aldosterone 
(and cortisol to confirm positioning of the catheters) is 
required. In some centres, this is performed even in the 
presence of a unilateral ‘adenoma’, to avoid inadvertent 
removal of an incidental non-functioning adenoma 
contralateral to the inapparent cause of aldosterone 
excess.
With renin high and aldosterone high (secondary 
hyperaldosteronism)
• Inadequate renal perfusion (diuretic therapy, cardiac failure, 
liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, renal artery stenosis)
• Renin-secreting renal tumour (very rare)
With renin low and aldosterone high (primary 
hyperaldosteronism)
• Adrenal adenoma secreting aldosterone (Conn’s syndrome)
• Idiopathic bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
• Glucocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism (rare)
With renin low and aldosterone low (non-aldosterone-
dependent activation of mineralocorticoid pathway)
• Ectopic ACTH syndrome
• Liquorice misuse (inhibition of 11 β-HSD2)
• Liddle’s syndrome
• 11-deoxycorticosterone-secreting adrenal tumour
• Rare forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia and 11 β-HSD2 
deficiency
20.50  Causes of mineralocorticoid excess
The adrenal glands
20
781
• Hypertension (usually 
paroxysmal; often postural 
drop of blood pressure)
• Paroxysms of:
Pallor (occasionally 
flushing)
Palpitations, sweating
Headache
Anxiety (angor animi)
• Abdominal pain, vomiting
• Constipation
• Weight loss
• Glucose intolerance
20.51  Clinical features of phaeochromocytoma
Fig. 20.22  Aldosterone-producing adenoma causing Conn’s 
syndrome.  A CT scan of left adrenal adenoma (arrow).  B The tumour 
is ‘canary yellow’ because of intracellular lipid accumulation. 
A
B
Management
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (spironolactone 
and eplerenone) are valuable in treating both hypo­
kalaemia and hypertension in all forms of mineralocor-
ticoid excess. Up to 20% of males develop gynaecomastia 
on spironolactone. Amiloride (10–40 mg/day), which 
blocks the epithelial sodium channel regulated by aldo­
sterone, is an alternative.
In patients with an APA, medical therapy is usually 
given for a few weeks to normalise whole-body electro-
lyte balance before unilateral adrenalectomy. Laparo-
scopic surgery cures the biochemical abnormality but, 
depending on the pre-operative duration, hypertension 
remains in as many as 70% of cases, probably because of 
irreversible damage to the systemic microcirculation.
Phaeochromocytoma and 
paraganglioma
These are rare neuro-endocrine tumours that may secrete 
catecholamines (adrenaline/epinephrine, noradrenaline/
norepinephrine). Approximately 80% of these tumours 
occur in the adrenal medulla (phaeochromocytomas), 
while 20% arise elsewhere in the body in sympathetic 
ganglia (paragangliomas). Most are benign but approxi-
mately 15% show malignant features. Around 30% are 
associated with inherited disorders, including neuro­
fibromatosis (p. 1215), von Hippel–Lindau syndrome 
(p. 1216) and MEN 2 (p. 795). Paragangliomas are par-
ticularly associated with mutations in the succinate 
dehydrogenase B, C and D genes.
Clinical features
These depend on the pattern of catecholamine secretion 
and are listed in Box 20.51.
Some patients present with hypertension, although it 
has been estimated that phaeochromocytoma accounts 
for less than 0.1% of cases of hypertension. The presenta-
tion may be with a complication of hypertension, such 
as stroke, myocardial infarction, left ventricular failure, 
hypertensive retinopathy or accelerated phase hyperten-
sion. The apparent paradox of postural hypotension 
between episodes is explained by ‘pressure natriuresis’ 
during hypertensive episodes so that intravascular 
volume is reduced. There may also be features of the 
familial syndromes associated with phaeochromo­
cytoma. Paragangliomas are often non-functioning.
Investigations
Excessive secretion of catecholamines can be con-
firmed by measuring metabolites in plasma and/or 
urine (metanephrine and normetanephrine). There is a 
high ‘false-positive’ rate, as misleading metanephrine 
concentrations may be seen in stressed patients (during 
acute illness, following vigorous exercise or severe 
pain) and following ingestion of some drugs such 
as tricyclic antidepressants. For this reason, a repeat 
sample should usually be requested if elevated levels 
are found, although, as a rule, the higher the concentra-
tion of metanephrines, the more likely is the diagnosis 
of phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma. Serum chromo­
granin A is often elevated and may be a useful tumour 
marker in patients with non-secretory tumours and/ 
or metastatic disease. Genetic testing should be consid-
ered in individuals with other features of a genetic syn-
drome, with a family history of phaeochromocytoma/
paraganglioma, and in those presenting under the age 
of 50 years.
Localisation
Phaeochromocytomas are usually identified by abdomi-
nal CT or MRI (Fig. 20.23). Localisation of paragan­
gliomas may be more difficult. Scintigraphy using 
meta-iodobenzyl guanidine (MIBG) can be useful, par-
ticularly if combined with CT. 18F-deoxyglucose PET is 
especially useful for detection of malignant disease and 
for confirming an imaging abnormality as a paragan­
glioma in an individual with underlying risk due to 
genetic mutation.
Endocrine disease
20
782
Fig. 20.23  CT scan of abdomen showing large left adrenal 
phaeochromocytoma. The normal right adrenal (white arrow) contrasts 
with the large heterogeneous phaeochromocytoma arising from the left 
adrenal gland (black arrow). 
Management
Medical therapy is required to prepare the patient for 
surgery, preferably for a minimum of 6 weeks to allow 
restoration of normal plasma volume. The most useful 
drug in the face of very high circulating catecholamines 
is the α-blocker phenoxybenzamine (10–20 mg orally 
3–4 times daily) because it is a non-competitive antago-
nist, unlike prazosin or doxazosin. If α-blockade pro-
duces a marked tachycardia, then a β-blocker such as 
propranolol can be added. On no account should a 
β-blocker be given before an α-blocker, as this may cause 
a paradoxical rise in blood pressure due to unopposed 
α-mediated vasoconstriction.
During surgery, sodium nitroprusside and the 
short-acting α-antagonist phentolamine are useful in 
controlling hypertensive episodes, which may result 
from anaesthetic induction or tumour mobilisation. 
Post-operative hypotension may occur and require 
volume expansion and, very occasionally, noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine) infusion, but is uncommon if the 
patient has been prepared with phenoxybenzamine.
Metastatic tumours may behave in an aggressive or 
a very indolent fashion. Management options include 
debulking surgery, radionuclide therapy with 131I-MIBG, 
chemotherapy and (chemo)embolisation of hepatic 
metastases; some may respond to tyrosine kinase and 
angiogenesis inhibitors.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Pathophysiology and clinical features
Inherited defects in enzymes of the cortisol biosynthetic 
pathway (see Fig. 20.18, p. 772) result in insufficiency 
of hormones downstream of the block, with impaired 
negative feedback and increased ACTH secretion. ACTH 
then stimulates the production of steroids upstream of 
the enzyme block. This produces adrenal hyperplasia 
and a combination of clinical features that depend on 
the severity and site of the defect in biosynthesis. All of 
these enzyme abnormalities are inherited as autosomal 
recessive traits.
The most common enzyme defect is 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency. This results in impaired synthesis of 
cortisol and aldosterone and accumulation of 17OH-
progesterone, which is then diverted to form adrenal 
androgens. In about one-third of cases, this defect is 
severe and presents in infancy with features of glucocor-
ticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency (see Box 20.46, 
p. 778) and androgen excess, such as ambiguous genita-
lia in girls. In the other two-thirds, mineralocorticoid 
secretion is adequate but there may be features of corti-
sol insufficiency and/or ACTH and androgen excess, 
including precocious pseudo-puberty, which is distin-
guished from ‘true’ precocious puberty by low gonado-
trophins. Sometimes the mildest enzyme defects are 
not apparent until adult life, when females may present 
with amenorrhoea and/or hirsutism (p. 763). This is 
called ‘non-classical’ or ‘late-onset’ congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia.
Defects of all the other enzymes in Figure 20.18  
(p. 772) are rare. Both 17-hydroxylase and 11 β-­
hydroxylase deficiency may produce hypertension due 
to excess production of 11-deoxycorticosterone, which 
has mineralocorticoid activity.
Investigations
Circulating 17OH-progesterone levels are raised in 
21-hydroxylase deficiency, but this may only be demon-
strated after ACTH administration in late-onset cases. 
To avoid salt-wasting crises in infancy, 17OH- 
progesterone can be routinely measured in heelprick 
blood spot samples taken from all infants in the first 
week of life. Assessment is otherwise as described for 
adrenal insufficiency on page 778.
In siblings of affected children, antenatal genetic 
diagnosis can be made by amniocentesis or chorionic 
villus sampling. This allows prevention of virilisation of 
affected female fetuses by administration of dexametha-
sone to the mother to suppress ACTH levels.
Management
The aim is to replace deficient corticosteroids and to 
suppress ACTH-driven adrenal androgen production. 
A careful balance is required between adequate sup­
pression of adrenal androgen excess and excessive 
glucocorticoid replacement resulting in features of 
Cushing’s syndrome. In children, growth velocity is an 
important measurement, since either under- or over-
replacement with glucocorticoids suppresses growth. In 
adults, there is no uniformly agreed adrenal replace-
ment regime, and clinical features (menstrual cycle, hir-
sutism, weight gain, blood pressure) and biochemical 
profiles (plasma renin, 17OH-progesterone and testo-
sterone levels) provide a guide.
Women with late-onset 21-hydroxylase deficiency 
may not require corticosteroid replacement. If hirsutism 
is the main problem, anti-androgen therapy may be just 
as effective (p. 764).
THE ENDOCRINE PANCREAS AND 
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
A series of hormones are secreted from cells dis­
tributed throughout the gastrointestinal tract and 
pancreas. Functional anatomy and physiology are 
The endocrine pancreas and gastrointestinal tract
20
783
Primary
Secondary
Hormone 
excess
Insulinoma
Gastrinoma 
(Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome)
Carcinoid syndrome 
(secretion of 5-HT)
Glucagonoma
VIPoma
Somatostatinoma
Hypergastrinaemia 
of achlorhydria
Hyperinsulinaemia 
after bariatric 
surgery
Hormone 
deficiency
Diabetes mellitus
Hormone 
resistance
Insulin resistance 
syndromes (e.g. type 
2 diabetes mellitus, 
lipodystrophy, 
leprechaunism)
Non-functioning 
tumours
Pancreatic carcinoma
Pancreatic 
neuro-endocrine 
tumour
20.52  Classification of endocrine diseases of 
the pancreas and gastrointestinal tract
Fig. 20.24  Differential diagnosis of spontaneous hypoglycaemia. Measurement of insulin and C-peptide concentrations during an episode is 
helpful in determining the underlying cause. 
Whipple’s triad confirmed
Patient had symptoms of hypoglycaemia
Low blood glucose measured at the time of symptoms
Symptoms resolved on correction of hypoglycaemia
↑ Insulin
↓ C-peptide
↓ Insulin
↓ C-peptide
↑ Insulin
↑ C-peptide
Alcohol
Drugs
Critical illnesses
Hypopituitarism (rare)
Primary adrenocortical failure (rare in adults)
Non-islet cell tumour (e.g. sarcoma)
Inborn errors of metabolism
Exogenous
insulin
Insulinoma
Sulphonylureas
Other drugs
Hyperinsulinism of infancy
described in Chapters 21 and 22. Diseases associated 
with abnormalities of these hormones are listed in 
Box 20.52. Most are rare, with the exception of diabetes 
mellitus (Ch. 21).
Presenting problems in endocrine 
pancreas disease
Spontaneous hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia most commonly occurs as a side-effect 
of treatment with insulin or sulphonylurea drugs in 
people with diabetes mellitus. In non-diabetic individu-
als, symptomatic hypoglycaemia is rare, but it is not 
uncommon to detect venous blood glucose concentra-
tions below 3.0 mmol/L in asymptomatic patients. For 
this reason, and because the symptoms of hypoglycae-
mia are non-specific, a hypoglycaemic disorder should 
only be diagnosed if all three conditions of Whipple’s 
triad are met (Fig. 20.24). There is no specific blood 
glucose concentration at which spontaneous hypo­
glycaemia can be said to occur, although the lower the 
blood glucose concentration, the more likely it is to have 
pathological significance.
Clinical assessment
The clinical features of hypoglycaemia are described in 
the section on insulin-induced hypoglycaemia on page 
814. Individuals with chronic spontaneous hypoglycae-
mia often have attenuated autonomic responses and 
‘hypoglycaemia unawareness’, and may present with a 
wide variety of features of neuro-glycopenia, including 
odd behaviour and convulsions. The symptoms are 
usually episodic and relieved by consumption of carbo-
hydrate. Symptoms occurring while fasting (such as 
before breakfast) or following exercise are much more 
likely to be representative of pathological hypoglycae-
mia than those which develop after food (post-prandial 
or ‘reactive’ symptoms). Hypoglycaemia should be con-
sidered in all comatose patients, even if there is an 
apparently obvious cause, such as hemiplegic stroke or 
alcohol intoxication.
Investigations
Does the patient have a hypoglycaemic disorder?
Patients who present acutely with confusion, coma or 
convulsions should be tested for hypoglycaemia at 
the bedside with a capillary blood sample and an auto-
mated meter. While this is sufficient to exclude hypo­
glycaemia, blood glucose meters are relatively inaccurate 
in the hypoglycaemic range and the diagnosis should 
always be confirmed by a laboratory-based glucose 
measurement. At the same time, a sample should be 
taken for later measurement, if necessary, of alcohol, 
insulin, C-peptide, cortisol and sulphonylurea levels. 
Taking these samples during an acute presentation 
Endocrine disease
20
784
secretion (diazoxide or somatostatin analogues). Insuli-
nomas are resected when benign, providing the indi-
vidual is fit enough to undergo surgery. Metastatic 
malignant insulinomas are incurable and are managed 
along the same lines as other metastatic neuro-endocrine 
tumours (see below).
Gastroenteropancreatic neuro-endocrine 
tumours
Neuro-endocrine tumours (NETs) are a heterogeneous 
group derived from neuro-endocrine cells in many 
organs, including the gastrointestinal tract, lung, 
adrenals (phaeochromocytoma, p. 781) and thyroid 
(medullary carcinoma, p. 755). Most NETs occur 
sporadically, but a proportion are associated with 
genetic cancer syndromes, such as MEN 1, MEN 2 and 
neurofibromatosis type 1 (pp. 795 and 1215). NETs may 
secrete hormones into the circulation.
Gastroenteropancreatic NETs arise in organs that are 
derived embryologically from the gastrointestinal tract. 
Most commonly, they occur in the small bowel but they 
can also arise elsewhere in the bowel, pancreas, thymus 
and bronchi. The term ‘carcinoid’ is often used when 
referring to non-pancreatic gastroenteropancreatic NETs 
because, when initially described, they were thought to 
behave in an indolent fashion compared with conven-
tional cancers. It is now recognised that there is a wide 
spectrum of malignant potential for all NETs; some are 
benign (most insulinomas and appendiceal carcinoid 
tumours), while others have an aggressive clinical 
course with widespread metastases (small-cell carci-
noma of the lung). The majority of gastroenteropancre-
atic NETs behave in an intermediate manner, with 
relatively slow growth but a propensity to invade and 
metastasise to remote organs, especially the liver.
Clinical features
Patients with gastroenteropancreatic NETs often have a 
history of abdominal pain over many years prior to diag-
nosis and usually present with local mass effects, such 
as small-bowel obstruction, appendicitis, and pain from 
hepatic metastases. Thymic and bronchial carcinoids 
occasionally present with ectopic ACTH syndrome 
(p. 774). Pancreatic NETs can also cause hormone excess 
(Box 20.54) but most are non-functional. The classic ‘car-
cinoid syndrome’ (Box 20.55) occurs when vasoactive 
hormones reach the systemic circulation. In the case of 
gastrointestinal carcinoids, this invariably means that 
the tumour has metastasised to the liver or there are 
peritoneal deposits, which allow secreted hormones to 
gain access to the systemic circulation; hormones 
secreted by the primary tumour into the portal vein are 
metabolised and inactivated in the liver.
prevents subsequent unnecessary dynamic tests and is 
of medico-legal importance in cases where poisoning is 
suspected.
Patients who attend the outpatient clinic with epi-
sodic symptoms suggestive of hypoglycaemia present 
a more challenging problem. The main diagnostic test 
is the prolonged (72-hour) fast. If symptoms of hypo­
glycaemia develop during the fast, then blood samples 
should be taken to confirm hypoglycaemia and for later 
measurement of insulin and C-peptide. Hypoglycaemia 
is then corrected with oral or intravenous glucose and 
Whipple’s triad completed by confirmation of the reso-
lution of symptoms. The absence of clinical and bio-
chemical evidence of hypoglycaemia during a prolonged 
fast effectively excludes the diagnosis of a hypoglycae-
mic disorder.
What is the cause of the hypoglycaemia?
In the acute setting, the underlying diagnosis is often 
obvious. In non-diabetic individuals, alcohol excess is 
the most common cause of hypoglycaemia in the UK, 
but other drugs – for example, salicylates, quinine and 
pentamidine – may also be implicated. Hypoglycaemia 
is one of many metabolic derangements which occur in 
patients with hepatic failure, renal failure, sepsis or 
malaria.
Hypoglycaemia in the absence of insulin, or any 
insulin-like factor, in the blood indicates impaired 
gluconeogenesis and/or availability of glucose from 
glycogen in the liver. Hypoglycaemia associated with 
high insulin and low C-peptide concentrations is indica-
tive of administration of exogenous insulin, either facti-
tiously or feloniously. Adults with high insulin and 
C-peptide concentrations during an episode of hypo­
glycaemia are most likely to have an insulinoma, but 
sulphonylurea ingestion should also be considered (par-
ticularly in individuals with access to such medication, 
such as health-care professionals or family members of 
someone with type 2 diabetes). Suppressed plasma 
β-hydroxybutyrate helps confirm inappropriate insulin 
secretion during fasting. Usually, insulinomas in the 
pancreas are small (< 5 mm diameter) but can be identi-
fied by CT, MRI or ultrasound (endoscopic or laparo-
scopic). Imaging should include the liver since around 
10% of insulinomas are malignant. Rarely, large non-
pancreatic tumours, such as sarcomas, may cause recur-
rent hypoglycaemia because of their ability to produce 
excess pro-insulin-like growth factor-2 (pro-IGF-2).
Management
Treatment of acute hypoglycaemia should be initiated 
as soon as laboratory blood samples have been taken, 
and should not be deferred until formal laboratory con-
firmation has been obtained. Intravenous dextrose (5% 
or 10%) is effective in the short term in the obtunded 
patient, and should be followed on recovery with oral 
unrefined carbohydrate (starch). Continuous dextrose 
infusion may be necessary, especially in sulphonylurea 
poisoning. Intramuscular glucagon (1 mg) stimulates 
hepatic glucose release, but is ineffective in patients with 
depleted glycogen reserves, such as in alcohol excess or 
liver disease.
Chronic recurrent hypoglycaemia in insulin-secreting 
tumours can be treated by regular consumption of oral 
carbohydrate combined with agents that inhibit insulin 
• Presentation: may present with focal neurological 
abnormality. Blood glucose should be checked in all patients 
with acute neurological symptoms and signs, especially 
stroke, as these will reverse with early treatment of 
hypoglycaemia.
20.53  Spontaneous hypoglycaemia in old age
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland 
20
785
Tumour
Hormone
Effects
Gastrinoma
Gastrin
Peptic ulcer and 
steatorrhoea 
(Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome)
Insulinoma
Insulin
Recurrent 
hypoglycaemia (see 
above)
VIPoma
Vasoactive 
intestinal 
peptide (VIP)
Watery diarrhoea and 
hypokalaemia
Glucagonoma
Glucagon
Diabetes mellitus, 
necrolytic migratory 
erythema
Somatostatinoma
Somatostatin
Diabetes mellitus and 
steatorrhoea
20.54  Pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours
• Episodic flushing, wheezing and diarrhoea
• Facial telangiectasia
• Cardiac involvement (tricuspid regurgitation, pulmonary 
stenosis, right ventricular endocardial plaques) leading to 
heart failure
20.55  Clinical features of the carcinoid syndrome
Fig. 20.25  Octreotide scintigraphy in a metastatic neuro-endocrine tumour. A Coronal CT scan showing hepatomegaly and a mass inferior to 
the liver (at the intersection of the horizontal and vertical red lines). B Octreotide scintogram showing patches of increased uptake in the upper abdomen.
 C When the octreotide and CT scans are superimposed, it shows that the areas of increased uptake are in hepatic metastases and in the tissue mass, 
which may be lymph nodes or a primary tumour. 
B
C
A
‘Two randomised controlled clinical trials showed significant 
improvements in progression-free survival in patients with 
advanced and progressive pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours.’
• Yao JC, et al. N Engl J Med 2011; 364(6):514–523.
• Raymond E, et al. N Engl J Med 2011; 364(6):501–513.
20.56  Tyrosine kinase/mTOR inhibitors in 
advanced pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours
Investigations
A combination of imaging with ultrasound, CT, MRI 
and/or radio-labelled somatostatin analogue (Fig. 20.25) 
will usually identify the primary tumour and allow 
staging, which is crucial for determining prognosis. 
Biopsy of the primary tumour or a metastatic deposit 
is required to confirm the histological type. NETs 
demonstrate immunohistochemical staining for the 
proteins chromogranin A and synaptophysin, and 
the histological grade may also provide prognostic 
information.
Carcinoid syndrome is confirmed by measuring ele-
vated concentrations of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid 
(5-HIAA), a metabolite of serotonin, in a 24-hour urine 
collection. False-positives can occur, particularly if the 
individual has been eating certain foods, such as avocado 
and pineapple. Plasma chromogranin A can be meas-
ured in a fasting blood sample, along with the hormones 
listed in Box 20.54. All of these can be useful as tumour 
markers.
Management
Treatment of solitary tumours is by surgical resection. If 
metastatic or multifocal primary disease is present, 
then surgery is usually not indicated, unless there is a 
complication such as gastrointestinal obstruction. Dia-
zoxide can reduce insulin secretion in insulinomas, and 
high doses of proton pump inhibitors suppress acid pro-
duction in gastrinomas. Somatostatin analogues are 
effective in reducing the symptoms of carcinoid syn-
drome and of excess glucagon and vasoactive intestinal 
peptide (VIP) production. The slow-growing nature of 
NETs means that conventional cancer therapies, such as 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy, have limited efficacy. 
Other treatments, such as interferon, targeted radio­
nuclide therapy with 
131I-MIBG and radio-labelled 
somatostatin analogues (which may be taken up by 
NET metastases), and resection/embolisation of hepatic 
metastases, may have a role in the palliation of symp-
toms but there is little evidence that they prolong life. 
The tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib and the mam-
malian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor everolimus 
have shown benefit in progressive pancreatic NETS 
(Box 20.56), and should be considered as part of stand-
ard therapy.
THE HYPOTHALAMUS AND  
THE PITUITARY GLAND
Diseases of the hypothalamus and pituitary have 
an annual incidence of approximately 3 : 100 000 and a 
Endocrine disease
20
786
prevalence of 30–40 per 100 000. The pituitary plays a 
central role in several major endocrine axes, so that 
investigation and treatment invariably involve several 
other endocrine glands.
Functional anatomy, physiology  
and investigations
The anatomical relationships of the pituitary are shown 
in Figure 20.26 and its numerous functions are shown in 
Figure 20.2 (p. 737). The pituitary gland is enclosed in 
the sella turcica and bridged over by a fold of dura mater 
called the diaphragma sellae, with the sphenoidal air 
sinuses below and the optic chiasm above. The cavern-
ous sinuses are lateral to the pituitary fossa and contain 
the 3rd, 4th and 6th cranial nerves and the internal 
carotid arteries. The gland is composed of two lobes, 
anterior and posterior, and is connected to the hypotha-
lamus by the infundibular stalk, which has portal vessels 
carrying blood from the median eminence of the hypo­
thalamus to the anterior lobe and nerve fibres to the 
posterior lobe.
Diseases of the hypothalamus and pituitary are clas-
sified in Box 20.57. By far the most common disorder is 
an adenoma of the anterior pituitary gland.
Fig. 20.26  Anatomical relationships of the normal pituitary gland 
and hypothalamus. See also Figure 20.2 (p. 737).  A Sagittal MRI.
 B Coronal MRI. (AP = anterior pituitary; CS = cavernous sinus; H = 
hypothalamus; IC = internal carotid artery; OC = optic chiasm; PP = 
posterior pituitary; PS = pituitary stalk; SS = sphenoid sinus; TV = third 
ventricle) 
SS
PP
H
TV
OC
AP
A
B
OC
IC
TV
PS
CS
AP
Primary
Secondary
Non-functioning 
tumours
Pituitary adenoma
Craniopharyngioma
Metastatic tumours
Hormone excess
Anterior pituitary
Prolactinoma
Acromegaly
Cushing’s disease
Rare TSH-, LH-and 
FSH-secreting 
adenomas
Disconnection 
hyperprolactinaemia
Hypothalamus 
and posterior 
pituitary
Syndrome of 
inappropriate 
antidiuretic 
hormone (SIADH;  
p. 438)
Hormone deficiency
Anterior pituitary
Hypothalamus 
and posterior 
pituitary
Hypopituitarism
Cranial diabetes 
insipidus
GnRH deficiency
(Kallmann’s 
syndrome)
Hormone 
resistance
Growth hormone 
resistance (Laron 
dwarfism)
Nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus
20.57  Classification of diseases of the pituitary 
and hypothalamus
Investigation of patients with pituitary disease
Although pituitary disease presents with diverse clinical 
manifestations (see below), the approach to investiga-
tion is similar in all cases (Box 20.58).
The approach to testing for hormone deficiency is 
outlined in Box 20.58. Details are given in the sections 
on individual glands elsewhere in this chapter. Tests for 
hormone excess vary according to the hormone in ques-
tion. For example, prolactin is not secreted in pulsatile 
fashion, although it rises with significant psychological 
stress. Assuming that the patient was not distressed by 
venepuncture, a random measurement of serum prolac-
tin is sufficient to diagnose hyperprolactinaemia. In con-
trast, growth hormone is secreted in a pulsatile fashion. 
A high random level does not confirm acromegaly; 
the diagnosis is only confirmed by failure of growth 
hormone to be suppressed during an oral glucose toler-
ance test, and a high serum insulin-like growth factor-1 
(IGF-1). Similarly, in suspected ACTH-dependent Cush-
ing’s disease (p. 773), random measurement of plasma 
cortisol is unreliable and the diagnosis is usually made 
by a dexamethasone suppression test.
The most common local complication of a large pitui-
tary tumour is compression of the optic pathway. The 
resulting visual field defect can be documented using a 
Goldman’s perimetry chart.
MRI reveals ‘abnormalities’ of the pituitary gland 
in as many as 10% of ‘healthy’ middle-aged people. 
It should therefore be performed only if there is a 
clear biochemical abnormality or in a patient who 
presents with clinical features of pituitary tumour (see 
below). A pituitary tumour may be classified as either a 
macroadenoma (> 10 mm diameter) or a microadenoma 
(< 10 mm diameter).
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland 
20
787
Identify pituitary hormone deficiency
ACTH deficiency
• Short ACTH stimulation test (see Box 20.47, p. 778)
• Insulin tolerance test (see Box 20.61, p. 788): only if 
uncertainty in interpretation of short ACTH stimulation test 
(e.g. acute presentation)
LH/FSH deficiency
• In the male, measure random serum testosterone, LH and 
FSH
• In the pre-menopausal female, ask if menses are regular
• In the post-menopausal female, measure random serum LH 
and FSH (which would normally be > 30 mU/L)
TSH deficiency
• Measure random serum T4
• Note that TSH is often detectable in secondary 
hypothyroidism
Growth hormone deficiency
Only investigate if growth hormone replacement therapy is being 
contemplated; p. 789
• Measure immediately after exercise
• Consider other stimulatory tests (see Box 20.60)
Cranial diabetes insipidus
Only investigate if patient complains of polyuria/polydipsia, which 
may be masked by ACTH or TSH deficiency
• Exclude other causes of polyuria with blood glucose, 
potassium and calcium measurements
• Water deprivation test (see Box 20.66, p. 795) or 5% saline 
infusion test
Identify hormone excess
• Measure random serum prolactin
• Investigate for acromegaly (glucose tolerance test) or 
Cushing’s syndrome (p. 774) if there are clinical features
Establish the anatomy and diagnosis
• Consider visual field testing
• Image the pituitary and hypothalamus by MRI or CT
20.58  How to investigate patients with suspected 
pituitary hypothalamic disease
Surgical biopsy is usually only performed as part of 
a therapeutic operation. Conventional histology identi-
fies tumours as chromophobe (usually non-functioning), 
acidophil (typically prolactin- or growth hormone-
secreting) or basophil (typically ACTH-secreting); 
immunohistochemistry may confirm their secretory 
capacity but is poorly predictive of growth potential of 
the tumour.
Presenting problems in hypothalamic 
and pituitary disease
The clinical features of pituitary disease are shown in 
Figure 20.27 overleaf. Younger women with pituitary 
disease most commonly present with secondary amen-
orrhoea (p. 759) or galactorrhoea (in hyperprolactin­
aemia). Post-menopausal women and men of any age 
are less likely to report symptoms of hypogonadism and 
so are more likely to present late with larger tumours 
causing visual field defects. Nowadays, many patients 
present with the incidental finding of a pituitary tumour 
on a CT or MRI scan.
Hypopituitarism
Hypopituitarism describes combined deficiency of any 
of the anterior pituitary hormones. The clinical presenta-
tion is variable and depends on the underlying lesion 
and the pattern of resulting hormone deficiency. The 
most common cause is a pituitary macroadenoma but 
other causes are listed in Box 20.59.
Clinical assessment
The presentation is highly variable. For example, follow-
ing radiotherapy to the pituitary region, there is a char-
acteristic sequence of loss of pituitary hormone secretion. 
Growth hormone secretion is often the earliest to be lost. 
In adults, this produces lethargy, muscle weakness and 
increased fat mass but these features are not obvious in 
isolation. Next, gonadotrophin (LH and FSH) secretion 
becomes impaired with, in the male, loss of libido and, 
in the female, oligomenorrhoea or amenorrhoea. Later, 
in the male there may be gynaecomastia and decreased 
frequency of shaving. In both sexes, axillary and pubic 
hair eventually become sparse or even absent and the 
skin becomes characteristically finer and wrinkled. 
Chronic anaemia may also occur. The next hormone to 
be lost is usually ACTH, resulting in symptoms of cor-
tisol insufficiency (including postural hypotension and 
Structural
• Primary pituitary tumour
Adenoma*
Carcinoma (exceptionally 
rare)
• Craniopharyngioma*
• Meningioma*
• Secondary tumour 
(including leukaemia and 
lymphoma)
• Chordoma
• Germinoma (pinealoma)
• Arachnoid cyst
• Rathke’s cleft cyst
• Haemorrhage (apoplexy)
Inflammatory/infiltrative
• Sarcoidosis
• Infections, e.g. pituitary 
abscess, tuberculosis, 
syphilis, encephalitis
• Lymphocytic hypophysitis
• Haemochromatosis
• Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis
Congenital deficiencies
• GnRH (Kallmann’s 
syndrome)* – 
gonadotrophin-releasing 
hormone
• GHRH* – growth  
hormone-releasing 
hormone
• TRH – thyrotrophin-
releasing hormone
• CRH – corticotrophin-
releasing hormone
Functional*
• Chronic systemic illness
• Anorexia nervosa
• Excessive exercise
Other
• Head injury*
• (Para)sellar surgery*
• (Para)sellar radiotherapy*
• Post-partum necrosis 
(Sheehan’s syndrome)
• Opiate analgesia
*The most common causes of pituitary hormone deficiency.
20.59  Causes of anterior pituitary hormone 
deficiency
Endocrine disease
20
788
a dilutional hyponatraemia). In contrast to primary 
adrenal insufficiency (p. 777), angiotensin II-dependent 
zona glomerulosa function is not lost and hence aldos-
terone secretion maintains normal plasma potassium. In 
contrast to the pigmentation of Addison’s disease due to 
high levels of circulating ACTH acting on the skin 
melanocytes, a striking degree of pallor is usually 
present. Finally, TSH secretion is lost with consequent 
secondary hypothyroidism. This contributes further to 
apathy and cold intolerance. In contrast to primary 
hypothyroidism, frank myxoedema is rare, presumably 
because the thyroid retains some autonomous function. 
The onset of all of the above symptoms is notoriously 
insidious. However, patients sometimes present acutely 
unwell with glucocorticoid deficiency. This may be pre-
cipitated by a mild infection or injury, or may occur 
secondary to pituitary apoplexy (p. 789).
Other features of pituitary disease may be present 
(see Fig. 20.27).
Investigations
The strategy for investigation of pituitary disease is 
described in Box 20.58. In acutely unwell patients, the 
priority is to diagnose and treat cortisol deficiency 
(p. 776). Other tests can be undertaken later. Specific 
dynamic tests for diagnosing hormone deficiency are 
described in Boxes 20.47 (p. 778) and 20.60. More spe-
cialised biochemical tests, such as insulin tolerance tests 
(Box 20.61), GnRH and TRH tests, are rarely required. 
All patients with biochemical evidence of pituitary 
hormone deficiency should have an MRI or CT scan to 
identify pituitary or hypothalamic tumours. If a tumour 
Fig. 20.27  Common symptoms and signs to consider in a patient with suspected pituitary disease. 
Macroadenoma (arrows)
> 10 mm diameter
Local complications
• Headache
• Visual field defect
• Disconnection hyperprolactinaemia
• Diplopia (cavernous sinus involvement)
• Acute infarction/expansion (pituitary apoplexy)
Hormone excess
Hyperprolactinaemia
• Galactorrhoea
• Amenorrhoea
• Hypogonadism
Acromegaly
• Headache
• Sweating
• Change in shoe
  and ring size
Cushing’s disease
• Weight gain
• Bruising
• Myopathy
• Hypertension
• Striae
• Depression
Hypopituitarism
Growth hormone
• Lethargy
Gonadotrophins
• Lethargy
• Loss of libido
• Hair loss
• Amenorrhoea
ACTH
• Lethargy
• Postural hypotension
• Pallor
• Hair loss
TSH
 • Lethargy
Vasopressin (ADH)
(usually post-surgical)
• Thirst and polyuria
Microadenoma (arrow)
< 10 mm diameter
GH levels are commonly undetectable, so a choice from the 
range of ‘stimulation’ tests is required:
• Insulin-induced hypoglycaemia
• Arginine (may be combined with GHRH)
• Glucagon
• Clonidine
20.60  Tests of growth hormone secretion
is not identified, then further investigations are indi-
cated to exclude infectious or infiltrative causes.
Management
Treatment of acutely ill patients is similar to that 
described for adrenocortical insufficiency on page 778, 
except that sodium depletion is not an important 
component to correct. Chronic hormone replacement 
therapies are described below. Once the cause of hypo-
pituitarism is established, specific treatment – of a pitui-
tary macroadenoma, for example (see below) – may be 
required.
Cortisol replacement
Hydrocortisone should be given if there is ACTH defi-
ciency. Suitable doses are described in the section on 
adrenal disease on page 779. Mineralocorticoid replace-
ment is not required.
Thyroid hormone replacement
Levothyroxine 50–150 µg once daily should be given 
as described on page 743. Unlike in primary 
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland 
20
789
started at a low dose, with monitoring of the response 
by measurement of serum IGF-1.
Pituitary tumour
Pituitary tumours produce a variety of mass effects, 
depending on their size and location, but also present 
as incidental findings on CT or MRI, or with hypo­
pituitarism, as described above. A wide variety of dis-
orders can present as mass lesions in or around the 
pituitary gland (see Box 20.59). Most intrasellar tumours 
are pituitary macroadenomas (most commonly non-
functioning adenomas, see Fig. 20.27), whereas suprasel-
lar masses may be craniopharyngiomas (see Fig. 20.30, 
p. 794). The most common cause of a parasellar mass is 
a meningioma.
Clinical assessment
Clinical features are shown in Figure 20.27. A common 
but non-specific presentation is with headache, which 
may be the consequence of stretching of the diaphragma 
sellae. Although the classical abnormalities associated 
with compression of the optic chiasm are bitemporal 
hemianopia (see Fig. 20.28) or upper quadrantanopia, 
any type of visual field defect can result from suprasellar 
extension of a tumour because it may compress the optic 
nerve (unilateral loss of acuity or scotoma) or the optic 
tract (homonymous hemianopia). Optic atrophy may be 
apparent on ophthalmoscopy. Lateral extension of a 
sellar mass into the cavernous sinus with subsequent 
compression of the 3rd, 4th or 6th cranial nerve may 
cause diplopia and strabismus, but in anterior pituitary 
tumours this is an unusual presentation.
Occasionally, pituitary tumours infarct or there is 
bleeding into cystic lesions. This is termed ‘pituitary 
apoplexy’ and may result in sudden expansion with 
local compression symptoms and acute-onset hypo­
pituitarism. Non-haemorrhagic infarction can also occur 
in a normal pituitary gland; predisposing factors include 
catastrophic obstetric haemorrhage (Sheehan’s syn-
drome), diabetes mellitus and raised intracranial 
pressure.
Investigations
Patients suspected of having a pituitary tumour should 
undergo MRI or CT. Whilst some lesions have dis­
tinctive neuro-radiological features, the definitive diag-
nosis is made on histology after surgery. All patients 
with (para)sellar space-occupying lesions should have 
pituitary function assessed as described in Box 20.58  
(p. 787).
Management
Modalities of treatment of common pituitary and 
hypothalamic tumours are shown in Box 20.62. Associ-
ated hypopituitarism should be treated as described 
above.
Urgent treatment is required if there is evidence of 
pressure on visual pathways. The chances of recovery 
of a visual field defect are proportional to the duration 
of symptoms, with full recovery unlikely if the defect 
has been present for longer than 4 months. In the pres-
ence of a sellar mass lesion, it is crucial that serum 
prolactin is measured before emergency surgery is per-
formed. If the prolactin is over 5000 mU/L, then the 
lesion is likely to be a macroprolactinoma and to respond 
*The precise cut-off figure for a satisfactory cortisol and GH response 
depends on the assay used and so varies between centres.
Use
• Assessment of the HPA axis
• Assessment of growth hormone deficiency
• Indicated when there is doubt after the other tests in  
Box 20.58
• Usually performed in specialist centres, especially in children
• IV glucose and hydrocortisone must be available for 
resuscitation
Contraindications
• Ischaemic heart disease
• Epilepsy
• Severe hypopituitarism (0800 hrs plasma cortisol  
< 180 nmol/L (6.6 µg/dL))
Dose
• 0.15 U/kg body weight soluble insulin IV
Aim
• To produce adequate hypoglycaemia (tachycardia and 
sweating with blood glucose < 2.2 mmol/L (40 mg/dL))
Blood samples
• 0, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120 mins for blood glucose, plasma 
cortisol and growth hormone
Results
• Normal subjects: GH > 6.7 µg/L (20 mU/L)*
• Normal subjects: cortisol > 550 nmol/L (∼20.2 µg/dL)*
20.61  How and when to do an insulin 
tolerance test
hypo­thyroidism, measuring TSH is not helpful in adjust-
ing the replacement dose because patients with hypo­
pituitarism often secrete glycoproteins which are 
measured in the TSH assays but are not bioactive. The 
aim is to maintain serum T4 in the upper part of the refer-
ence range. It is dangerous to give thyroid replacement 
in adrenal insufficiency without first giving glucocorti-
coid therapy, since this may precipitate adrenal crisis.
Sex hormone replacement
This is indicated if there is gonadotrophin deficiency in 
women under the age of 50 and in men to restore normal 
sexual function and to prevent osteoporosis (p. 1120).
Growth hormone replacement
Growth hormone (GH) is administered by daily subcu-
taneous self-injection to children and adolescents with 
GH deficiency and, until recently, was discontinued 
once the epiphyses had fused. However, although hypo-
pituitary adults receiving ‘full’ replacement with hydro-
cortisone, levothyroxine and sex steroids are usually 
much improved by these therapies, some individuals 
remain lethargic and unwell compared with a healthy 
population. Some of these patients feel better, and have 
objective improvements in their fat : muscle mass ratios 
and other metabolic parameters, if they are also given 
GH replacement. Treatment with GH may also help 
young adults to achieve a higher peak bone mineral 
density. The principal side-effect is sodium retention, 
manifest as peripheral oedema or carpal tunnel syn-
drome. For this reason, GH replacement should be 
Endocrine disease
20
790
to a dopamine agonist with shrinkage of the lesion, 
making surgery unnecessary (see Fig. 20.28).
Most operations on the pituitary are performed using 
the trans-sphenoidal approach via the nostrils, while 
transfrontal surgery via a craniotomy is reserved for 
suprasellar tumours. It is uncommon to be able to resect 
lateral extensions into the cavernous sinuses. All opera-
tions on the pituitary carry a risk of damaging normal 
endocrine function; this risk increases with the size of 
the primary lesion.
Pituitary function (see Box 20.58, p. 787) should be 
retested 4–6 weeks following surgery, primarily to 
detect the development of any new hormone deficits. 
Rarely, the surgical treatment of a sellar lesion can result 
in recovery of hormone secretion that was deficient 
pre-operatively.
Following surgery, usually after 3–6 months, imaging 
should be repeated and, if there is a significant residual 
mass and the histology confirms an anterior pituitary 
tumour, external radiotherapy may be given to reduce 
the risk of recurrence. Radiotherapy is not useful in 
patients requiring urgent therapy because it takes many 
months or years to be effective and there is a risk of acute 
swelling of the mass. Fractionated radiotherapy carries 
a life-long risk of hypopituitarism (50–70% in the first 
10 years) and annual pituitary function tests are obliga-
tory. There is also concern that radiotherapy might 
impair cognitive function, cause vascular changes and 
even induce primary brain tumours, but these side-
effects have not been quantified reliably and are likely 
to be rare. Stereotactic radiosurgery, best delivered by 
the ‘gamma knife’, allows specific targeting of residual 
disease in a more focused fashion.
Non-functioning tumours should be followed up 
by repeated imaging at intervals that depend on the size 
of the lesion and on whether or not radiotherapy has 
been administered. For smaller lesions that are not 
causing mass effects, therapeutic surgery may not be 
indicated and the lesion may simply be monitored by 
serial neuroimaging without a clear-cut diagnosis 
having been established.
Hyperprolactinaemia/galactorrhoea
Hyperprolactinaemia is a common abnormality which 
usually presents with hypogonadism and/or galactor-
rhoea (lactation in the absence of breastfeeding). Since 
Surgery
Radiotherapy
Medical
Comment
Non-functioning 
pituitary macroadenoma
1st line
2nd line
–
Prolactinoma
2nd line
2nd line
1st line
Dopamine agonists
Dopamine agonists usually cause 
macroadenomas to shrink
Acromegaly
1st line
2nd line
2nd line
Somatostatin analogues
Dopamine agonists
GH receptor antagonists
Medical therapy does not reliably cause 
macroadenomas to shrink
Radiotherapy and medical therapy are used in 
combination for inoperable tumours
Cushing’s disease
1st line
2nd line
–
Radiotherapy may be more effective in children 
than in adults and appears to cause less 
hypopituitarism in the long-term
Craniopharyngioma
1st line
2nd line
–
20.62  Therapeutic modalities for hypothalamic and pituitary tumours
prolactin stimulates milk secretion but not breast devel-
opment, galactorrhoea rarely occurs in men and only 
does so if gynaecomastia has been induced by hypo­
gonadism (p. 760). The differential diagnosis of hyper­
prolactinaemia is shown in Box 20.63. Many drugs, 
especially dopamine antagonists, elevate prolactin con-
centrations. Pituitary tumours can cause hyperprolacti-
naemia by directly secreting prolactin (prolactinomas, 
see below), or by compressing the infundibular stalk 
Physiological
• Stress (e.g. post-seizure)
• Pregnancy
• Lactation
• Nipple stimulation
• Sleep
• Coitus
• Exercise
• Baby crying
Drug-induced
Dopamine antagonists
• Antipsychotics 
(phenothiazines and 
butyrophenones)
• Antidepressants
• Antiemetics (e.g. 
metoclopramide, 
domperidone)
Dopamine-depleting drugs
• Reserpine
• Methyldopa
Oestrogens
• Oral contraceptive pill
Pathological
Common
• Disconnection 
hyperprolactinaemia (e.g. 
non-functioning pituitary 
macroadenoma)
• Prolactinoma (usually 
microadenoma)
• Primary hypothyroidism
• Polycystic ovarian 
syndrome
• Macroprolactinaemia
Uncommon
• Pituitary tumour secreting 
prolactin and growth 
hormone
• Hypothalamic disease
• Renal failure
Rare
• Chest wall reflex (e.g. post-herpes zoster)
20.63  Causes of hyperprolactinaemia
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland 
20
791
Levels above 5000 mU/L are highly suggestive of a 
macroprolactinoma.
Patients with prolactin excess should have tests of 
gonadal function (p. 757), and T4 and TSH should be 
measured to exclude primary hypothyroidism causing 
TRH-induced prolactin excess. Unless the prolactin 
falls after withdrawal of relevant drug therapy, a serum 
prolactin consistently above the reference range is an 
indication for MRI or CT scan of the hypothalamus and 
pituitary. Patients with a macroadenoma also need tests 
for hypopituitarism (see Box 20.58).
Management
If possible, the underlying cause should be corrected (for 
example, cessation of offending drugs and giving levo­
thyroxine replacement in primary hypothyroidism). If 
dopamine antagonists are the cause, then dopamine 
agonist therapy is contraindicated, and if gonadal dys-
function is the primary concern, sex steroid replacement 
therapy may be indicated. Troublesome physiological 
galactorrhoea can also be treated with dopamine ago-
nists (see Box 20.64). Management of prolactinomas is 
described below.
Prolactinoma
Most prolactinomas in pre-menopausal women are 
microadenomas because the symptoms of prolactin 
excess usually result in early presentation. Prolactin-
secreting cells of the anterior pituitary share a common 
lineage with GH-secreting cells, so occasionally prolac-
tinomas can secrete excess GH and cause acromegaly. In 
prolactinomas there is a relationship between prolactin 
concentration and tumour size: the higher the level, 
the bigger the tumour. Some macroprolactinomas can 
elevate prolactin concentrations above 100 000 mU/L. 
The investigation of prolactinomas is the same as for 
other pituitary tumours (see above).
Management
As shown in Box 20.62, several therapeutic modalities 
can be employed in the management of prolactinomas.
Medical
Dopamine agonist drugs are first-line therapy for the 
majority of patients (Box 20.64). They usually reduce 
and thus interrupting the tonic inhibitory effect of 
hypothalamic dopamine on prolactin secretion (‘discon-
nection’ hyperprolactinaemia).
Prolactin usually circulates as a free (monomeric) 
hormone in plasma, but in some individuals prolactin 
becomes bound to an IgG antibody. This complex 
is known as macroprolactin and such patients 
have macroprolactinaemia (not to be confused with 
macro-prolactinoma, a prolactin-secreting pituitary 
tumour of more than 1 cm in diameter). Since macropro-
lactin cannot cross blood-vessel walls to reach prolactin 
receptors in target tissues, it is of no pathological 
significance. Some commercial prolactin assays do 
not distinguish prolactin from macroprolactin and so 
macroprolactinaemia is a cause of spurious hyperpro­
lactinaemia. Identification of macroprolactin requires 
gel filtration chromatography or polyethylene glycol 
precipitation techniques, and one of these tests should 
be performed in all patients with hyperprolactinaemia if 
the prolactin assay is known to cross-react.
Clinical assessment
In women, in addition to galactorrhoea, hypogonadism 
associated with hyperprolactinaemia causes secondary 
amenorrhoea and anovulation with infertility (p. 759). 
Important points in the history include drug use, recent 
pregnancy and menstrual history. The quantity of milk 
produced is variable, and it may be observed only by 
manual expression. In men there is decreased libido, 
reduced shaving frequency and lethargy (p. 760). Uni-
lateral galactorrhoea may be confused with nipple dis-
charge, and breast examination to exclude malignancy 
or fibrocystic disease is important. Further assessment 
should address the features in Figure 20.27 (p. 788).
Investigations
Pregnancy should first be excluded before further inves-
tigations are performed in women of child-bearing 
potential. The upper limit of normal for many assays of 
serum prolactin is approximately 500 mU/L (14 ng/mL). 
In non-pregnant and non-lactating patients, monomeric 
prolactin concentrations of 500–1000 mU/L are likely to 
be induced by stress or drugs, and a repeat measure-
ment is indicated. Levels between 1000 and 5000 mU/L 
are likely to be due to either drugs, or a micro­
prolactinoma or ‘disconnection’ hyperprolactinaemia. 
Oral dose*
Advantages
Disadvantages
Bromocriptine
2.5–15 mg/day
2–3 times daily
Available for parenteral use
Short half-life; useful in treating 
infertility
Proven long-term efficacy
Ergotamine-like side-effects (nausea, headache, 
postural hypotension, constipation)
Frequent dosing so poor compliance
Rare reports of fibrotic reactions in various tissues
Cabergoline
250–1000 µg/week
2 doses/week
Long-acting, so missed doses less 
important
Reported to have fewer ergotamine-like 
side-effects
Limited data on safety in pregnancy
Associated with cardiac valvular fibrosis in 
Parkinson’s disease
Quinagolide
50–150 µg/day
Once daily
A non-ergot with few side-effects in 
patients intolerant of the above
Untested in pregnancy
*Tolerance develops for the side-effects. All of these agents, especially bromocriptine, must be introduced at low dose and increased slowly. If several doses of 
bromocriptine are missed, the process must start again.
20.64  Dopamine agonist therapy: drugs used to treat prolactinomas
Endocrine disease
20
792
serum prolactin concentrations and cause significant 
tumour shrinkage after several months of therapy (Fig. 
20.28), but visual field defects, if present, may improve 
within days of first administration. It is possible to with-
draw dopamine agonist therapy without recurrence of 
hyperprolactinaemia after a few years of treatment in 
some patients with a microadenoma. Also, after the 
menopause, suppression of prolactin is only required in 
microadenomas if galactorrhoea is troublesome, since 
hypogonadism is then physiological and tumour growth 
unlikely. In patients with macroadenomas, drugs can 
only be withdrawn after curative surgery or radio­
therapy and under close supervision.
Ergot-derived dopamine agonists (bromocriptine 
and cabergoline) can bind to 5-HT2B receptors in the 
heart and elsewhere and have been associated with 
fibrotic reactions, particularly tricuspid valve regurgita-
tion, when used in high doses in patients with 
Parkinson’s disease. At the relatively low doses used 
in prolactinomas most data suggest that systematic 
screening for cardiac fibrosis is unnecessary, but if 
dopamine agonist therapy is prolonged, periodic screen-
ing by echocardiography or use of non-ergot agents 
(quinagolide) may be indicated.
Surgery and radiotherapy
Surgical decompression is usually only necessary when 
a macroprolactinoma has failed to shrink sufficiently 
with dopamine agonist therapy, and this may be because 
the tumour has a significant cystic component. Surgery 
may also be performed in patients who are intolerant of 
dopamine agonists. Microadenomas can be removed 
selectively by trans-sphenoidal surgery with a cure rate 
of about 80% but recurrence is not unusual; the cure rate 
for surgery in macroadenomas is substantially lower.
External irradiation may be required for some macro­
adenomas to prevent regrowth if dopamine agonists are 
stopped.
Pregnancy
Hyperprolactinaemia often presents with infertility, so 
dopamine agonist therapy may be followed by preg-
nancy. Patients with microadenomas should be advised 
to withdraw dopamine agonist therapy as soon as preg-
nancy is confirmed. In contrast, macroprolactinomas 
may enlarge rapidly under oestrogen stimulation and 
these patients should continue dopamine agonist 
therapy and need measurement of prolactin levels and 
visual fields during pregnancy. All patients should be 
advised to report headache or visual disturbance 
promptly.
Acromegaly
Acromegaly is caused by growth hormone (GH) secre-
tion from a pituitary tumour, usually a macroadenoma, 
and carries an approximate two-fold excess mortality 
when untreated.
Clinical features
If GH hypersecretion occurs before puberty, then the 
presentation is with gigantism. More commonly, GH 
excess occurs in adult life and presents with acromegaly. 
If hypersecretion starts in adolescence and persists into 
adult life, then the two conditions may be combined. The 
clinical features are shown in Figure 20.29. The most 
common complaints are headache and sweating. Addi-
tional features include those of any pituitary tumour 
(see Fig. 20.27, p. 788).
Investigations
The clinical diagnosis must be confirmed by measuring 
GH levels during an oral glucose tolerance test and 
measuring serum IGF-1. In normal subjects, plasma GH 
suppresses to below 0.5 µg/L (approximately 2 mU/L). 
In acromegaly, GH does not suppress and in about 30% 
of patients there is a paradoxical rise; IGF-1 is also ele-
vated. The rest of pituitary function should be investi-
gated as described in Box 20.58 (p. 787). Prolactin 
concentrations are elevated in about 30% of patients due 
to co-secretion of prolactin from the tumour. Additional 
tests in acromegaly may include screening for colonic 
neoplasms with colonoscopy.
Management
The main aims are to improve symptoms and to normal-
ise serum GH and IGF-1 to reduce morbidity and mor-
tality. Treatment is summarised in Box 20.62.
Surgical
Trans-sphenoidal surgery is usually the first line of treat-
ment and may result in cure of GH excess, especially in 
patients with microadenomas. More often, surgery 
serves to debulk the tumour and further second-line 
therapy is required, according to post-operative imaging 
and glucose tolerance test results.
Fig. 20.28  Shrinkage of a macroprolactinoma following 
treatment with a dopamine agonist. A MRI scan showing a pituitary 
macroadenoma (T) compressing the optic chiasm (C).  B MRI scan of the 
same tumour following treatment with a dopamine agonist. The 
macroadenoma, which was a prolactinoma, has decreased in size 
substantially and is no longer compressing the optic chiasm. 
A
B
T
C
T
C
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland 
20
793
Fig. 20.29  Clinical features of acromegaly. (IGT = impaired glucose tolerance) 
Skull growth – prominent
supraorbital ridges with large
frontal sinuses
Prognathism
(growth of lower jaw)
Enlargement of lips,
nose and tongue
Headache
Hypertension
Increased sweating
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiovascular disease
(2–3 × ↑)
Enlargement of liver
Thickened skin
IGT (25%)/type 2
diabetes (10%)
Colonic cancer
(2–3 × ↑)
Enlargement of hands
Arthropathy
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Myopathy
Enlargement of feet
Increased heel pad thickness
Radiotherapy
External radiotherapy is usually employed as second-
line treatment if acromegaly persists after surgery, to 
stop tumour growth and lower GH levels. However, GH 
levels fall slowly (over many years) and there is a risk 
of hypopituitarism.
Medical
If acromegaly persists after surgery, medical therapy 
is usually employed to lower GH levels to below 
1.5 µg/L (below approximately 5 mU/L) and to normal-
ise IGF-1 concentrations. Medical therapy may be dis-
continued after several years in patients who have 
received radiotherapy. Somatostatin analogues (such 
as octreotide or lanreotide) can be administered as 
slow-release injections every few weeks. Somatostatin 
analogues can also be used as primary therapy for 
acromegaly either as an alternative or in advance of 
surgery, given evidence that they can induce modest 
tumour shrinkage in some patients. Dopamine agonists 
are less effective at lowering GH but may sometimes be 
helpful, especially with associated prolactin excess. 
Pegvisomant is a peptide GH receptor antagonist admin-
istered by daily self-injection and may be indicated in 
some patients whose GH and IGF-1 concentrations fail 
to suppress sufficiently following somatostatin analogue 
therapy.
Craniopharyngioma
Craniopharyngiomas are benign tumours that develop 
in cell rests of Rathke’s pouch, and may be located 
within the sella turcica, or commonly in the suprasellar 
space. They are often cystic, with a solid component that 
may or may not be calcified (Fig. 20.30). In young people, 
they are diagnosed more commonly than pituitary ade-
nomas. They may present with pressure effects on adja-
cent structures, hypopituitarism and/or cranial diabetes 
insipidus. Other clinical features directly related to 
hypothalamic damage may also occur. These include 
hyperphagia and obesity, loss of the sensation of thirst 
and disturbance of temperature regulation.
Craniopharyngiomas can be treated by the trans-
sphenoidal route but surgery may also involve a crani-
otomy, with a relatively high risk of hypothalamic 
damage and other complications. If the tumour has a 
large cystic component, it may be safer to place in the 
cyst cavity a drain which is attached to a subcutaneous 
access device, rather than attempt a resection. Whatever 
form it takes, surgery is unlikely to be curative and 
radiotherapy is usually given to reduce the risk of 
relapse. Unfortunately, craniopharyngiomas often recur, 
requiring repeated surgery. They often cause consider-
able morbidity, usually from hypothalamic obesity, 
water balance problems and/or visual failure.
Endocrine disease
20
794
insipidus may not be manifest until glucocorticoid 
replacement therapy is given. The most common dif-
ferential diagnosis is primary polydipsia, caused by 
drinking excessive amounts of fluid in the absence of a 
defect in ADH or thirst control.
Investigations
Diabetes insipidus can be confirmed if serum ADH is 
undetectable (although the assay for this is not widely 
available) or the urine is not maximally concentrated (i.e. 
is below 600 mOsm/kg) in the presence of increased 
plasma osmolality (i.e. greater than 300 mOsm/kg). 
Sometimes, the diagnosis can be confirmed or refuted by 
random simultaneous samples of blood and urine, but 
more often a dynamic test is required. The water depri-
vation test described in Box 20.66 is widely used, but an 
alternative is to infuse hypertonic (5%) saline and 
measure ADH secretion in response to increasing plasma 
osmolality. Thirst can also be assessed during these tests 
on a visual analogue scale. Anterior pituitary function 
and suprasellar anatomy should be assessed in patients 
with cranial diabetes insipidus (see Box 20.58, p. 787).
In primary polydipsia, the urine may be excessively 
dilute because of chronic diuresis, which ‘washes out’ 
the solute gradient across the loop of Henle, but plasma 
osmolality is low rather than high. DDAVP (see below) 
should not be administered to patients with primary 
polydipsia, since it will prevent excretion of water and 
there is a risk of severe water intoxication if the patient 
continues to drink fluid to excess.
In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, appropriate 
further tests include plasma electrolytes, calcium and 
investigation of the renal tract (Chs 16 and 17).
Management
Treatment of cranial diabetes insipidus is with des-
amino-des-aspartate-arginine 
vasopressin 
(desmo-
pressin, DDAVP), an analogue of ADH which has a 
Diabetes insipidus
This uncommon disorder is characterised by the per­
sistent excretion of excessive quantities of dilute urine 
and by thirst. It is classified into two types:
•	 cranial diabetes insipidus, in which there is 
deficient production of ADH by the hypothalamus
•	 nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, in which the renal 
tubules are unresponsive to ADH.
The underlying causes are listed in Box 20.65.
Clinical features
The most marked symptoms are polyuria and polydip-
sia. The patient may pass 5–20 L or more of urine in 
24 hours. This is of low specific gravity and osmolality. 
If the patient has an intact thirst mechanism, is conscious 
and has access to oral fluids, then he or she can maintain 
adequate fluid intake. However, in an unconscious 
patient or a patient with damage to the hypothalamic 
thirst centre, diabetes insipidus is potentially lethal. If 
there is associated cortisol deficiency, then diabetes 
Fig. 20.30  Craniopharyngioma.  A This developmental tumour 
characteristically presents in younger patients; it is often cystic and 
calcified, as shown in this MRI scan (arrows).  B Pathology specimen. 
A
B
Cranial
Structural hypothalamic or high stalk lesion
• See Box 20.59
Idiopathic
Genetic defect
• Dominant (AVP gene mutation)
• Recessive (DIDMOAD syndrome – association of diabetes 
insipidus with diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness)
Nephrogenic
Genetic defect
• V2 receptor mutation
• Aquaporin-2 mutation
• Cystinosis
Metabolic abnormality
• Hypokalaemia
• Hypercalcaemia
Drug therapy
• Lithium
• Demeclocycline
Poisoning
• Heavy metals
Chronic kidney disease
• Polycystic kidney disease
• Sickle-cell anaemia
• Infiltrative disease
20.65  Causes of diabetes insipidus
Disorders affecting multiple endocrine glands
20
795
Use
• To establish a diagnosis of diabetes insipidus and to 
differentiate cranial from nephrogenic causes
Protocol
• No coffee, tea or smoking on the test day
• Free fluids until 0730 hrs on the morning of the test, but 
discourage patients from ‘stocking up’ with extra fluid in 
anticipation of fluid deprivation
• No fluids from 0730 hrs
• Attend at 0830 hrs for body weight, plasma and urine 
osmolality
• Record body weight, urine volume, urine and plasma 
osmolality and thirst score on a visual analogue scale every 
2 hrs for up to 8 hrs
• Stop the test if the patient loses 3% of body weight
• If plasma osmolality reaches > 300 mOsm/kg and urine 
osmolality < 600 mOsm/kg, then administer DDAVP (see text) 
2 µg IM
Interpretation
• Diabetes insipidus is confirmed by a plasma osmolality  
> 300 mOsm/kg with a urine osmolality < 600 mOsm/kg
• Cranial diabetes insipidus is confirmed if urine osmolality 
rises by at least 50% after DDAVP
• Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is confirmed if DDAVP does 
not concentrate the urine
• Primary polydipsia is suggested by low plasma osmolality at 
the start of the test
20.66  How and when to do a water 
deprivation test
longer half-life. DDAVP is usually administered intra-
nasally. An oral formulation is also available but bio­
availability is low and rather unpredictable. In sick 
patients, DDAVP should be given by intramuscular 
injection. The dose of DDAVP should be adjusted on the 
basis of serum sodium concentrations and/or osmolal-
ity. The principal hazard is excessive treatment, result-
ing in water intoxication and hyponatraemia. Conversely, 
inadequate treatment results in thirst and polyuria. The 
ideal dose prevents nocturia but allows a degree of poly-
uria from time to time before the next dose (e.g. DDAVP 
nasal dose 5 µg in the morning and 10 µg at night).
The polyuria in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is 
improved by thiazide diuretics (e.g. bendroflumethia­
zide 5–10 mg/day), amiloride (5–10 mg/day) and 
NSAIDs (e.g. indometacin 15 mg 3 times daily), although 
the last of these carries a risk of reducing glomerular 
filtration rate.
• Late presentation: often with large tumours causing visual 
disturbance, because early symptoms such as amenorrhoea 
and sexual dysfunction do not occur or are not recognised.
• Coincidentally discovered pituitary tumours: may not 
require surgical intervention if the visual apparatus is not 
involved, because of slow growth. Radiotherapy alone is 
sometimes employed simply to prevent further growth.
• Hyperprolactinaemia: less impact in post-menopausal 
women who are already ‘physiologically’ hypogonadal. 
Macroprolactinomas, however, require treatment because of 
their potential to cause mass effects.
20.67  The pituitary and hypothalamus in old age
MEN 1 (Wermer’s syndrome)
• Primary hyperparathyroidism
• Pituitary tumours
• Pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours (insulinoma, gastrinoma)
MEN 2 (Sipple’s syndrome)
• Primary hyperparathyroidism
• Medullary carcinoma of thyroid
• Phaeochromocytoma
In addition, in MEN 2b syndrome, there are phenotypic changes 
(including marfanoid habitus, skeletal abnormalities, abnormal 
dental enamel, multiple mucosal neuromas)
20.68  Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 
syndromes
The MEN syndromes should be considered in all 
patients with two or more endocrine tumours and in 
patients with solitary tumours who report other endo-
crine tumours in their family. Inactivating mutations in 
MENIN, a tumour suppressor gene on chromosome 11, 
cause MEN 1, whereas MEN 2 is caused by gain-of-
function mutations in the RET proto-oncogene on chro-
mosome 10. These cause constitutive activation of the 
membrane-associated tyrosine kinase RET, which con-
trols the development of cells that migrate from the 
neural crest. In contrast, loss-of-function mutations of 
the RET kinase cause Hirschsprung’s disease (p. 917). 
Genetic testing can be performed on relatives of affected 
individuals, after appropriate counselling (p. 67).
Individuals who carry mutations associated with 
MEN should be entered into a surveillance programme. 
In MEN 1, this typically involves annual history, 
examination and measurements of serum calcium, 
gastrointestinal hormones (see Box 20.54, p. 785) and 
prolactin; MRI of the pituitary and pancreas is per-
formed at less frequent intervals. In individuals with 
MEN 2, annual history, examination and measurement 
of serum calcium and urinary catecholamine metabolites 
should be performed. Because the penetrance of medul-
lary carcinoma of the thyroid is 100% in individuals with 
a RET mutation, prophylactic thyroidectomy should be 
performed in early childhood.
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes
Two distinct autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes are 
known: APS types 1 and 2.
DISORDERS AFFECTING MULTIPLE 
ENDOCRINE GLANDS
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
Multiple endocrine neoplasias (MEN) are rare auto-
somal dominant syndromes characterised by hyperpla-
sia and formation of adenomas or malignant tumours in 
multiple glands. They fall into two groups, as shown 
in Box 20.68. Some other genetic diseases also have 
an increased risk of endocrine tumours; for example, 
phaeochromocytoma is associated with von Hippel–
Lindau syndrome (p. 1216) and neurofibromatosis 
type 1 (p. 1215).
Endocrine disease
20
796
The most common is APS type 2 (Schmidt’s syn-
drome), which typically presents in women between the 
ages of 20 and 60. It is usually defined as the occurrence 
in the same individual of two or more autoimmune 
endocrine disorders, some of which are listed in Box 
20.69. The mode of inheritance is autosomal dominant 
with incomplete penetrance and there is a strong asso-
ciation with HLA-DR3 and CTLA-4.
Much less common is APS type 1, which is also 
termed autoimmune poly-endocrinopathy-candidiasis-
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). This is inherited in an 
autosomal recessive fashion and is caused by loss-of-
function mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene 
AIRE, which is responsible for the presentation of self-
antigens to thymocytes in utero. This is essential for the 
deletion of thymocyte clones that react against self-
antigens and hence for the development of immune tol-
erance (Ch. 4). The most common clinical features are 
described in Box 20.69, although the pattern of presenta-
tion is variable and other autoimmune disorders are 
often observed.
*In both types of APS, the precise pattern of disease varies between 
affected individuals.
Type 1 (APECED)
• Addison’s disease
• Hypoparathyroidism
• Type 1 diabetes
• Primary hypothyroidism
• Chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis
• Nail dystrophy
• Dental enamel hypoplasia
Type 2 (Schmidt’s syndrome)
• Addison’s disease
• Primary hypothyroidism
• Graves’ disease
• Pernicious anaemia
• Primary hypogonadism
• Type 1 diabetes
• Vitiligo
• Coeliac disease
• Myasthenia gravis
20.69  Autoimmune polyendocrine 
syndromes (APS)*
Late effects of childhood cancer therapy
Prolonged survival is increasingly common following 
successful treatment of cancers in children and ado­
lescents. The therapies used to treat these diseases, 
including radiotherapy and chemotherapy, may cause 
long-term endocrine dysfunction. In many circum-
stances this is predictable, such as cytotoxic chemo­
therapy causing future infertility and pubertal delay 
(especially in boys), cranial irradiation causing long-
term pituitary dysfunction, and radiotherapy to the neck 
causing hypothyroidism and thyroid cancer. Increasing 
recognition of these issues has resulted in active moni-
toring programmes for survivors of childhood cancer, 
who are best seen in specialist ‘late effects’ multidiscipli-
nary clinics where teams include endocrinologists, 
oncologists, reproductive medicine specialists, psychol-
ogists and nurse specialists.
Further information
Websites
www.british-thyroid-association.org British Thyroid 
Association: provider of guidelines, e.g. for use of thyroid 
function tests.
www.btf-thyroid.org British Thyroid Foundation: a resource for 
patient leaflets and support for patients with thyroid disorders.
www.endocrinology.org British Society for Endocrinology: 
useful online education resources and links to patient support 
group.
www.endo-society.org American Endocrine Society: provider of 
clinical practice guidelines.
www.pituitary.org.uk Pituitary Foundation: a resource for 
patient and general practitioner leaflets and further 
information.
www.thyroid.org American Thyroid Association: provider of 
clinical practice guidelines.
797
21 
Clinical examination of the patient with 
diabetes 798
Functional anatomy and physiology 800
Normal glucose and fat metabolism 800
Aetiology and pathogenesis of diabetes 802
Investigations 807
Presenting problems in diabetes  
mellitus 808
Newly discovered hyperglycaemia 808
Long-term supervision of diabetes 811
Diabetic ketoacidosis 811
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state 814
Hypoglycaemia 814
Diabetes in pregnancy 817
Children, adolescents and young adults with 
diabetes 818
Hyperglycaemia in acute myocardial  
infarction 818
Surgery and diabetes 818
Complications of diabetes 820
Diabetes mellitus
E.R. Pearson
R.J. McCrimmon
Management of diabetes 820
Diet and lifestyle 820
Drugs to reduce hyperglycaemia 821
Insulin therapy 824
Transplantation 826
Complications of diabetes 826
Diabetic retinopathy 828
Diabetic nephropathy 830
Diabetic neuropathy 831
The diabetic foot 833
Diabetes mellitus
798
Inset (Acanthosis nigricans) From Shotliff. In: Lim 2007 – see p. 836. 
Observation
Abdomen
Hepatomegaly
(fatty infiltration of liver)
9
• Weight loss in insulin deficiency
• Obesity in type 2 diabetes
• Mucosal candidiasis
• Dehydration– dry mouth,
  ↓tissue turgor
• Air hunger– Kussmaul breathing
  in ketoacidosis
Legs
Muscle-wasting
Sensory abnormality
Hair loss
Tendon reflexes
10
Hands
(see opposite)
1
Exudative
maculopathy
7
Blood pressure 3
2
Skin
Bullosis
Pigmentation
Granuloma annulare
Vitiligo
Axillae 4
6
Acanthosis nigricans
in insulin resistance
Necrobiosis lipoidica
‘Prayer sign’
Neuropathic foot ulcer
Charcot neuroarthropathy
8
11 Feet (see opposite)
Inspection
Peripheral pulses
Sensation
5
Neck
Carotid pulses
Bruits
Thyroid enlargement
Head
Xanthelasma
Cranial nerve palsy/
eye movements/ptosis
Eyes (see opposite)
Visual acuity
Cataract/lens opacity
Fundoscopy
Insulin injection sites
(see opposite)
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH DIABETES
Clinical examination of the patient with diabetes
799
8  Insulin injection sites
Main areas used
• Anterior abdominal wall
• Upper thighs/buttocks
• Upper outer arms
Inspection
• Bruising
• Subcutaneous fat deposition 
(lipohypertrophy)
• Subcutaneous fat loss (lipoatrophy; 
associated with injection of unpurified 
animal insulins – now rare)
• Erythema, infection (rare)
7  Examination of the eyes
Visual acuity
• Distance vision using Snellen chart at 
6 metres
• Near vision using standard reading 
chart
Visual acuity can alter reversibly with 
acute hyperglycaemia due to osmotic 
changes affecting the lens. Most patients 
with retinopathy do not have altered 
visual acuity, except after a vitreous 
haemorrhage or in some cases of 
maculopathy.
Lens opacification
• Look for the red reflex using the 
ophthalmoscope held 30 cm from  
the eye
Fundal examination
• Either use a three-field retinal camera 
or dilate pupils with a mydriatic (e.g. 
tropicamide) and examine with 
ophthalmoscope in a darkened room
• Note features of diabetic retinopathy 
(p. 828), including photocoagulation 
scars from previous laser treatment
Diabetes can affect every system in 
the body. In routine clinical practice, 
examination of the patient with dia-
betes is focused on 1  hands, 3  
blood pressure, 4  and 5  axillae 
and neck, 7  eyes, 8  insulin injec-
tion sites and 11  feet.
Background retinopathy. 
Proliferative retinopathy. 
1  Examination of the hands
Several abnormalities are more common 
in diabetes:
• Limited joint mobility 
(‘cheiroarthropathy’) causes painless 
stiffness. The inability to extend  
(to 180°) the metacarpophalangeal  
or interphalangeal joints of at  
least one finger bilaterally  
can be demonstrated in the  
‘prayer sign’
• Dupuytren’s contracture (p. 1134) 
causes nodules or thickening of the 
skin and knuckle pads
• Carpal tunnel syndrome (p. 1224) 
presents with wrist pain radiating into 
the hand
• Trigger finger (flexor tenosynovitis)
• Muscle-wasting/sensory changes  
may be present in peripheral 
sensorimotor neuropathy, although 
this is more common in the  
lower limbs
Lipohypertrophy of the upper arm. 
11	 Examination of the feet
Inspection
• Look for evidence of callus formation 
on weight-bearing areas, clawing of 
the toes (in neuropathy), loss of the 
plantar arch, discoloration of the skin 
(ischaemia), localised infection and 
ulcers
• Deformity may be present, especially 
in Charcot neuroarthropathy
• Fungal infection may affect skin 
between toes, and nails
Circulation
• Peripheral pulses, skin temperature 
and capillary refill may be abnormal
Sensation
• Abnormal in stocking distribution in 
typical peripheral sensorimotor 
neuropathy
• Testing light touch with 
monofilaments is sufficient for risk 
assessment; test other sensation 
modalities (vibration, pain, 
proprioception) only when neuropathy 
is being evaluated
Reflexes
• Loss of ankle reflexes in typical 
sensorimotor neuropathy
• Test plantar and ankle reflexes
Monofilaments. The monofilament is 
applied gently until slightly deformed at 5 
points on each foot. Callus should be 
avoided as sensation is reduced. If the 
patient feels fewer than 8 out of 10 touches, 
the risk of foot ulceration is increased 
5–10-fold. 
Diabetes mellitus
21
800
Fig. 21.1  Prevalence (%) of diabetes in those aged 20–79 years, 2011, based on estimates from the International Diabetes 
Federation. 
4–5
<4
5–7
7–9
9–12
>12
and economic development. A pronounced rise in the 
prevalence of type 2 diabetes occurs in migrant popula-
tions to industrialised countries, as in Asian and Afro-
Caribbean immigrants to the UK or USA. Type 2 diabetes 
is now being observed in children and adolescents, par-
ticularly in some ethnic groups, such as Hispanics and 
Afro-Americans.
The incidence of type 1 diabetes is also increasing, 
such that between 1960 and 1996, 3% more children were 
diagnosed worldwide each year. Type 1 diabetes is gen-
erally more common in countries closer to the polar 
regions. Finland, for instance, has the highest rate of 
type 1 diagnosis per year at around 40 per 100 000 of the 
population, whereas in China the incidence is only 0.1 
per 100 000 of the population. Type 1 diabetes is most 
common in Caucasians and more people are diagnosed 
in the winter months.
Diabetes is a major burden upon health-care facilities 
in all countries. Globally, diabetes caused 4.6 million 
deaths in 2011, and health-care expenditure attributed 
to diabetes was estimated to be at least US$465 billion, 
or 11% of total health-care expenditure.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY
Normal glucose and fat metabolism
Blood glucose is tightly regulated and maintained within 
a narrow range. This is essential for ensuring a continu-
ous supply of glucose to the central nervous system. The 
brain has little capacity to store energy in the form of 
glycogen or triglyceride and the blood–brain barrier is 
largely impermeable to fatty acids, so the brain depends 
on the liver for a constant supply of glucose for oxida-
tion and hence generation of adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP). Glucose homeostasis is achieved through the 
coordinated actions of multiple organs, but mainly 
reflects a balance between the entry of glucose into the 
circulation from the liver, supplemented by intestinal 
Diabetes mellitus is a clinical syndrome characterised 
by an increase in plasma blood glucose (hyperglycae-
mia). Diabetes has many causes (see Box 21.5, p. 807) 
but is most commonly due to type 1 or type 2 diabetes. 
Type 1 diabetes is caused by autoimmune destruction 
of insulin-producing cells (β cells) in the pancreas, 
resulting in absolute insulin deficiency, whereas type 2 
diabetes is characterised by resistance to the action of 
insulin and an inability to produce sufficient insulin to 
overcome this ‘insulin resistance’. Hyperglycaemia 
results in both acute and long-term problems. Acutely, 
high glucose and lack of insulin can result in marked 
symptoms, metabolic decompensation and hospital­
isation. Chronic hyperglycaemia is responsible for 
diabetes-specific ‘microvascular’ complications affecting 
the eyes (retinopathy), kidneys (nephropathy) and feet 
(neuropathy).
There is a continuous distribution of blood glucose in 
the population, with no clear division between people 
with normal and abnormal values. The diagnostic cri­
teria for diabetes (a fasting plasma glucose ≥ 7.0 mmol/L 
(126 mg/dL) or glucose 2 hours after an oral glucose 
challenge ≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL); see p. 807) have 
been selected to identify those who have a degree 
of hyperglycaemia which, if untreated, carries a signifi-
cant risk of microvascular disease, and in particular dia-
betic retinopathy. Less severe hyperglycaemia is called 
‘impaired glucose tolerance’. This is not associated with 
a substantial risk of microvascular disease, but is con-
nected with an increased risk of large vessel disease (e.g. 
atheroma leading to myocardial infarction) and with a 
greater risk of developing diabetes in future.
The incidence of diabetes is rising. Globally, it is esti-
mated that 366 million people had diabetes in 2011 
(approximately 8.3% of the world population, or 3 new 
cases every 10 seconds), and this figure is expected to 
reach 552 million by 2030. This global pandemic princi-
pally involves type 2 diabetes, the prevalence of which 
varies considerably around the world (Fig. 21.1), being 
associated with differences in genetic as well as environ-
mental factors such as greater longevity, obesity, unsat-
isfactory diet, sedentary lifestyle, increasing urbanisation 
Functional anatomy and physiology
21
801
Fig. 21.2  Major metabolic pathways of fuel metabolism and the actions of insulin. ⊕ indicates stimulation and ⊖ indicates suppression by 
insulin. In response to a rise in blood glucose, e.g. after a meal, insulin is released, suppressing gluconeogenesis and promoting glycogen synthesis and 
storage. Insulin promotes the peripheral uptake of glucose, particularly in skeletal muscle, and encourages storage (as muscle glycogen). It also promotes 
protein synthesis and lipogenesis, and suppresses lipolysis. The release of intermediate metabolites, including amino acids (glutamine, alanine), 3-carbon 
intermediates in oxidation (lactate, pyruvate) and free fatty acids (FFAs), is controlled by insulin. In the absence of insulin, e.g. during fasting, these 
processes are reversed and favour gluconeogenesis in liver from glycogen, glycerol, amino acids and other 3-carbon precursors. 
Liver
Adipose tissue
Muscle
Gut
Gluconeogenesis
FFAs
Amino acids
Lactate
Pyruvate
Proteolysis
Glucose
Ketone
bodies
Oxidation
Glucose
Glycogen
Oxidation
FFAs
Triglycerides
Food
Glucose
Glycogen
Ketogenesis
Oxidation
Glycerol
FFAs
Glucose
Glycerol
+
absorption of glucose after meals, and the uptake of 
glucose by peripheral tissues, particularly skeletal 
muscle and brain.
After ingestion of a meal containing carbohydrate, 
normal blood glucose levels are maintained by:
•	 suppression of hepatic glucose production
•	 stimulation of hepatic glucose uptake
•	 stimulation of glucose uptake by peripheral tissues 
(Fig. 21.2).
Insulin, the primary regulator of glucose metabolism 
and storage (Box 21.1), is secreted from pancreatic β cells 
into the portal circulation in response to a rise in blood 
glucose (Fig. 21.3). A number of other factors released 
from the gut following food intake can augment insulin 
release, including amino acids and hormones such as 
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and gastrointestinal 
peptide (GIP). As a result, insulin release is greater when 
glucose is administered by mouth than when the same 
rise in plasma glucose is achieved by intravenous 
glucose infusion, a phenomenon termed the ‘incretin’ 
effect (see Fig. 21.3). The post-prandial rise in portal vein 
insulin and glucose, together with a fall in portal 
Increase
Decrease
Carbohydrate metabolism
Glucose transport (muscle, 
adipose tissue)
Glucose phosphorylation
Glycogen synthesis
Glycolysis
Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
activity
Pentose phosphate  
shunt
Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis
Lipid metabolism
Triglyceride synthesis
Fatty acid synthesis (liver)
Lipoprotein lipase activity 
(adipose tissue)
Lipolysis
Lipoprotein lipase (muscle)
Ketogenesis
Fatty acid oxidation (liver)
Protein metabolism
Amino acid transport
Protein synthesis
Protein degradation
21.1  Metabolic actions of insulin
Diabetes mellitus
21
802
Fig. 21.3  Pancreatic structure and endocrine function.  A The 
normal adult pancreas contains about 1 million islets, which are scattered 
throughout the exocrine parenchyma. Histology is shown in Figure 21.4. 
 B The core of each islet consists of β cells that produce insulin, and is 
surrounded by a cortex of endocrine cells that produce other hormones, 
including glucagon (α cells), somatostatin (δ cells) and pancreatic 
polypeptide (PP cells).  C Pro-insulin in the pancreatic β cell is cleaved to 
release insulin and equimolar amounts of inert C-peptide (connecting 
peptide). Measurement of C-peptide can be used to assess endogenous 
insulin secretory capacity.  D An acute first phase of insulin secretion 
occurs in response to an elevated blood glucose, followed by a sustained 
second phase.  E The incretin effect describes the observation that insulin 
secretion is greater when glucose is given by mouth than when glucose is 
administered intravenously to achieve the same rise in blood glucose 
concentrations. The additional stimulus to insulin secretion is mediated by 
release of peptides from the gut and these actions are exploited in 
incretin-based therapies (p. 823). 
Accessory ampulla
Ampulla
of Vater
Duodenum
Islet core (β cells)
Arteriole
Other islet cells
Venules
Pro-insulin
Pancreatic
β cell
1st phase
2nd phase
Basal
secretion
Insulin secretion
The incretin effect
Glucose stimulus
0–5
mins
Time
Time
After oral
glucose
After
intravenous
glucose
Insulin
C-peptide
Insulin
C
B
D
E
A
glucagon concentrations, suppresses hepatic glucose 
production and results in net hepatic glucose uptake. 
Depending on the size of the carbohydrate load, around 
one-quarter to one-third of ingested glucose is taken up 
in the liver. In addition, insulin stimulates glucose 
uptake in skeletal muscle and fat, mediated by the 
glucose transporter, GLUT 4.
When intestinal glucose absorption declines between 
meals, portal vein insulin and glucose concentrations 
fall while glucagon levels rise. This leads to increased 
hepatic glucose output via gluconeogenesis and glyco-
gen breakdown. The liver now resumes net glucose pro-
duction and glucose homeostasis is maintained. The 
main substrates for gluconeogenesis are glycerol and 
amino acids, as shown in Figure 21.2.
Adipocytes (and the liver) synthesise triglyceride 
from non-esterified (‘free’) fatty acids (FFAs) and gly­
cerol. Insulin is the major regulator not only of glucose 
metabolism but also of fatty acid metabolism. High 
insulin levels after meals promote triglyceride accumu-
lation. In contrast, in the fasting state, low insulin levels 
permit lipolysis and the release into the circulation of 
FFAs (and glycerol), which can be oxidised by many 
tissues. Their partial oxidation in the liver provides 
energy to drive gluconeogenesis and also produces 
ketone bodies (acetoacetate, which can be reduced to 
3-hydroxybutyrate or decarboxylated to acetone), which 
are generated in hepatocyte mitochondria. Ketone 
bodies are organic acids which, when formed in small 
amounts, are oxidised and utilised as metabolic fuel. 
However, the rate of utilisation of ketone bodies by 
peripheral tissues is limited, and when the rate of pro-
duction by the liver exceeds their removal, hyper­
ketonaemia results. This occurs physiologically during 
starvation, when low insulin levels and high catecho-
lamine levels increase lipolysis and delivery of FFAs 
to the liver.
Aetiology and pathogenesis of diabetes
In both of the common types of diabetes, environmental 
factors interact with genetic susceptibility to determine 
which people develop the clinical syndrome, and the 
Functional anatomy and physiology
21
803
including thyroid disease (p. 738), coeliac disease 
(p. 880), Addison’s disease (p. 777), pernicious anaemia 
(p. 1025) and vitiligo (p. 1295).
Genetic predisposition
Genetic factors account for about one-third of the sus-
ceptibility to type 1 diabetes, the inheritance of which is 
polygenic (Box 21.2). Over 20 different regions of the 
human genome show some linkage with type 1 diabetes 
but most interest has focused on the human leucocyte 
antigen (HLA) region within the major histocompatibil-
ity complex on the short arm of chromosome 6; this 
locus is designated IDDM 1. The HLA haplotypes DR3 
and/or DR4 are associated with increased susceptibility 
to type 1 diabetes in Caucasians and are in ‘linkage 
disequilibrium’, i.e. they tend to be transmitted together, 
with the neighbouring alleles of the HLA-DQA1 and 
DQB1 genes. The latter may be the main determinants 
of genetic susceptibility, since these HLA class II genes 
code for proteins on the surface of cells which present 
foreign and self antigens to T lymphocytes (p. 87). 
Candidate gene and genome-wide association studies 
have also implicated other genes in type 1 diabetes, e.g. 
CD25, PTPN22, IL2RA and IL-10, which are involved in 
immune recognition of pancreatic islet antigens, T-cell 
development and immune regulation. The genes associ-
ated with type 1 diabetes overlap with those for other 
timing of its onset. However, the underlying genes, 
precipitating environmental factors and pathophysiol-
ogy differ substantially between type 1 and type 2 
diabetes. Type 1 diabetes was previously termed 
‘insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus’ (IDDM) and is 
invariably associated with profound insulin deficiency 
requiring replacement therapy. Type 2 diabetes was 
previously termed ‘non-insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus’ (NIDDM) because patients retain the capacity 
to secrete some insulin but exhibit impaired sensitivity 
to insulin (insulin resistance) and initially can usually 
be treated without insulin replacement therapy. 
However, 20% or more of patients with type 2 diabetes 
will ultimately develop profound insulin deficiency 
requiring re­placement therapy, so that IDDM and 
NIDDM were misnomers.
Type 1 diabetes
Pathology
Type 1 diabetes is a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease 
(p. 86) involving destruction of the insulin-secreting β 
cells in the pancreatic islets. Progressive loss of β cell 
function takes place over a prolonged period (months 
to years), but marked hyperglycaemia, accompanied by 
the classical symptoms of diabetes, occurs only when 
80–90% of the functional capacity of β cells has been lost.
The pathology in the pre-diabetic pancreas is charac-
terised by ‘insulitis’ (Fig. 21.4), with infiltration of the 
islets by mononuclear cells con­taining activated macro-
phages, helper cytotoxic and suppressor T lymphocytes, 
natural killer cells and B lymphocytes. Initially, these 
lesions are patchy and, until a very late stage, lobules 
containing heavily infiltrated islets are seen adjacent to 
unaffected lobules. The destructive process is β cell-
specific, the glucagon and other hormone-secreting cells 
in the islet remaining intact.
Islet cell antibodies are present before the clinical 
presentation of type 1 diabetes, and their detection can 
be useful in confirming a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, 
but they are poorly predictive of disease progression 
and disappear over time (see Fig. 21.4). Type 1 diabetes 
is associated with other autoimmune disorders (Ch. 4), 
Fig. 21.4  Pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. Proposed sequence of events in the development of type 1 diabetes. Environmental triggers are described 
in the text. 
Normal islet
β-cell mass
Environmental triggers
Genetic
susceptibility to
immune dysfunction
Inflammatory cell infiltration of islet
Antibody-mediated β-cell destruction
Autoantibodies present in blood
Overt
diabetes
Loss of first phase
insulin secretion
Impaired glucose
tolerance
Insulitis
β-cell destruction
Time
Relative with type 1 diabetes
% overall risk
Identical twin
35
Non-identical twin
20
HLA-identical sibling
16
Non-HLA-identical sibling
3
Father
9
Mother
3
Both parents
Up to 30
21.2  Risk of type 1 diabetes among first-degree 
relatives of patients with type 1 diabetes
Diabetes mellitus
21
804
protein expressed by β cells. It has also been proposed 
that reduced exposure to microorganisms in early child-
hood limits maturation of the immune system and 
increases susceptibility to autoimmune disease (the 
‘hygiene hypothesis’).
Metabolic disturbances in type 1 diabetes
Patients with type 1 diabetes present when progressive 
β-cell destruction has crossed a threshold at which ade-
quate insulin secretion and normal blood glucose levels 
can no longer be sustained. Above a certain level, high 
glucose levels may be toxic to the remaining β cells, so 
that profound insulin deficiency rapidly ensues, causing 
the metabolic sequ­elae shown in Figure 21.5. Hyper­
glycaemia leads to glycosuria and dehydration, causing 
fatigue, polyuria, nocturia, thirst and polydipsia, sus-
ceptibility to urinary and genital tract infections, and 
later tachycardia and hypotension. Unrestrained lipo­
lysis and proteolysis result in weight loss. Ketoacidosis 
occurs when generation of ketone bodies exceeds the 
capacity for their metabolism. Elevated blood H+ ions 
drive K+ out of the intracellular compartment, while sec-
ondary hyperaldosteronism encourages urinary loss of 
K+. Thus patients usually present with a short history 
(typically a few weeks) of hyperglycaemic symptoms 
(thirst, polyuria, nocturia and fatigue), infections and 
weight loss, and may have developed ketoacidosis 
(p. 811).
autoimmune disorders, such as coeliac disease and 
thyroid disease, consistent with clustering of these con-
ditions in individuals or families.
Environmental predisposition
Although genetic susceptibility appears to be a pre­
requisite for type 1 diabetes, the concordance rate 
between monozygotic twins is less than 40% (see Box 
21.2), and wide geographic and seasonal variations in 
incidence suggest that environmental factors have an 
important role in precipitating disease.
Although hypotheses abound, the nature of these 
environmental factors is uncertain. They may trigger 
type 1 diabetes through direct toxicity to β cells or by 
stimulating an autoimmune reaction directed against β 
cells. Potential candidates fall into three main categories: 
viruses, specific drugs or chemicals, and dietary con-
stituents. Viruses implicated in the aetiology of type 1 
diabetes include mumps, Coxsackie B4, retroviruses, 
rubella (in utero), cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr 
virus. Various dietary nitrosamines (found in smoked 
and cured meats) and coffee have been proposed as 
potentially diabetogenic toxins. Bovine serum albumin 
(BSA), a major constituent of cow’s milk, has been impli-
cated, since children who are given cow’s milk early in 
infancy are more likely to develop type 1 diabetes than 
those who are breastfed. BSA may cross the neonatal gut 
and raise antibodies which cross-react with a heat-shock 
Fig. 21.5  Acute metabolic complications of insulin deficiency. (FFA = free fatty acids.) 
↓Glucose uptake
and utilisation
↑Glycogenolysis
Hyperglycaemia
Glycosuria
Osmotic diuresis
Dehydration
Hyperosmolarity
Secondary
hyperaldosteronism
K+ deficiency
↑Gluconeogenesis
↑Lipolysis
↑Proteolysis
↑FFA and glycerol
to liver
↓Renal function
↑Lactate
↑Ketogenesis
Metabolic acidosis
Insufficient insulin
Functional anatomy and physiology
21
805
The primary cause of insulin resistance remains 
unclear; it is likely that there are multiple defects in 
insulin signalling, affecting several tissues. One theory 
is centred around the adipocyte; this is particularly 
appealing, as obesity is a major cause of increased 
insulin resistance. Intra-abdominal ‘central’ adipose 
tissue is metabolically active, and releases large quanti-
ties of FFAs, which may induce insulin resistance 
because they compete with glucose as a fuel supply for 
oxidation in peripheral tissues such as muscle. In addi-
tion, adipose tissue releases a number of hormones 
(including a variety of peptides, called ‘adipokines’ 
because they are structurally similar to immunological 
‘cytokines’) which act on specific receptors to influence 
sensitivity to insulin in other tissues. Because the venous 
drainage of visceral adipose tissue is into the portal vein, 
central obesity may have a particularly potent influence 
on insulin sensitivity in the liver, and thereby adversely 
affect gluconeogenesis and hepatic lipid metabolism.
Physical activity is another important determinant of 
insulin sensitivity. Inactivity is associated with down-
regulation of insulin-sensitive kinases and may promote 
accumulation of FFAs within skeletal muscle. Sedentary 
people are therefore more insulin-resistant than active 
people with the same degree of obesity. Moreover, 
physical activity allows non-insulin-dependent glucose 
uptake into muscle, reducing the ‘demand’ on the pan-
creatic β cells to produce insulin.
Deposition of fat in the liver is a common association 
with central obesity and is exacerbated by insulin resist-
ance and/or deficiency. Many patients with type 2 dia-
betes have evidence of fatty infiltration of the liver 
(non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)). This condi-
tion may improve with effective treatment of the diabe-
tes and dyslipidaemia, but despite this, a few patients 
progress to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH, p. 959) 
and cirrhosis.
Type 2 diabetes
Pathology
Type 2 diabetes is a diagnosis of exclusion, i.e. it is made 
when type 1 diabetes and other types of diabetes (see 
Box 21.5, p. 807) are ruled out, and is highly heterogene-
ous. The natural history of typical type 2 diabetes is 
shown in Figure 21.6. Initially, insulin resistance leads 
to elevated insulin secretion in order to maintain normal 
blood glucose levels. However, in susceptible individu-
als, the pancreatic β cells are unable to sustain the 
increased demand for insulin and a slowly progressive 
insulin deficiency develops. Some patients develop dia-
betes at a young age, usually driven by insulin resistance 
due to obesity and ethnicity; others, particularly the 
elderly, develop dia­betes despite being non-obese and 
may have more pronounced β-cell failure. The key 
feature is a ‘relative’ insulin deficiency, such that there 
is insufficient insulin production to overcome the resist-
ance to insulin action. This contrasts with type 1 dia­
betes, in which there is rapid loss of insulin production 
and an absolute deficiency, resulting in ketoacidosis and 
death if the insulin is not replaced. 
Insulin resistance
Type 2 diabetes, or its antecedent, impaired glucose tol-
erance, is one of a cluster of conditions thought to be 
caused by resistance to insulin action. Thus, patients 
with type 2 diabetes often have associated disorders 
including hypertension, dyslipidaemia (characterised 
by elevated levels of small dense low-density lipopro-
tein (LDL) cholesterol and triglycerides, and a low level 
of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol), non-
alcoholic fatty liver (p. 959) and, in women, polycystic 
ovarian syndrome. This cluster has been termed the 
‘insulin resistance syndrome’ or ‘metabolic syndrome’, 
and is much more common in patients who are obese.
Fig. 21.6  Natural history of type 2 diabetes.  A In the early stage of the disorder, the response to progressive insulin resistance is an increase in 
insulin secretion by the pancreatic cells, causing hyperinsulinaemia. Eventually, the β cells are unable to compensate adequately and blood glucose rises, 
producing hyperglycaemia. With further β-cell failure, glycaemic control deteriorates and treatment requirements escalate.  B Progressive pancreatic 
β-cell failure in patients with type 2 diabetes in the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS). Beta-cell function was estimated using the 
homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) and was already below 50% at the time of diagnosis. Thereafter, long-term incremental increases in fasting 
plasma glucose were accompanied by progressive β-cell dysfunction. If the slope of this progression is extrapolated, it appears that pancreatic dysfunction 
may have been developing for many years before diagnosis of diabetes. Part B adapted from Holman 1998 – see p. 836.
Impaired
glucose
tolerance
Type 2 diabetes
Hyperinsulin-
aemia
Normal
Time
Plasma
glucose
100
β-cell function (%)
80
60
40
20
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
Time from diagnosis (years)
Start of treatment
2
4
6
0
Plasma
insulin
Deteriorating β-cell function
Increasing insulin resistance with age, obesity etc.
Euglycaemia
Diet-
controlled
Anti-
diabetic
drugs
Insulin
A
B
Diabetes mellitus
21
806
Age
Type 2 diabetes is more common in the middle-aged and 
elderly (Box 21.4). In the UK, it affects 10% of the popula-
tion over 65, and over 70% of all cases of diabetes occur 
after the age of 50 years.
Metabolic disturbances in type 2 diabetes
Patients with type 2 diabetes have a slow onset of ‘rela-
tive’ insulin deficiency. Relatively small amounts of 
insulin are required to suppress lipolysis, and some 
glucose uptake is maintained in muscle, so that, in con-
trast with type 1 diabetes, lipolysis and proteolysis are 
not unrestrained and weight loss and ketoacidosis 
seldom occur. In type 2 diabetes, hyperglycaemia tends 
to develop slowly over months or years; because of this 
insidious onset many cases of type 2 diabetes are discov-
ered coincidentally and a large number are undetected. 
At diagnosis, patients are often asymptomatic or give a 
long history (typically many months) of fatigue, with or 
without ‘osmotic symptoms’ (thirst and polyuria). In 
some patients with type 2 diabetes, presentation is late 
and pancreatic β-cell failure has reached an advanced 
stage of insulin deficiency (see type 1 diabetes, p. 803). 
These patients may present with weight loss but ketoaci-
dosis is uncommon. However, in some ethnic groups, 
such as African Americans, half of those whose first 
presentation is with diabetic ketoacidosis have type 2 
diabetes.
Intercurrent illness, e.g. with infections, increases the 
production of stress hormones which oppose insulin 
action, such as cortisol, growth hormone and catecho-
lamines. This can precipitate an acute exacerbation of 
insulin resistance and insulin deficiency, and result 
in more severe hyperglycaemia and dehydration (see 
hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state, p. 814).
Other forms of diabetes
Other causes of diabetes are shown in Box 21.5. In most 
cases, there is an obvious cause of destruction of pancre-
atic β cells. Some acquired disorders, notably other 
endocrine diseases such as acromegaly (p. 792) or 
Cushing’s syndrome (p. 773), can precipitate type 2 
diabetes in susceptible individuals.
A number of unusual genetic diseases are associated 
with diabetes. In rare families, diabetes is caused by 
single gene defects with autosomal dominant inherit-
ance. These subtypes constitute less than 5% of all cases 
of diabetes and typically present as ‘maturity-onset dia-
betes of the young’ (MODY), i.e. non-insulin-requiring 
Pancreatic β-cell failure
In the early stages of type 2 diabetes, reduction in the 
total mass of pancreatic islet tissue is modest. At the 
time of diagnosis, around 50% of β-cell function has 
been lost and this declines progressively (see Fig. 21.6B). 
Some pathological changes are typical of type 2 dia-
betes, the most consistent of which is deposition of 
amyloid in the islets. In addition, elevated plasma 
glucose and FFAs exert toxic effects on pancreatic β 
cells to impair insulin secretion. However, while β-cell 
numbers are reduced, β-cell mass is unchanged and 
glucagon secretion is increased, which may contribute 
to hyperglycaemia.
Genetic predisposition
Genetic factors are important in type 2 diabetes, as 
shown by marked differences in susceptibility in dif-
ferent ethnic groups and by studies in monozygotic 
twins where concordance rates for type 2 diabetes 
approach 100%. However, many genes are involved 
and the chance of developing diabetes is also influenced 
very powerfully by environmental factors (Box 21.3). 
Genome-wide association studies have identified over 
65 genes or gene regions that are associated with type 
2 diabetes, each exerting a small effect. The largest 
effect is seen with variation in TCF7L2; the 10% of the 
population with two copies of the risk variant for this 
gene have a nearly twofold increase in risk of develop-
ing type 2 diabetes. Most of the genes known to con-
tribute to risk of type 2 diabetes are involved in β-cell 
function or in regulation of cell cycling and turnover, 
suggesting that altered regulation of β-cell mass is a 
key factor.
• Prevalence: increases with age, affecting ~10% of people 
over 65 years. Half of these people are undiagnosed. 
Impaired β-cell function and exaggerated insulin resistance 
with ageing both contribute.
• Glycosuria: the renal threshold for glucose rises with age, so 
glycosuria may not develop until the blood glucose 
concentration is markedly raised.
• Pancreatic carcinoma: may present in old age with the 
development of diabetes, in association with weight loss and 
diminished appetite.
21.4  Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in old age
Age at onset of type 2 diabetes 
in proband
Age-corrected risk of type 2 
diabetes for siblings (%)
25–44
53
45–54
37
55–64
38
65–80
31
21.3  Risk of developing type 2 diabetes for 
siblings of and individuals with type 2 diabetes
Environmental and other risk factors
Diet and obesity
Epidemiological studies show that type 2 diabetes is 
associated with overeating, especially when combined 
with obesity and underactivity. Middle-aged people 
with diabetes eat significantly more and are fatter and 
less active than their non-diabetic siblings. The risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes increases tenfold in people 
with a body mass index (BMI) of more than 30 kg/m2 
(p. 115). However, although the majority of patients 
with type 2 diabetes are obese, only a minority of obese 
people develop diabetes, as the majority of obese patients 
are able to increase insulin secretion to compensate for 
the increased demand resulting from obesity and insulin 
resistance. Those who develop diabetes may have genet-
ically impaired β-cell function, reduced β-cell mass, or a 
susceptibility of β cells to attack by toxic substances such 
as FFAs or inflammatory cytokines.
Investigations
21
807
INVESTIGATIONS
Urine testing
Glucose
Testing the urine for glucose with dipsticks is a common 
screening procedure for detecting diabetes. If possible, 
testing should be performed on urine passed 1–2 hours 
after a meal to maximise sensitivity. Glycosuria always 
warrants further assessment by blood testing (see 
below). The greatest disadvantage of urinary glucose 
measurement is the individual variation in renal thresh-
old for glucose. The most frequent cause of glycosuria is 
a low renal threshold, which is common during preg-
nancy and in young people; the resulting ‘renal glycos­
uria’ is a benign condition unrelated to diabetes. Another 
disadvantage is that some drugs (such as β-lactam anti-
biotics, levodopa and salicylates) may interfere with 
urine glucose tests.
Ketones
Ketone bodies can be identified by the nitroprusside 
reaction, which measures acetoacetate, using either 
tablets or dipsticks. Ketonuria may be found in normal 
people who have been fasting or exercising strenuously 
for long periods, who have been vomiting repeatedly, or 
who have been eating a diet high in fat and low in 
carbohydrate. Ketonuria is therefore not pathognomonic 
of diabetes but, if associated with glycosuria, the diag-
nosis of diabetes is highly likely. In diabetic ketoacidosis 
(p. 811), ketones can also be detected in plasma using 
test sticks (see below).
Protein
Standard dipstick testing for albumin detects urinary 
albumin at concentrations above 300 mg/L, but smaller 
amounts (microalbuminuria, see Box 17.13, p. 476) can 
only be measured using specific albumin dipsticks 
or by quantitative biochemical laboratory measurement. 
Microalbuminuria or proteinuria, in the absence of 
urinary tract infection, is an important indicator of dia-
betic nephropathy and/or increased risk of macrovascu-
lar disease (p. 830).
Blood testing
Glucose
Laboratory glucose testing in blood relies upon an enzym­
atic reaction (glucose oxidase) and is cheap, usually 
automated and highly reliable. However, blood glucose 
levels depend on whether the patient has eaten recently, 
so it is important to consider the circumstances in which 
the blood sample was taken.
Blood glucose can also be measured with colorimet-
ric or other testing sticks, which are often read with 
a portable electronic meter. These are used for capillary 
(fingerprick) testing to monitor diabetes treatment 
(p. 810). There is some debate as to whether self-
monitoring in people with type 2 diabetes improves 
glycaemic control. Many countries now only offer self-
monitoring to people with type 2 diabetes taking 
insulin therapy. To make the diagnosis of diabetes, the 
blood glucose concentration should be estimated using 
an accurate laboratory method rather than a portable 
technique.
Functional defect
Main type*
Gene mutated*
β-cell glucose sensing
MODY2
GCK
The set point for basal insulin release is altered, causing a high 
fasting glucose, but sufficient insulin is released after meals.  
As a result, the HbA1c is often normal and microvascular 
complications are rare. Treatment is rarely required
β-cell transcriptional 
regulation
MODY3
HNF-1α
MODY5
HNF-1β
MODY1
HNF-4α
Diabetes develops during adolescence/early adulthood and can 
be managed with diet and tablets for many years, but ultimately, 
insulin treatment is required. The HNF-1α and 4α forms respond 
particularly well to sulphonylurea drugs. All types are associated 
with microvascular complications. HNF-1β mutations also cause 
renal cysts and renal failure
*Other gene mutations have been found in rare cases. For further 
information, see http://diabetesgenes.org.
21.6  Monogenic diabetes mellitus: maturity-
onset diabetes of the young (MODY)
Type 1 diabetes
• Immune-mediated
• Idiopathic
Type 2 diabetes
Other specific types
• Genetic defects of β-cell function (see Box 21.6)
• Genetic defects of insulin action (e.g. leprechaunism, 
lipodystrophies)
• Pancreatic disease (e.g. pancreatitis, pancreatectomy, 
neoplastic disease, cystic fibrosis, haemochromatosis, 
fibrocalculous pancreatopathy)
• Excess endogenous production of hormonal antagonists to 
insulin, e.g.
Growth hormone – acromegaly
Glucocorticoids – Cushing’s syndrome
Glucagon – glucagonoma
Catecholamines – phaeochromocytoma
Thyroid hormones – thyrotoxicosis
• Drug-induced (e.g. corticosteroids, thiazide diuretics, 
phenytoin)
• Uncommon forms of immune-mediated diabetes (e.g. IPEX 
(immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy X) syndrome)
• Associated with genetic syndromes (e.g. Down’s syndrome; 
Klinefelter’s syndrome; Turner’s syndrome; DIDMOAD 
(Wolfram’s syndrome) – diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, 
optic atrophy, nerve deafness; Friedreich’s ataxia; myotonic 
dystrophy)
Gestational diabetes
21.5  Aetiological classification of 
diabetes mellitus
diabetes presenting before the age of 25 years (Box 21.6). 
Very rarely, diabetes can develop at or soon after birth. 
This neonatal diabetes is usually genetic in origin, with 
50% due to mutations in the KATP channel of the pancre-
atic β cell causing insulin deficiency and diabetic keto­
acidosis. However, sulphonylurea drugs overcome the 
defect in potassium channel signalling, so that insulin 
therapy is not necessary in these cases.
Diabetes mellitus
21
808
To allow worldwide comparisons of HbA1c values, the 
International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and 
Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) has developed a standard 
method; IFCC-standardised HbA1c values are reported 
in mmol/mol. In 2011, many countries adopted the 
IFCC reference method (Box 21.8).
HbA1c estimates may be erroneously diminished in 
anaemia or during pregnancy, and may be difficult to 
interpret with some assay methods in patients who have 
uraemia or a haemoglobinopathy.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN  
DIABETES MELLITUS
Newly discovered hyperglycaemia
Hyperglycaemia is a very common biochemical abnor-
mality. It is frequently detected on routine biochemical 
analysis of asymptomatic patients, following routine 
dipstick testing of urine showing glycosuria, or during 
severe illness (‘stress hyperglycaemia’). Alternatively, 
hyperglycaemia may present with the symptoms 
described in Box 21.9. Occasionally, patients present as 
an emergency with acute metabolic decompensation 
(see below). The key goals are to establish whether the 
patient has diabetes, and if so, what type of diabetes it 
is and how it should be treated.
Establishing the diagnosis of diabetes
Glycaemia can be classified into three categories: normal, 
impaired (pre-diabetes) and diabetes (Boxes 21.10 and 
21.11). The glucose cut-off that defines diabetes is based 
upon the level above which there is a significant risk of 
microvascular complications (retinopathy, nephropathy, 
neuropathy). People categorised as having pre-diabetes 
have blood glucose levels that carry a negligible risk of 
microvascular complications but are at increased risk of 
developing diabetes. Also, because there is a continuous 
risk of macrovascular disease (atheroma of large conduit 
blood vessels) with increasing glycae­mia in the popula-
tion, people with pre-diabetes have increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease (myocardial infarction, stroke 
and peripheral vascular disease).
When a person has symptoms of diabetes, the diag-
nosis can be confirmed with either a fasting glucose 
Glucose concentrations are lower in venous than arte-
rial or capillary (fingerprick) blood. Whole blood glucose 
concentrations are lower than plasma concentrations 
because red blood cells contain relatively little glucose. 
Venous plasma values are usually the most reliable for 
diagnostic purposes (Boxes 21.10 and 21.11).
Ketones
Blood ketone monitoring is increasingly available. 
Urinary ketone measurements described above are 
semi-quantitative, difficult to perform and retrospective 
(i.e. the urine has accumulated over several hours), and 
do not measure the major ketone in blood during 
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), beta-hydroxybutyrate (β-
OHB). Whole blood ketone monitoring detects β-OHB 
and is useful in assisting with insulin adjustment during 
intercurrent illness or sustained hyperglycaemia to 
prevent or detect DKA. Blood ketone monitoring is also 
useful in monitoring resolution of DKA in hospitalised 
patients (Box 21.7).
DCCT units (%)
IFCC units (mmol/mol)
4
20
5
31
6
42
7
53
8
64
9
75
10
86
IFCC HbA1c (mmol/mol) = [DCCT HbA1c(%)−2.15] × 10.929
21.8  Conversion between DCCT and IFCC units 
for HbA1c
(DCCT = Diabetes Control and Complications Trial; IFCC = International 
Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Measurement*
Interpretation
< 0.6 mmol/L
Normal; no action required
0.6–1.5 mmol/L
Suggests metabolic control may be 
deteriorating; continue to monitor and 
seek medical advice if sustained/
progressive
1.5–3.0 mmol/L
With high blood glucose (> 10 mmol/L), 
there is a high risk of diabetic 
ketoacidosis; seek medical advice
> 3.0 mmol/L
Severe ketosis; in the presence of high 
glucose (> 10 mmol/L) suggests 
presence of diabetic ketoacidosis; seek 
urgent medical help
21.7  Interpretation of capillary blood ketone 
measurements
*To convert to mg/dL, divide values by 0.098.
Glycated haemoglobin
Glycated haemoglobin provides an accurate and objec-
tive measure of glycaemic control integrated over a 
period of weeks to months.
In diabetes, the slow non-enzymatic covalent attach-
ment of glucose to haemoglobin (glycation) increases the 
amount in the HbA1 (HbA1c) fraction relative to non-
glycated adult haemoglobin (HbA0). These fractions can 
be separated by chromatography; laboratories may 
report glycated haemoglobin as total glycated haemo-
globin (GHb), HbA1 or HbA1c. In most countries, HbA1c 
is the preferred measurement. The rate of formation of 
HbA1c is directly proportional to the ambient blood 
glucose concentration; a rise of 1% in HbA1c corresponds 
to an approximate average increase of 2 mmol/L 
(36 mg/dL) in blood glucose. Although HbA1c concen-
tration reflects the integrated blood glucose control over 
the lifespan of erythrocytes (120 days), HbA1c is most 
sensitive to changes in glycaemic control occurring in 
the month before measurement.
Various assay methods are used to measure HbA1c, 
but most laboratories have been reporting HbA1c values 
(as %) aligned with the reference range that was used in 
the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT). 
Presenting problems in diabetes mellitus 
21
809
When a diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed, other 
investigations should include plasma urea, creatinine 
and electrolytes, lipids, liver and thyroid function 
tests, and urine testing for ketones, protein or 
microalbuminuria.
Clinical assessment and classification
Hyperglycaemia causes a wide variety of symptoms (see 
Box 21.9). The classical clinical features of the two main 
types of diabetes are compared in Box 21.12. Symptoms 
of thirst, polyuria, nocturia and rapid weight loss are 
prominent in type 1 diabetes, but are often absent in 
patients with type 2 diabetes, many of whom are asymp-
tomatic or have non-specific complaints such as chronic 
fatigue and malaise. Uncontrolled diabetes is associated 
• Thirst, dry mouth
• Polyuria
• Nocturia
• Tiredness, fatigue, lethargy
• Change in weight (usually weight loss)
• Blurring of vision
• Pruritus vulvae, balanitis (genital candidiasis)
• Nausea
• Headache
• Hyperphagia; predilection for sweet foods
• Mood change, irritability, difficulty in concentrating, apathy
21.9  Symptoms of hyperglycaemia
Diabetes is confirmed by either:
• Plasma glucose in random sample or 2 hrs after a 75 g 
glucose load ≥ 11.1 (200 mg/dL) or
• Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)
In asymptomatic patients, two diagnostic tests are required to 
confirm diabetes.
‘Pre-diabetes’ is classified as:
• Impaired fasting glucose = fasting plasma glucose ≥ 6.0 
(108 mg/dL) and < 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)
• Impaired glucose tolerance = fasting plasma glucose 
< 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) and 2-hr glucose after 75 g oral 
glucose drink 7.8–11.1 mmol/L (140–200 mg/dL)
21.10  Diagnosis of diabetes and pre-diabetes
Fasting
2 hrs after  
glucose load
Impaired fasting 
glucose
6.1–6.9 mmol/L
< 7.8 mmol/L
(110–125 mg/dL)
(< 140 mg/dL)
Impaired glucose 
tolerance
< 7.0 mmol/L
7.8–11.0 mmol/L
(< 126 mg/dL)
(140–199 mg/dL)
Diabetes
≥ 7.0 mmol/L
≥ 11.1 mmol/L
(> 126 mg/dL)
(> 200 mg/dL)
Which patients to test
• Fasting plasma glucose 6.1–7.0 mmol/L (110–126 mg/dL)
• Uncertainty about the diagnosis of diabetes
Preparation before the test
• Unrestricted carbohydrate diet for 3 days
• Fasted overnight for at least 8 hrs
• Rest for 30 mins
• Remain seated for the duration of the test, with no smoking
Sampling
• Measure plasma glucose before and 2 hrs after a 75 g oral 
glucose drink
Interpretation (venous plasma glucose)
21.11  How to perform an oral glucose 
tolerance test (OGTT)
Type 1
Type 2
Typical age at onset
< 40 yrs
> 50 yrs
Duration of symptoms
Weeks
Months to years
Body weight
Normal or low
Obese
Ketonuria
Yes
No
Rapid death without 
treatment with insulin
Yes
No
Autoantibodies
Positive in 
80–90%
Negative
Diabetic complications 
at diagnosis
No
25%
Family history of 
diabetes
Uncommon
Common
Other autoimmune 
disease
Common
Uncommon
21.12  Classical features of type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes
≥ 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) or a random glucose 
≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) (see Box 21.10). Asymptom­
atic individuals should have a second confirmatory test. 
Diabetes should not be diagnosed by capillary blood 
glucose results. The World Health Organization (WHO) 
guidelines (2011) introduced the use of HbA1c for diag-
nosis of diabetes, with an IFCC HbA1c of more than 
48 mmol/mol also being diagnostic.
Pre-diabetes can be diagnosed either as ‘impaired 
fasting glucose’ (IFG), based upon a fasting plasma 
glucose result, or ‘impaired glucose tolerance’ (IGT), 
based upon the fasting and 2-hour oral glucose tolerance 
test results (OGTT; see Box 21.11). Patients with pre-
diabetes should be advised of their risk of progression 
to diabetes, given advice about lifestyle modification to 
reduce this risk (as for type 2 diabetes, p. 820), and be 
ensured of aggressive management of cardiovascular 
risk factors such as hypertension and dyslipidaemia.
In some people, an abnormal blood glucose result is 
observed under conditions which impose a burden on 
the pancreatic β cells, e.g. during pregnancy, infection, 
myocardial infarction or other severe stress, or during 
treatment with diabetogenic drugs such as corticoster-
oids. This ‘stress hyperglycaemia’ usually disappears 
after the acute illness has resolved. However, blood 
glucose should be remeasured and an OGTT will often 
show persistence of impaired glucose tolerance.
The diagnostic criteria recommended for diabetes in 
pregnancy are more stringent than those for non-
pregnant subjects (see Box 21.23, p. 817). Pregnant 
women with abnormal glucose tolerance should be 
referred urgently to a specialist unit for full evaluation.
Diabetes mellitus
21
810
• Licensing regulations vary considerably between countries. In 
the UK, diabetes requiring insulin therapy or any complication 
that could affect driving should be declared to the Driver and 
Vehicle Licensing Agency; ordinary driving licences are 
‘period-restricted’ for insulin-treated drivers; and vocational 
licences (large goods vehicles and public service vehicles) 
may be granted but require very strict criteria to be met
• The main risk to driving performance is hypoglycaemia. 
Visual impairment and other complications may occasionally 
cause problems
• Insulin-treated diabetic drivers should:
Check blood glucose before driving and 2-hourly during 
long journeys
Keep an accessible supply of fast-acting carbohydrate in 
the vehicle
Take regular snacks or meals during long journeys
Stop driving if hypoglycaemia develops
Refrain from driving until at least 45 mins after treatment 
of hypoglycaemia (delayed recovery of cognitive function)
Carry identification in case of injury
21.13  Diabetes and driving
Educating patients
It is essential that people with diabetes understand their 
disorder and learn to handle all aspects of their manage-
ment as comprehensively and quickly as possible. 
Ideally, this can be achieved by a multidisciplinary team 
(doctor, dietitian, specialist nurse and podiatrist) in the 
outpatient setting. For those with newly diagnosed type 
2 diabetes, structured education can be given in groups 
by trained educators. Those requiring insulin need to 
learn how to measure doses of insulin accurately with 
an insulin syringe or pen device, how to inject, and how 
to adjust the dose on the basis of blood glucose values 
and in relation to factors such as exercise, illness and 
episodic hypoglycaemia. They must therefore acquire a 
working knowledge of diabetes, be familiar with the 
symptoms of hypoglycaemia (see Box 21.19, p. 815), and 
have ready access to medical advice when the need 
arises. Information should be provided about driving 
(national statutory regulations and practical safety 
measures, Box 21.13). Providing this education is time-
consuming but essential if patients are to undertake 
normal activities safely while maintaining good control.
Self-assessment of glycaemic control
In people with type 2 diabetes there is not usually a need 
for regular self-assessment of blood glucose, unless the 
patient is treated with insulin, or at risk of hypoglycae-
mia while taking sulphonylureas. Blood glucose testing 
can be used for self-education (i.e. demonstrating how 
different food and exercise regimes affect blood glucose), 
and may be useful in acute illness. Blood glucose targets 
vary according to individual circumstances, but, in 
general, pre-meal values between 4 and 7 mmol/L (72 
and 126 mg/dL) and 2-hour post-meal values between 
4 and 8 mmol/L represent optimal control.
Insulin-treated patients should be taught how to 
monitor their own blood glucose using capillary blood 
glucose meters. Immediate knowledge of blood glucose 
levels can be used by patients to guide their insulin 
dosing and to manage exercise and illness. This can be 
with an increased susceptibility to infection and patients 
may present with skin sepsis (boils) or genital candidia-
sis, and complain of pruritus vulvae or balanitis.
While the distinction between type 1 and type 2 dia-
betes is usually obvious, overlap occurs, particularly in 
age at onset, duration of symptoms and family history. 
There are many patients in whom the type of diabetes 
is not immediately apparent. For example, patients 
with type 2 diabetes may present with marked and 
rapid weight loss and even diabetic ketoacidosis, and 
type 2 diabetes is increasingly diagnosed in children 
and young adults. Type 1 diabetes can occur at any age, 
not just in younger people, and may develop more 
insidiously; the presence of pancreatic autoantibodies 
confirms the diagnosis of slow-onset type 1 diabetes, 
termed latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA). 
Pancreatic autoantibodies are detectable at high titre in 
80–90% of patients with type 1 diabetes, so a negative 
result should prompt consideration of other aetiologies. 
Other causes of diabetes (see Box 21.5, p. 807), such as 
MODY, should not be forgotten, particularly in those 
presenting in childhood or as young adults. A history 
of pancreatic disease, particularly in patients with a 
history of alcohol excess, makes insulin deficiency more 
likely. Sometimes the definitive classification of the 
type of diabetes is only made later, once the natural 
history or responsiveness to different therapies becomes 
apparent.
Physical signs in patients with type 2 diabetes at 
diagnosis depend on the mode of presentation. In 
Western populations, more than 80% are overweight, 
and the obesity is often central (truncal or abdominal). 
Obesity is much less evident in Asians. Hypertension 
is present in at least 50% of patients with type 2 diabetes. 
Although dyslipidaemia is also common, skin lesions 
such as xanthelasma and eruptive xanthomas are rare. 
An increasing number of patients now present with 
NAFLD, usually identified by their elevated blood 
transaminase values, but they may also have non-tender 
hepatomegaly.
Management
The aims of management are to improve symptoms of 
hyperglycaemia and to minimise the risks of long-term 
microvascular and macrovascular complications. Treat-
ment methods for diabetes include dietary/lifestyle 
modification, oral anti-diabetic drugs and injected thera-
pies. These are described in detail on page 821. In 
patients with suspected type 1 diabetes, urgent treat-
ment with insulin is required and prompt referral to a 
specialist is usually needed. In patients with suspected 
type 2 diabetes, first-line therapy involves advice about 
dietary and lifestyle modification. Oral anti-diabetic 
drugs are usually added in those who do not achieve 
glycaemic targets as a result, or who have severe symp-
tomatic hyperglycaemia at diagnosis and a high HbA1c. 
However, the guidelines in some countries are to intro-
duce medication immediately upon diagnosis of dia­
betes without waiting to assess the impact of diet and 
lifestyle changes.
In parallel with treatment of hyperglycaemia, other 
risk factors for complications of diabetes need to be 
addressed, 
including 
treatment 
of 
hypertension 
(p. 609) and dyslipidaemia (p. 456), and advice on 
smoking cessation (p. 100).
Presenting problems in diabetes mellitus 
21
811
supplemented with blood testing for ketones when 
blood glucose is high and/or during intercurrent illness.
Urine testing for glucose is not recommended because 
variability in renal threshold means that some patients 
with inadequate glycaemic control will not find glucose 
in their urine.
Long-term supervision of diabetes
Diabetes is a complex disorder which progresses in 
severity with time, so people with diabetes should be 
seen at regular intervals for the remainder of their lives, 
either at a specialist diabetic clinic or in primary care 
where facilities are available and staff are trained in 
diabetes care. A checklist for follow-up visits is given in 
Box 21.14. The frequency of visits is variable, ranging 
from weekly during pregnancy to annually in the case 
of patients with well-controlled type 2 diabetes.
Therapeutic goals
The target HbA1c depends on the individual patient. 
Early on in diabetes (i.e. patients managed by diet or 
one or two oral agents), a target of 48 mmol/mol (6.5%) 
or less may be appropriate. However, a higher target of 
58 mmol/mol (7.5%) may be more appropriate in older 
Lifestyle issues
• General health
• Work or school
• Smoking
• Alcohol intake
• Stress or depression
• Sexual health
• Exercise
Body weight and BMI
Blood pressure
• Individualised target of 130–140/70–80 mmHg, depending 
on risk factors and presence of nephropathy
Urinalysis
• Analyse fasting specimen for glucose, ketones, albumin (both 
macro- and micro-albuminuria)
Biochemistry
• Renal, liver and thyroid function
• Lipid profile and estimated 10-yr cardiovascular risk to guide 
need for lipid-lowering therapy (p. 581)
Glycaemic control
• Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c); individualised target between 
48 and 58 mmol/mol (6.5 and 7.5%)
• Inspection of home blood glucose monitoring record (if 
carried out by patient)
Hypoglycaemic episodes
• Number and cause of severe (requiring assistance for 
treatment) events and frequency of mild (self-treated) 
episodes and biochemical hypoglycaemia
• Awareness of hypoglycaemia
• Driving advice
Assessment of injection sites if insulin-treated
Eye examination
• Visual acuities (near and distance)
• Ophthalmoscopy (with pupils dilated) or digital photography
Examination of lower limbs and feet
• Assessment of foot risk (p. 799)
21.14  How to review a patient in the 
diabetes clinic
patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease, or 
those treated with insulin and therefore at risk of 
hypoglycaemia. In general, the benefits of lower target 
HbA1c (primarily a lower risk of microvascular disease) 
need to be weighed against any increased risks (prima-
rily hypoglycaemia in insulin-treated patients). Type 2 
diabetes is usually a progressive condition (Fig. 21.7), 
unless there are major diet and lifestyle changes, 
so that there is usually a need to increase diabetes 
medication over time to achieve the individualised 
target HbA1c.
In people with type 2 diabetes, treatment of coexist-
ing hypertension and dyslipidaemia is usually required. 
This can be decided by assessing absolute risk of a car-
diovascular disease event (p. 581) and adjusting targets 
to individual circumstances. The target for blood pres-
sure is usually below 140/80 mmHg, although some 
guidelines suggest 130/80 mmHg. For lipid-lowering, 
there is a reduction in cardiovascular risk even with 
normal cholesterol levels, but statin therapy is usually 
recommended when the 10-year cardiovascular event 
risk is at least 20%. As a general rule, this means that 
anyone with type 2 diabetes who is over the age of 
40 years should receive a statin, irrespective of baseline 
cholesterol levels. Some guidelines do not suggest a 
target level once the patient is started on a statin but 
others suggest a total cholesterol of less than 4.0 mmol/L 
(~150 mg/dL) and an LDL cholesterol of less than 
2.0 mmol/L (~75 mg/dL). Similar targets are appropri-
ate in type 1 diabetes, although there is a shortage of 
data from clinical trials in this group.
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a medical emergency and 
remains a serious cause of morbidity, principally in 
people with type 1 diabetes. Mortality is low in the UK 
(approximately 2%) but remains high in developing 
countries and among non-hospitalised patients. Mortal-
ity in DKA is most commonly caused in children 
and adolescents by cerebral oedema and in adults by 
hypokalaemia, acute respiratory distress syndrome and 
Fig. 21.7  Time course of changes in HbA1c during the 
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS). In 
the UKPDS there was loss of glycaemic control with time in patients 
receiving monotherapy, independently of their randomisation to 
conventional or intensive glycaemic control, consistent with progressive 
decline in β-cell function (see Fig. 21.6, p. 805). Adapted from UKPDS 
1998 – see p. 836.
6
Conventional
Upper limit of normal
Years from randomisation
Intensive
0
0
3
6
9
12
15
7
8
HbA1c(%)
9
Diabetes mellitus
21
812
Symptoms
• Polyuria, thirst
• Weight loss
• Weakness
• Nausea, vomiting
• Leg cramps
• Blurred vision
• Abdominal pain
Signs
• Dehydration
• Hypotension (postural or 
supine)
• Cold extremities/peripheral 
cyanosis
• Tachycardia
• Air hunger (Kussmaul 
breathing)
• Smell of acetone
• Hypothermia
• Confusion, drowsiness, 
coma (10%)
21.16  Clinical features of diabetic ketoacidosis
comorbid conditions such as acute myocardial infarc-
tion, sepsis or pneumonia.
DKA is characteristic of type 1 diabetes (see Box 
21.12) and is often the presenting problem in newly 
diagnosed patients. However, an increasing number of 
patients presenting with DKA have underlying type 2 
diabetes. This appears to be particularly prevalent in 
African-American and Hispanic populations. In estab-
lished type 1 diabetes, DKA may be precipitated by an 
intercurrent illness because of failure to increase insulin 
dose appropriately to compensate for the stress response. 
Sometimes, there is no evidence of a precipitating infec-
tion and DKA develops because of errors in self-
management. In young patients with recurrent episodes 
of DKA, up to 20% may have psychological problems 
complicated by eating disorders.
Pathogenesis
A clear understanding of the biochemical basis and 
pathophysiology of DKA is essential for its efficient 
treatment (see Fig. 21.5, p. 804). The cardinal biochemi-
cal features are:
•	 hyperketonaemia (≥ 3 mmol/L) and ketonuria 
(more than 2+ on standard urine sticks)
•	 hyperglycaemia (blood glucose ≥ 11 mmol/L 
(~200 mg/dL))
•	 metabolic acidosis (venous bicarbonate  
< 15 mmol/L and/or venous pH < 7.3).
The hyperglycaemia causes a profound osmotic diu-
resis leading to dehydration and electrolyte loss, par-
ticularly of sodium and potassium. Potassium loss is 
exacerbated by secondary hyperaldosteronism as a 
result of reduced renal perfusion. Ketosis results from 
insulin deficiency, exacerbated by elevated catecho-
lamines and other stress hormones, leading to unre-
strained lipolysis and supply of FFAs for hepatic 
ketogenesis. When this exceeds the capacity to metabo-
lise acidic ketones, these accumulate in blood. The 
resulting metabolic acidosis forces hydrogen ions into 
cells, displacing potassium ions.
The average loss of fluid and electrolytes in moder-
ately severe DKA in an adult is shown in Box 21.15. 
About half the deficit of total body water is derived from 
the intracellular compartment and occurs comparatively 
early in the development of acidosis with relatively few 
clinical features; the remainder represents loss of extra-
cellular fluid sustained largely in the later stages, when 
marked contraction of extracellular fluid volume occurs, 
with haemoconcentration, a decreased blood volume, 
and finally a fall in blood pressure with associated renal 
ischaemia and oliguria.
Every patient in DKA is potassium-depleted, but the 
plasma concentration of potassium gives very little indi-
cation of the total body deficit. Plasma potassium may 
even be raised initially due to disproportionate loss of 
21.15  Average loss of fluid and electrolytes in 
adult diabetic ketoacidosis of moderate severity
water, catabolism of protein and glycogen, and displace-
ment of potassium from the intracellular compartment 
by H+ ions. However, soon after treatment is started, 
there is likely to be a precipitous fall in the plasma potas-
sium due to dilution of extracellular potassium by 
administration of intravenous fluids, the movement of 
potassium into cells induced by insulin, and the continu-
ing renal loss of potassium.
The magnitude of the hyperglycaemia does not cor-
relate with the severity of the metabolic acidosis; moder-
ate elevation of blood glucose may be associated with 
life-threatening ketoacidosis. In some cases, hyper­
glycaemia predominates and acidosis is minimal, with 
patients presenting in a hyperosmolar state (p. 814).
Clinical assessment
The clinical features of ketoacidosis are listed in Box 
21.16. In the fulminating case, the striking features are 
those of salt and water depletion, with loss of skin 
turgor, furred tongue and cracked lips, tachycardia, 
hypotension and reduced intra-ocular pressure. Breath-
ing may be deep and sighing, the breath is usually fetid, 
and the sickly-sweet smell of acetone may be apparent. 
Mental apathy, confusion or a reduced conscious level 
may be present, although coma is uncommon. Indeed, a 
patient with dangerous ketoacidosis requiring urgent 
treatment may walk into the consulting room. For this 
reason, the term ‘diabetic ketoacidosis’ is to be preferred 
to ‘diabetic coma’, which implies that there is no urgency 
until unconsciousness supervenes. In fact, it is impera-
tive that energetic treatment is started at the earliest 
possible stage.
Abdominal pain is sometimes a feature of DKA, par-
ticularly in children, and vomiting is common. Serum 
amylase may be elevated but rarely indicates coexisting 
pancreatitis. In infected patients, pyrexia may not be 
present initially because of vasodilatation secondary to 
acidosis.
Investigations
The following are important but should not delay the 
institution of intravenous fluid and insulin replacement:
•	 Venous blood: for urea and electrolytes, glucose and 
bicarbonate (severe acidosis is indicated by a 
venous plasma bicarbonate < 12 mmol/L).
•	 Urine or blood analysis for ketones (p. 807).
Presenting problems in diabetes mellitus 
21
813
glucose concentration should fall by 3–6  mmol/L 
(approximately 55–110  mg/dL) per hour, or blood 
ketone concentrations fall by at least 0.5  mmol/L/hr. 
A more rapid decrease in blood glucose should be 
avoided, as this might precipitate hypoglycaemia and 
the serious complication of cerebral oedema, particu-
larly in children. Failure of blood glucose to fall within 
1 hour of commencing insulin infusion should lead to 
a re-assessment of insulin dose. Ketosis, dehydration, 
acidaemia, infection and stress combine to produce 
severe insulin resistance in some cases, but most will 
respond to a low-dose insulin regimen. When the blood 
glucose has fallen, 10% dextrose infusion is introduced 
and insulin infusion continued to encourage glucose 
uptake into cells and restoration of normal metabolism. 
In recent years, it has also become increasingly common 
to continue with the use of long-acting insulin analogues 
administered subcutaneously during the initial manage-
ment of DKA; this provides background insulin for 
when the intravenous insulin is discontinued.
Restoration of the usual insulin regimen, by subcuta-
neous injection, should not be instituted until the patient 
is both biochemically stable and able to eat and drink 
normally.
•	 ECG.
•	 Infection screen: full blood count, blood and urine 
culture, C-reactive protein, chest X-ray. Although 
leucocytosis invariably occurs in DKA, this 
represents a stress response and does not 
necessarily indicate infection.
Management
DKA is a medical emergency which should be treated in 
hospital, preferably in a high-dependency area. If avail-
able, the diabetes specialist team should be involved. 
Regular clinical and biochemical review is essential, par-
ticularly during the first 24 hours of treatment. Guide-
lines for management of DKA are shown in Box 21.17.
Insulin
A fixed-rate intravenous insulin infusion of 0.1  U/
kg body weight/hr is recommended (see Box 21.17). 
Exceptionally, if intravenous administration is not fea-
sible, soluble insulin can be given by intramuscular 
injection (loading dose of 10–20  U, followed by 5  U 
hourly), or a fast-acting insulin analogue can be given 
hourly by subcutaneous injection (initially 0.3  U/kg 
body weight, then 0.1  U/kg hourly). The blood 
Time: 0–60 mins
1. Commence 0.9% sodium chloride
If systolic BP > 90 mmHg, give 1 L over 60 mins
If systolic BP < 90 mmHg, give 500 mL over 10–15 mins, 
then re-assess. If BP remains < 90 mmHg, seek senior 
review
2. Commence insulin treatment
50 U human soluble insulin in 50 mL 0.9% sodium chloride 
infused intravenously at 0.1 U/kg body weight/hr
Continue with SC basal insulin analogue if usually taken by 
patient
3. Perform further investigations: see text
4. Establish monitoring schedule
Hourly capillary blood glucose and ketone testing
Venous bicarbonate and potassium after 1 and 2 hrs, then 
every 2 hrs
Plasma electrolytes every 4 hrs
Clinical monitoring of O2 saturation, pulse, BP, respiratory 
rate and urine output every hour
5. Treat any precipitating cause
Time: 60 mins to 12 hrs
• IV infusion of 0.9% sodium chloride with potassium chloride 
added as indicated below
1 L over 2 hrs
1 L over 2 hrs
1 L over 4 hrs
1 L over 4 hrs
1 L over 6 hrs
• Add 10% glucose 125 mL/hr IV when glucose < 14 mmol/L
• Be more cautious with fluid replacement in elderly, young 
people, pregnant patients and those with renal or heart failure. 
If plasma sodium is > 155 mmol/L, 0.45% sodium chloride may 
be used.
21.17  Management of diabetic ketoacidosis*
*Adapted from Joint British Diabetes Societies guideline, NHS Diabetes (2010).
• Adjust potassium chloride infusion
Plasma potassium 
(mmol/L)
Potassium replacement 
(mmol/L of infusion)
> 5.5
Nil
3.5–5.5
40
< 3.5
Senior review – additional 
potassium required
Time: 12–24 hrs
• Ketonaemia and acidosis should have resolved (blood ketones 
< 0.3 mmol/L, venous bicarbonate > 18 mmol/L). Request 
senior review if not improving
• If patient is not eating and drinking
Continue IV insulin infusion at lower rate of  
2–3 U/kg/hr
Continue IV fluid replacement and biochemical  
monitoring
• If ketoacidosis has resolved and patient is able to eat and  
drink
Re-initiate SC insulin with advice from diabetes team. Do 
not discontinue IV insulin until 30 mins after SC short-acting 
insulin injection
Additional procedures
• Catheterisation if no urine passed after 3 hrs
• Central venous line if cardiovascular system compromised, to 
allow fluid replacement to be adjusted accurately – also 
consider in elderly, pregnant, renal or cardiac failure, other 
serious comorbidities, severe DKA
• Measure arterial blood gases and repeat chest X-ray if O2 
saturation < 92%
• ECG monitoring in severe cases
• Thromboprophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin
Diabetes mellitus
21
814
Fluid replacement
In adults, rapid fluid replacement in the first few hours 
is usually recommended (as in Box 21.17). Caution is 
recommended in children and young adults because of 
the risk of cerebral oedema. Most current guidelines 
favour correction of the extracellular fluid deficit with 
isotonic saline (0.9% sodium chloride). If the plasma 
sodium is greater than 155 mmol/L, 0.45% saline may 
be used initially.
Potassium
Careful monitoring of potassium is essential to the man-
agement of diabetic ketoacidosis because both hypo- 
and hyperkalaemia can occur and are potentially 
life-threatening. Potassium replacement is not usually 
recommended with the initial litre of fluid because pre-
renal failure may be present secondary to dehydration. 
Treatment with 0.9% sodium chloride with potassium 
chloride 40 mmol/L is recommended if the serum potas-
sium is below 5.5 mmol/L and the patient is passing 
urine (see Box 21.17). If the potassium falls below 
3.5 mmol/L, the potassium replacement regimen needs 
to be reviewed. Cardiac rhythm should be monitored in 
severe DKA because of the risk of electrolyte-induced 
cardiac arrhythmia.
Bicarbonate
Adequate fluid and insulin replacement should resolve 
the acidosis. The use of intravenous bicarbonate therapy 
is currently not recommended. Acidosis may reflect an 
adaptive response, improving oxygen delivery to the 
tissues, and so excessive bicarbonate may induce a para-
doxical increase in cerebrospinal fluid acidosis and has 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of cerebral oedema 
in children and young adults.
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) is character-
ised by severe hyperglycaemia (> 30 mmol/L (600 mg/
dL)), hyperosmolality (serum osmolality > 320 mOsm/
kg), and dehydration in the absence of significant hyper-
ketonaemia (< 3 mmol/L) or acidosis (pH > 7.3, bicarbo-
nate > 15 mmol/L). It was previously referred to as 
hyperosmolar non-ketotic (HONK) coma but, as in 
DKA, coma is not invariable. As with DKA, there is 
glycosuria, leading to an osmotic diuresis, with loss 
of water, sodium, potassium and other electrolytes. 
However, in HHS, hyperglycaemia usually develops 
over a longer period (a few days to weeks), causing more 
profound hyperglycaemia and dehydration (fluid loss 
may be 10–22 litres in a person weighing 100 kg). The 
reason that patients with HHS do not develop signifi-
cant ketoacidosis is unclear, although it has been specu-
lated that insulin levels may be too low to stimulate 
glucose uptake in insulin-sensitive tissues, but still suf-
ficient to prevent lipolysis and subsequent ketogenesis. 
A mixed picture of HHS and DKA can occur.
Although typically occurring in the elderly, HHS is 
increasingly seen in younger adults. Common precipi-
tating factors include infection, myocardial infarction, 
cerebrovascular events or drug therapy (e.g. cortico­
steroids). Poor prognostic signs include hypothermia, 
hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 90 mmHg), 
tachy- or bradycardia, severe hypernatraemia (sodium 
> 160 mmol/L), serum osmolality > 360 mOsm/kg, and 
the presence of other serious comorbidities. Mortality 
rates are higher than in DKA – up to 20% in the USA, 
reflecting the age and frailty of the population and more 
frequent presence of comorbidities.
The principles of therapy are shown in Box 21.18. The 
aims are to normalise osmolality, replace fluid and elec-
trolyte losses, and normalise blood glucose, at the same 
time preventing complications such as arterial or venous 
thrombosis, cerebral oedema and central pontine demye­
linosis (Ch. 16). Comorbidities also need to be taken into 
account; for example, rapid fluid replacement may pre-
cipitate cardiac failure in patients with coronary artery 
disease. Historically, management of HHS has followed 
DKA guidelines, but increasing recognition of the differ-
ences between HHS and DKA has led to new approaches 
in HHS. In particular, rapid shifts in osmolality should 
be avoided through more measured fluid replacement 
regimens that are guided by serial calculations of serum 
osmolality. A key recommendation is that 0.9% sodium 
chloride solution alone is used for initial treatment, and 
that insulin is introduced only when the rate of fall in 
blood glucose has plateaued.
If osmolality cannot be measured frequently, osmo-
larity can be calculated as follows and used as a surro-
gate (based on plasma values in mmol/L):
Plasma osmolarity
2 Na
glucose
urea
=
+
+
+
[
]
[
]
[
]
The normal value is 280–290 mmol/L and consciousness 
is impaired when it is high (> 340 mmol/L), as com-
monly occurs in HHS.
Hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia (blood glucose < 3.5 mmol/L (63 mg/
dL)) in diabetes results in most circumstances from 
insulin therapy, less frequently from use of oral insulin 
secretagogues such as sulphonylurea drugs, and rarely 
with other anti-diabetic drugs. When hypoglycaemia 
develops in non-diabetic people, it is called ‘spontane-
ous’ hypoglycaemia, the causes and investigation of 
which are described on page 783. Hypoglycaemia can be 
• Measure or calculate serum osmolality frequently
• Give fluid replacement with 0.9% sodium chloride (IV). Use 
0.45% sodium chloride only if osmolality is increasing, 
despite positive fluid balance. Target fall in plasma sodium is 
≤ 10 mmol/L at 24 hrs
• Aim for positive fluid balance of 3–6 L by 12 hrs, and 
replacement of remaining estimated loss over next 12 hrs
• Initiate insulin IV infusion (0.05 U/kg body weight/hr) only 
when blood glucose is not falling with 0.9% sodium chloride 
alone OR if there is significant ketonaemia 
(3β-hydroxybutyrate > 1 mmol/L or urine ketones > 2+). 
Reduce blood glucose by no more than 5 mmol/L/hr
• Treat coexisting conditions
• Give prophylactic anticoagulation
• Assume high risk of foot ulceration
21.18  Principles of management of 
hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state
Presenting problems in diabetes mellitus 
21
815
of hyperinsulinaemia. Suppression of endogenous 
insulin secretion to allow increased hepatic glucose 
production to meet the increased metabolic demand is 
key to the normal physiological response to exercise. 
In insulin-treated diabetes, insulin levels may actually 
increase with exercise because of improved blood flow 
at the site of injection and this increases the risk of 
hypoglycaemia.
Awareness of hypoglycaemia
For most individuals, the glucose level (threshold) at 
which they first become aware of hypoglycaemia is not 
a frequent occurrence in the lives of people with type 1 
diabetes and has a major impact on their willingness and 
ability to achieve target glucose levels.
In health, a number of mechanisms are in place to 
ensure that glucose homeostasis is maintained. If blood 
glucose falls, three primary physiological defence mech-
anisms operate: endogenous insulin release from pan-
creatic β cells is suppressed; release of glucagon from 
pancreatic α cells is increased; and the autonomic 
nervous system is activated, with release of catechol­
amines both systemically and within the tissues. In 
addition, stress hormones, such as cortisol and growth 
hormone, are increased in the blood. These actions 
reduce whole-body glucose uptake and increase hepatic 
glucose production, maintaining a glucose supply to the 
brain. People with type 1 diabetes cannot regulate 
insulin once it is injected subcutaneously, and so it con-
tinues to act, despite developing hypoglycaemia. In 
addition, within 5 years of diagnosis, most patients will 
have lost their ability to release glucagon specifically 
during hypoglycaemia. This is thought to result mainly 
from loss of α-cell regulation by β cells. These two 
primary defects mean that hypoglycaemia occurs much 
more frequently in people with type 1 and longer-
duration type 2 diabetes.
Clinical assessment
Symptoms of hypoglycaemia (Box 21.19) comprise two 
main groups: those related to acute activation of the 
autonomic nervous system and those secondary to 
glucose deprivation of the brain (neuroglycopenia). 
Symptoms of hypoglycaemia are idiosyncratic and 
differ with age and duration of diabetes. Hypoglycae-
mia also affects mood, inducing a state of increased 
tension and low energy. Learning to recognise the early 
onset of hypoglycaemia is an important aspect of the 
education of diabetic patients treated with insulin. The 
severity of hypoglycaemia is defined by the ability to 
self-treat; ‘mild’ episodes are self-treated, while ‘severe’ 
episodes require assistance for recovery.
Circumstances of hypoglycaemia
Risk factors and causes of hypoglycaemia in patients 
taking insulin or sulphonylurea drugs are listed in Box 
21.20. Severe hypoglycaemia can have serious morbidity 
(e.g. convulsions, coma, focal neurological lesions) and 
has a mortality of up to 4% in insulin-treated patients. 
Rarely, sudden death during sleep occurs in otherwise 
healthy young patients with type 1 diabetes (‘dead-in-
bed syndrome’) and may result from hypoglycaemia-
induced cardiac arrhythmia. Severe hypoglycaemia is 
very disruptive and impinges on many aspects of the 
patient’s life, including employment, driving (see Box 
21.13, p. 810), travel, sport and personal relationships.
Nocturnal hypoglycaemia in patients with type 1 
diabetes is common but often undetected, as hypo­
glycaemia does not usually waken a person from sleep. 
Patients may describe poor quality of sleep, morning 
headaches and vivid dreams or nightmares, or a 
partner may observe profuse sweating, restlessness, 
twitching or even seizures. The only reliable way to 
identify this problem is to measure blood glucose 
during the night.
Exercise-induced hypoglycaemia occurs in people 
with well-controlled, insulin-treated diabetes because 
Autonomic
• Sweating
• Trembling
• Pounding heart
• Hunger
• Anxiety
Neuroglycopenic
• Confusion
• Drowsiness
• Speech difficulty
• Inability to concentrate
• Incoordination
• Irritability, anger
Non-specific
• Nausea
• Tiredness
• Headache
21.19  Most common symptoms of hypoglycaemia
N.B. Symptoms differ with age; children exhibit behavioural changes (such 
as naughtiness or irritability), while elderly people experience more 
prominent neurological symptoms (such as visual disturbance and ataxia).
Causes of hypoglycaemia
• Missed, delayed or inadequate meal
• Unexpected or unusual exercise
• Alcohol
• Errors in oral anti-diabetic agent(s) or insulin dose/schedule/
administration
• Poorly designed insulin regimen, particularly if predisposing 
to nocturnal hyperinsulinaemia
• Lipohypertrophy at injection sites causing variable insulin 
absorption
• Gastroparesis due to autonomic neuropathy causing variable 
carbohydrate absorption
• Malabsorption, e.g. coeliac disease
• Unrecognised other endocrine disorder, e.g. Addison’s 
disease
• Factitious (deliberately induced)
• Breastfeeding
Risk factors for severe hypoglycaemia
• Strict glycaemic control
• Impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia
• Age (very young and elderly)
• Long duration of diabetes
• Sleep
• C-peptide negativity (indicating complete insulin deficiency)
• History of previous severe hypoglycaemia
• Renal impairment
• Genetic, e.g. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) genotype
21.20  Hypoglycaemia in diabetes: common 
causes and risk factors
Diabetes mellitus
21
816
– should be considered. Cerebral oedema has a high 
mortality and morbidity, and requires urgent treatment 
with mannitol and high-dose oxygen.
Following recovery, it is important to try to identify 
a cause and make appropriate adjustments to the 
patient’s therapy. Unless the reason for a hypoglycaemic 
episode is clear, the patient should reduce the next dose 
of insulin by 10–20% and seek medical advice about 
further adjustments in dose.
The management of self-poisoning with oral anti-
diabetic agents is described on page 216.
Prevention of hypoglycaemia
Patient education is fundamental to the prevention 
of hypoglycaemia. Risk factors for, and treatment of 
hypoglycaemia should be discussed. The importance 
of regular blood glucose monitoring and the need to 
have glucose (and glucagon) readily available should 
be stressed. A review of insulin and carbo­hydrate 
management during exercise is particularly useful. 
Advice for patients when travelling is summarised in 
Box 21.22.
Relatives and friends also need to be familiar with the 
symptoms and signs of hypoglycaemia and should 
be instructed in how to help (including how to inject 
glucagon).
It is important to recognise that all current insulin 
replacement regimens are suboptimal and do not accu-
rately replicate normal physiological insulin profiles. 
Understanding the pharmacokinetics and pharmaco­
dynamics of the insulin regimen in use by the patient 
will help prevent further hypoglycaemia (p. 824). For 
example, an individual experiencing regular nocturnal 
hypoglycaemia between midnight and 0200 hours 
may be found to be taking twice-daily soluble and 
intermediate-acting insulins before breakfast and before 
the main evening meal between 1700 and 1900 hours. In 
this case, the peak action of the isophane insulin will 
coincide with the period of maximum sensitivity to 
insulin – namely, 2300–0200 hours – and increase the 
risk of nocturnal hypoglycaemia. To address this, the 
evening dose of depot intermediate-acting insulin 
should be deferred until bedtime (after 2300 hours), 
shifting its peak action period to 0500–0700 hours. It is 
also a sensible precaution for patients to measure their 
blood glucose before they retire to bed and to have a 
carbohydrate snack if the reading is less than 6.0 mmol/L 
(approximately 110 mg/dL).
constant but varies according to the circumstances in 
which hypoglycaemia arises (e.g. during the night or 
during exercise). In addition, with longer duration 
of disease, and particularly in response to frequent 
hypoglycaemia, the threshold for generation of symptom 
responses to hypoglycaemia shifts to a lower glucose 
concentration. This cerebral adaptation has a similar 
effect on the counter-regulatory hormonal response to 
hypoglycaemia. Taken together, this means that indi-
viduals with type 1 diabetes may have reduced 
(impaired) awareness of hypoglycaemia. Symptoms 
can be experienced less intensely, or even be absent, 
despite blood glucose concentrations below 2.5 mmol/L 
(45 mg/dL). Such individuals are at an especially high 
risk of severe hypoglycaemia. The prevalence of 
impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia increases with 
time; overall, it affects around 20–25% of people with 
type 1 diabetes and under 10% with insulin-treated type 
2 diabetes.
Management
Acute treatment of hypoglycaemia
Treatment of hypoglycaemia depends on its severity 
and on whether the patient is conscious and able to 
swallow (Box 21.21). Oral carbohydrate usually suffices 
if hypoglycaemia is recognised early. If parenteral 
therapy is required, then as soon as the patient is able 
to swallow, glucose should be given orally. Full recovery 
may not occur immediately and reversal of cognitive 
impairment may not be complete until 60 minutes 
after normoglycaemia is restored. When hypoglycaemia 
has occurred in a patient treated with a long- or 
intermediate-acting insulin or a long-acting sulphonyl­
urea, such as glibenclamide, the possibility of recurrence 
should be anticipated; to prevent this, infusion of 10% 
dextrose, titrated to the patient’s blood glucose, may 
be necessary.
If the patient fails to regain consciousness after blood 
glucose is restored to normal, then cerebral oedema and 
other causes of impaired consciousness – such as alcohol 
intoxication, a post-ictal state or cerebral haemorrhage 
Mild (self-treated)
• Oral fast-acting carbohydrate (10–15 g) is taken as glucose 
drink or tablets or confectionery
• This should be followed with a snack containing complex 
carbohydrate
Severe (external help required)
• If patient is semiconscious or unconscious, parenteral 
treatment is required:
IV 75 mL 20% dextrose (= 15 g; give 0.2 g/kg in 
children)*
Or
IM glucagon (1 mg; 0.5 mg in children)
• If patient is conscious and able to swallow:
Give oral refined glucose as drink or sweets (= 25 g)
Or
Apply glucose gel or jam or honey to buccal mucosa
21.21  Emergency treatment of hypoglycaemia
*Use of 50% dextrose is no longer recommended.
• Carry a supply of fast-acting carbohydrate (non-perishable, in 
suitable containers)
Screwtop plastic bottles for glucose drinks
Packets of powdered glucose (for use in hot, humid 
climates)
Confectionery (foil-wrapped in hot climates)
• Companions should carry additional oral carbohydrate, and 
glucagon
• Perform frequent blood glucose testing (carry spare meter 
and/or visually read strips)
• Use fast-acting insulin analogues for long-distance air travel
21.22  Avoidance and treatment of hypoglycaemia 
during travel
Presenting problems in diabetes mellitus 
21
817
carbohydrate. Women with gestational diabetes should 
undertake regular pre- and post-prandial self-monitoring 
of blood glucose, aiming for pre-meal blood glucose 
levels of less than 5.5 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) or post-
meal blood glucose levels of less than 7.0 mmol/L 
(125 mg/dL). If treatment is necessary, metformin or 
glibenclamide is considered safe to use in pregnancy. 
Glibenclamide should be used rather than other sulpho-
nylureas because it does not cross the placenta. Other 
oral therapies or injectable incretin-based therapies 
should not be given in pregnancy. Insulin may be 
required, especially in the later stages of pregnancy. If 
the maternal blood glucose is not well controlled prior 
to, and during, delivery, the resulting fetal hyperinsulin­
aemia leads to neonatal hyperinsulinaemia, which in 
turn can cause neonatal hypoglycaemia.
After delivery, maternal glucose usually rapidly 
returns to pre-pregnancy levels. Woman should be 
tested at least 6 weeks post-partum with an oral glucose 
tolerance test. In women with persistent mild fasting 
hyperglycaemia (glucose over 5.5 mmol/L (100 mg/
dL)) who have a small increment (less than 3.5 mmol/L) 
in plasma glucose 2 hours after oral glucose, monogenic 
diabetes due to a mutation in GCK (encoding gluco­
kinase) should be considered (see Box 21.6, p. 807). 
Those who have returned to normal glucose tolerance 
remain at considerable risk for developing type 2 diabe-
tes, with a 5-year risk between 15 and 50%, depending 
on the population. Therefore, all women who have had 
gestational diabetes should be given diet and lifestyle 
advice to reduce their risk of developing type 2 diabetes 
(p. 820).
Pregnancy in women with 
established diabetes
Maternal hyperglycaemia early in pregnancy (during 
the first 6 weeks post-conception) can adversely affect 
fetal development. Consequences include cardiac, 
renal and skeletal malformations, of which the caudal 
regression syndrome is the most characteristic. The risk 
of fetal anomaly is about 2% for non-diabetic women, 
Diabetes in pregnancy
During pregnancy, maternal glucose metabolism 
changes to optimise glucose and other nutrient delivery 
to the fetus. This is particularly apparent in the second 
half of pregnancy, when there is an increase in maternal 
tissue insulin resistance, such that glucose is preferen-
tially supplied to the fetus rather than maternal tissue. 
This is largely driven by the maternal hormonal environ-
ment, with increased oestrogens and progestogens, and, 
in particular, human placental lactogen (hPL). The deliv-
ery of the placenta results in rapid decline in hPL with 
a rapid reversal of insulin resistance soon after birth. 
During pregnancy, fasting plasma glucose decreases 
slightly, while post-prandial blood glucose may be 
increased. The renal threshold for glycosuria (p. 807) is 
reduced in pregnancy.
In the fetus, insulin secretion is driven by fetal blood 
glucose levels, which are determined by the maternal 
glucose concentrations. Thus maternal hyperglycaemia 
drives fetal hyperinsulinaemia. Since insulin is a major 
fetal growth factor, hyperinsulinaemia in turn drives 
increased fetal growth, resulting in increased birth 
weight (‘macrosomia’).
Gestational diabetes
Gestational diabetes is defined as diabetes with first 
onset or recognition during pregnancy. This definition 
will include a few patients who develop type 1 diabetes 
during pregnancy, where prompt action and early 
insulin treatment will be required, and some patients 
who develop type 2 diabetes, or had unknown pre-
existing type 2 diabetes, in whom the diabetes does 
not remit after pregnancy. However, the majority of 
gestational diabetes develops due to an inability to 
increase insulin secretion adequately to compensate for 
pregnancy-induced insulin resistance, and most women 
can expect to return to normal glucose tolerance imme-
diately after pregnancy.
In contrast to non-gestational diabetes, for which the 
diagnostic thresholds for diabetes are based upon risk 
of microvascular complications, the diagnosis of gesta-
tional diabetes is based upon maternal blood glucose 
measures that are associated with increased fetal growth. 
An international consensus recommended that glucose 
values diagnostic of gestational diabetes should be 
lower than those for non-gestational diabetes (Box 
21.23). Controversy remains about who should be 
screened, and in part the screening strategy depends on 
the population risk. It is widely accepted that women at 
high risk for gestational diabetes should have an oral 
glucose tolerance test at 24–28 weeks, with some guide-
lines recommending that all are screened by measuring 
HbA1c, fasting blood glucose or random blood glucose 
at the first booking visit. With the increasing use of 
HbA1c to diagnose diabetes, it should be noted that 
HbA1c is unreliable after early pregnancy, when it falls 
due to increased red cell turnover.
Management of gestational diabetes
The aim is to normalise the maternal blood glucose 
and thereby reduce excessive fetal growth. The first 
element of management is dietary modification, in par-
ticular by reducing consumption of quick-acting refined 
Women at high risk of gestational diabetes
• BMI > 30 kg/m2
• A previous macrosomic baby weighing ≥ 4.5 kg at birth
• Previous gestational diabetes
• A first-degree relative with diabetes
• A high-risk ethnicity – South Asian, black Caribbean or 
Middle Eastern
Diagnosis
• High-risk women should have a 75 g oral glucose tolerance 
test before 28 weeks’ gestation
• Gestational diabetes is diagnosed when:
Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 5.1 mmol/L (92 mg/dL) or
1-hr plasma glucose (after glucose load) ≥ 10 mmol/L 
(180 mg/dL) or
2-hr plasma glucose (after glucose load) ≥ 8 mmol/L 
(144 mg/dL)
• Consider testing high-risk women at first booking visit with 
an HbA1c or fasting blood glucose
21.23  Identifying patients with 
gestational diabetes
Diabetes mellitus
21
818
• Type of diabetes: type 1 diabetes is predominant in children 
and adolescents, but type 2 diabetes is now presenting in 
unprecedented numbers of obese, inactive teenagers. 
Monogenic diabetes (MODY) should also be considered (see 
Box 21.6, p. 807).
• Physiological changes: hormonal, physical and lifestyle 
changes in puberty affect dietary intake, exercise patterns 
and sensitivity to insulin, necessitating alterations in insulin 
regimen.
• Emotional changes: adolescence is a phase of 
transition into independence (principally from parental care). 
Periods of rebellion against parental control, experimentation 
(e.g. with alcohol) and a more chaotic lifestyle are  
common, and often impact adversely on control  
of diabetes.
• Glycaemic control: a temporary deterioration in control 
is common, although not universal. It is sometimes  
more important to maintain contact and engagement  
with a young person than to insist on tight glycaemic  
control.
• Diabetic ketoacidosis: a few adolescents and young adults 
present with frequent episodes of DKA, often because of 
non-adherence to insulin therapy. This is more common in 
females. Motivating factors may include weight loss, 
rebellion, and manipulation of family or schooling 
circumstances.
• Adolescent diabetes clinics: these challenges are best 
tackled with support from a specialised multidisciplinary 
team, including paediatricians, physicians, nurses and 
psychologists. Support is required for the patient and 
parents.
21.24  Diabetes in adolescence
Surgery and diabetes
Patients with diabetes are reported to have up to 50% 
higher peri-operative mortality than patients without 
diabetes. Surgery causes catabolic stress and secretion of 
counter-regulatory hormones (including catecholamines 
and cortisol) in both normal and diabetic subjects. This 
results in increased glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, 
lipolysis, proteolysis and insulin resistance. Starvation 
exacerbates this process by increasing lipolysis. In the 
non-diabetic person, these metabolic effects lead to a 
secondary increase in the secretion of insulin, which 
exerts a controlling influence. In diabetic patients, either 
there is absolute deficiency of insulin (type 1 diabetes) 
or insulin secretion is delayed and impaired (type 2 
diabetes), so that in untreated or poorly controlled 
diabetes, the uptake of metabolic substrate into tissues 
is significantly reduced, catabolism is increased and, 
ultimately, metabolic decompensation in the form of 
diabetic ketoacidosis may develop in both types of 
diabetes. In addition, hyperglycaemia impairs wound 
healing and innate immunity, leading to increased 
risk of infection. Patients with diabetes are also more 
likely to have underlying pre-operative morbidity, 
especially cardiovascular disease. Finally, management 
errors with diabetes may cause dangerous hyperglycae-
mia or hypoglycaemia. Careful pre-operative assess-
ment and peri-operative management are therefore 
essential, ideally with support from the diabetes special-
ist team.
about 4% for women with well-controlled diabetes 
(HbA1c below 53 mmol/mol (7%)), but more than 20% 
for those with poor glycaemic control (HbA1c greater 
than 97 mmol/mol (11%)). Therefore, a woman with 
diabetes should, if possible, be helped to achieve excel-
lent glycaemic control before becoming pregnant. In 
addition, high-dose folic acid (5 mg, rather than the 
usual 400 µg, daily) should be initiated before concep-
tion to reduce the risk of neural tube defects.
As for gestational diabetes, mothers should attempt 
to maintain near-normal blood glucose levels whilst 
avoiding hypoglycaemia throughout their pregnancy, as 
this minimises excessive fetal growth and neonatal 
hypoglycaemia. However, this is often difficult to 
achieve. Pregnancy is also associated with an increased 
potential for ketosis, particularly, but not exclusively, in 
women with type 1 diabetes. Ketoacidosis during preg-
nancy is dangerous for the mother and is associated with 
a high rate (10–35%) of fetal mortality.
Pregnancy is associated with a worsening of diabetic 
complications, most notably retinopathy and nephro­
pathy, so careful monitoring of eyes and kidneys is 
required throughout pregnancy. If heavy proteinuria 
and/or renal dysfunction exist prior to pregnancy, there 
is a marked increase in the risk of pre-eclampsia, and 
renal function can deteriorate irreversibly during preg-
nancy. These risks need to be carefully discussed before 
a woman with diabetes is considering pregnancy. While 
the outlook for mother and child has been vastly 
improved over recent years, pregnancy outcomes are 
still not equivalent to those of non-diabetic mothers. 
Perinatal mortality rates remain 3–4 times those of the 
non-diabetic population (at around 30–40 per 1000 preg-
nancies) and the rate of congenital malformation is 
increased 5–6-fold overall.
Children, adolescents and young adults 
with diabetes
The management of diabetes in children and adoles-
cents presents particular challenges, which should be 
addressed in specialised clinics (Box 21.24).
Hyperglycaemia in acute  
myocardial infarction
Hyperglycaemia is often found in patients who have 
sustained an acute myocardial infarction. In some, this 
represents stress hyperglycaemia (p. 808), some have 
previously undiagnosed diabetes, and many have estab-
lished diabetes. Many patients with stress hyper­
glycaemia will have impaired glucose tolerance on a 
subsequent glucose tolerance test. Over and above the 
standard management of myocardial infarction (p. 593), 
hyperglycaemia should be treated with insulin rather 
than oral anti-diabetic agents in the peri-infarct period, 
aiming for near-normalisation of blood glucose. Studies 
have suggested that good glycaemic control using 
insulin therapy in hyperglycaemic patients with acute 
myocardial infarction may reduce their long-term mor-
tality from coronary heart disease.
Presenting problems in diabetes mellitus 
21
819
Peri-operative management
Figure 21.8 outlines a general approach to peri-operative 
management of diabetes, although this may need to be 
adapted according to the patient, the surgical procedure 
and local guidelines. Patients with diabetes who are con-
sidered low-risk can attend as day cases or be admitted 
on the day of surgery. However, patients are often 
admitted the night before to ensure optimal manage-
ment, and to begin intravenous insulin to optimise blood 
glucose, if required.
Post-operative management
Patients who need to continue fasting after surgery 
should be maintained on intravenous insulin and fluids 
until they are able to eat and drink (see Fig. 21.8). During 
this time, care must be taken with fluid balance and 
electrolyte levels. Insulin infusion necessitates dextrose 
infusion to maintain a supply of glucose, but this com-
bination drives down plasma potassium (p. 440) and can 
result in hyponatraemia. Intravenous fluids during pro-
longed insulin infusion should therefore include saline 
and potassium supplementation. UK guidelines recom-
mend use of dextrose/saline (0.45% saline with 5% dex-
trose and 0.15% potassium chloride).
Once a patient’s usual treatment has been reinstated, 
care must be taken to continue to control the blood 
glucose, ideally between 4 and 10 mmol/L (70–180 mg/
dL), in order to optimise wound healing and recovery. 
Pre-operative assessment
Unless a surgical intervention is an emergency, patients 
with diabetes should be assessed well in advance of 
surgery so that poor glycaemic control and other risk 
factors can be addressed (Box 21.25). There is good evi-
dence that higher HbA1c is associated with adverse peri-
operative outcome. In general, an upper limit for an 
acceptable HbA1c should be between 64 and 75 mmol/
mol (8 and 9%). However, since optimisation of care 
may take weeks or months to achieve, the benefits need 
to be weighed against the need for early surgical 
intervention.
• Assess glycaemic control
Consider delaying surgery and referral to the diabetes 
team if HbA1c > 75 mmol/mol (9%). This should be 
weighed against the need for surgery
• Assess cardiovascular status
Optimise blood pressure
ECG for evidence of (possibly silent) ischaemic heart 
disease and to assess QTc (p. 532)
• Assess foot risk (p. 833)
Patients with high-risk feet should have suitable pressure 
relief provided during post-operative nursing
• For minor/moderate operations where only one meal will be 
omitted, plan for the patient to be first on the list
21.25  How to carry out pre-operative assessment 
of patients with diabetes
Fig. 21.8  Management of diabetic patients undergoing surgery and general anaesthesia. (Glucose > 14 mmol/L ≅ 250 mg/dL) (eGFR = 
estimated glomerular filtration rate; GLP-1 = glucagon-like peptide 1) 
Minor operation/
only one meal omitted
HbA1C ≤ 64 mmol/mol (8%)?
Yes
No
Aim for ‘first on list’
Omit any oral anti-diabetic drugs and
GLP-1 analogues on morning of operation
Omit quick-  or medium-acting insulins prior
to missed meal. Continue long-acting
insulin (e.g. glargine or detemir) but
consider reducing dose if surgical list
is in afternoon
No need for IV insulin unless unable to eat
post-operatively, blood glucose > 14 mmol/L,
or ketones present in urine or blood 
Resume usual medication with first meal;
if it is lunch for patient using mixed
insulin, give half of usual morning dose 
Major operation/
prolonged fast
Omit any oral anti-diabetic drugs and
GLP-1 analogues on morning of operation
Omit quick- or medium-acting insulins prior
to missed meal. Continue long-acting
insulin (e.g. glargine or detemir)   
Start IV insulin infusion and IV fluids
early on morning of operation
and maintain on IV insulin until eating
and drinking  
Once patient is eating, prescribe usual oral
or injectable treatment with a meal and
discontinue insulin infusion 1 hr later
Withhold metformin if eGFR < 50 mmol/min  
Check U&Es at least daily whilst on IV
insulin and fluids; ensure adequate
potassium replacement and avoid
hyponatraemia from dextrose infusion
Diabetes mellitus
21
820
Aims of dietary management
• Achieve good glycaemic control
• Reduce hyperglycaemia and avoid hypoglycaemia
• Assist with weight management:
Weight maintenance for type 1 diabetes and non-obese 
type 2 diabetes
Weight loss for overweight and obese type 2 diabetes
• Reduce the risk of micro- and macrovascular complications
• Ensure adequate nutritional intake
• Avoid ‘atherogenic’ diets or those that aggravate 
complications, e.g. high protein intake in nephropathy
Dietary constituents and recommended % of energy intake
• Carbohydrate: 45–60%
Sucrose: up to 10%
• Fat (total): < 35%
n-6 Polyunsaturated: < 10%
n-3 Polyunsaturated: eat 1 portion (140 g) oily fish once or 
twice weekly
Monounsaturated: 10–20%
Saturated: < 10%
• Protein: 10–15% (do not exceed 1 g/kg body weight/day)
• Fruit/vegetables: 5 portions daily
21.26  Dietary management of diabetes
underestimated in improving glycaemic control, but 
many people, particularly the middle-aged and elderly, 
find them difficult to sustain. Patients should also be 
encouraged to stop smoking.
Healthy eating
All people with diabetes need to pay special attention to 
their diet (Box 21.26; see also p. 110). They should have 
access to a dietitian at diagnosis, at review and at times 
of treatment change. Nutritional advice should be tai-
lored to individuals and take account of their age and 
lifestyle. Many people with type 2 diabetes require 
dietary advice for achieving weight loss, to include 
caloric restriction and, in particular, reduced fat intake. 
Structured education programmes are available for both 
common types of diabetes.
Carbohydrate
Both the amount and source of carbohydrate determine 
post-prandial glucose (p. 112). The glycaemic index (GI) 
of a carbohydrate-containing food is a measure of the 
change in blood glucose following its ingestion relative 
to the rise in blood glucose observed following a liquid 
oral glucose tolerance test. Different foods can be ranked 
by their effect on post-prandial glycaemia. Consumption 
of foods with a low GI is encouraged because they 
produce a slow, gradual rise in blood glucose. Examples 
include starchy foods such as basmati rice, spaghetti, 
porridge, noodles, granary bread, and beans and lentils. 
However, different methods of food processing and 
preparation can influence the GI of foods, as can the 
ripeness of some foods and differences in strains of rice. 
In addition, while consideration of GI is useful in choos-
ing between types of carbohydrate, it does not address 
the total amount consumed. Recent studies suggest 
short-term (6 months), very low carbohydrate diets (con-
taining as little as 50 g carbohydrate per day – 13% of 
daily energy) are safe and effective means of reducing 
Patients normally controlled on tablets may require 
temporary subcutaneous insulin treatment until the 
increased ‘stress’ of surgery, wound healing or infection 
has resolved.
Complications of diabetes
Patients with long-standing diabetes are at risk of devel-
oping a variety of complications (see Box 21.31, p. 826). 
Moreover, as many as 25% of people with type 2 diabe-
tes have evidence of diabetic complications at the time 
of initial diagnosis. Thus, diabetes may be first suspected 
when a patient visits an optometrist or podiatrist, or 
presents with hypertension or a vascular event such as 
an acute myocardial infarction or stroke. Blood glucose 
should therefore be checked in all patients presenting 
with such pathology. The detailed investigation and 
management of diabetic complications are described on 
pages 826–836.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES
In new cases of diabetes, adequate glycaemic control can 
be obtained by diet and lifestyle advice alone in approxi-
mately 50%, 20–30% will need oral anti-diabetic medica-
tion, and 20–30% will require insulin. Regardless of 
aetiology, the choice of treatment is determined by the 
adequacy of residual β-cell function. However, this 
cannot be determined easily by measurement of plasma 
insulin concentration because a level which is adequate 
in one patient may be inadequate in another, depending 
upon sensitivity to insulin. Consideration of the features 
in Box 21.12 (p. 809), and in particular the age and 
weight of the patient at diagnosis, usually indicate the 
type of treatment required. However, in each individual, 
the regimen adopted is effectively a therapeutic trial and 
should be reviewed regularly.
The ideal management for diabetes would allow the 
person to lead a completely normal life, to remain not 
only symptom-free but in good health, to achieve a 
normal metabolic state and to escape the long-term com-
plications of diabetes. This is achievable to a variable 
degree. Setting individual goals for each patient is dis-
cussed on page 811.
Patients whose glycaemic control deteriorates after a 
period of satisfactory control need their therapy to be 
adjusted. However, this is not a homogeneous group; it 
includes some patients with late-onset type 1 diabetes 
who develop an absolute deficiency of insulin, some 
with type 2 diabetes whose β-cell failure is advanced, 
and others who are not adhering to the recommended 
lifestyle changes or medication. Weight loss suggests 
worsening β-cell function. During continuing follow-up, 
the majority of patients will require combinations of 
anti-diabetic drugs, often with additional insulin replace-
ment, to obtain satisfactory glycaemic control.
Diet and lifestyle
The importance of lifestyle changes such as undertaking 
regular physical activity, observing a healthy diet 
and reducing alcohol consumption should not be 
Management of diabetes
21
821
of vigorous-intensity exercise, or a combination thereof. 
The aerobic (moderate-intensity) activity should be per-
formed for at least 10 minutes each time and spread 
throughout the week, with at least 30 minutes on at 
least 5 days of the week. Older adults should also follow 
these guidelines as far as their abilities allow. Recently, 
it has also been suggested that a combination of both 
aerobic and resistance exercise may lead to greater 
improvements in glycaemic control.
In type 1 diabetes, exercise can increase the risk of 
hypoglycaemia, so patients should seek specialist advice 
on taking extra carbohydrate, reducing insulin doses 
and choosing an injection site.
Alcohol
Alcohol is recognised as having both beneficial and 
harmful effects on cardiovascular disease and this also 
appears to apply in patients with diabetes. Alcohol can 
therefore be taken in moderation in diabetes with the 
aim of keeping within national guidelines relating to 
recommendations for people without diabetes (e.g. in 
the UK, the weekly recommended maximum is 14 U for 
women and 21 U for men). However, alcohol can reduce 
hypoglycaemia awareness and, by suppressing gluco-
neogenesis, increase hypoglycaemia risk. In addition, all 
patients with diabetes should be made aware of the high 
calorie content of alcohol and the implications for body 
weight management, which are often overlooked.
Drugs to reduce hyperglycaemia
For many years, there were only a few choices of drugs 
available for type 2 diabetes – the biguanide metformin, 
the sulphonylureas and insulin. Insulin is the only treat-
ment for type 1 diabetes. Acarbose was also available 
but little used in most countries. Since the late 1990s, 
however, several new classes of agents have been 
approved for use in type 2 diabetes, with more in 
development. Newer drugs include thiazolidinediones, 
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, glucagon-like 
peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, and sodium and 
glucose transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors. The effects of 
these drugs are compared in Box 21.27. This makes for 
an exciting time in diabetes pharmacotherapy, but 
exactly how, when and in what order these agents 
should be used remains uncertain. The older drugs are 
cheaper and have established benefits for reducing 
microvascular disease; they are therefore usually recom-
mended as first-line therapy. Use of the newer drugs is 
not supported by evidence for reduction in microvascu-
lar disease (because the trials have not yet been done) 
and they are much more expensive, so are often reserved 
for later therapy after failure of metformin and sulpho-
nylureas. One guideline which follows these principles 
is shown in Figure 21.9. However, this does not neces-
sarily reflect the optimum positioning of these newer 
drugs. As large trials, which aim to establish their car-
diovascular benefit, report in the next few years, these 
recommendations may change dramatically.
Biguanides
Metformin is the only biguanide now available. Its long-
term benefits were shown in the UK Prospective Dia­
betes Study (UKPDS) (p. 827), and it is now widely used 
weight and improving glycaemic control. However, 
high dropout rates and poor adherence suggest that this 
type of diet is not widely applicable.
In type 1 diabetes, the development of modern 
insulin regimens, particularly using insulin analogues 
or continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII; 
p. 824), has allowed increased flexibility in the timing 
and choice of carbohydrate intake. It is now possible 
to match the amount of carbohydrate in a meal with a 
dose of short-acting insulin using methods such as Dose 
Adjustment for Normal Eating (DAFNE), although this 
is demanding and requires extensive patient education. 
This approach enables motivated individuals with type 
1 diabetes to achieve and maintain good glycaemic 
control, while avoiding post-prandial hyper- and 
hypoglycaemia.
Fat
The intake of total fat should be restricted to less than 
35% of energy intake, with less than 10% as saturated 
fat, and 10–20% from monounsaturated fat through con-
sumption of oils and spreads made from olive, rapeseed 
or groundnut oils (see Box 21.26). The influence of 
dietary fats on plasma lipid profile and cardiovascular 
disease is discussed on page 113.
Salt
People with diabetes should follow the advice given to 
the general population: namely, to limit sodium intake 
to no more than 6 g daily.
Weight management
In patients with diabetes, weight management is impor-
tant, as a high percentage of people with type 2 diabetes 
are overweight or obese, and many anti-diabetic drugs, 
including insulin, encourage weight gain. Obesity, 
particularly central obesity with increased waist cir­
cumference, also predicts insulin resistance and cardio-
vascular risk.
Management of obesity is described on page 117. 
Weight loss can be achieved through a reduction in 
energy intake and an increase in energy expenditure 
through physical activity. Lifestyle interventions or 
pharmacotherapy for obesity when associated with 
weight reduction have beneficial effects on HbA1c, but 
long-term benefits in terms of glycaemic control and 
microvascular disease have not been adequately 
assessed. More recently, bariatric surgery has been 
shown to induce marked weight loss in obese individu-
als with type 2 diabetes and this is often associated with 
significant improvements in HbA1c and withdrawal of 
or reduction in diabetes medications.
Exercise
All patients with diabetes should be advised to achieve 
a significant level of physical activity and to maintain 
this in the long term. This can include activities such 
as walking, gardening, swimming or cycling. Super-
vised and structured exercise programmes may be of 
particular benefit to people with type 2 diabetes. Various 
guidelines exist for physical activity in the general popu-
lation. Those from the US Department of Health and 
Human services (2008) suggest that adults (18–64 years) 
should build up to achieve a weekly minimum of 
2.5 hours of moderate-intensity exercise or 75 minutes 
Diabetes mellitus
21
822
Fig. 21.9  Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes. Purple boxes indicate the usual approach, and green boxes show alternatives which 
are selected according to individual circumstances. *Hypoglycaemia risk includes driving, occupational hazards and risk of falls. Note that SGLT2 inhibitors 
were not available when this guideline was produced. (DPP-4 = dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GLP-1 = glucagon-like peptide 1). Adapted from SIGN 116 – 
see p. 836.
Thiazolidinedione
if no cardiac failure
Oral (continue MF/SU if tolerated)
DPP-4 inhibitor
if weight gain a concern
DPP-4 inhibitor
if hypoglycaemia a concern*
or if weight gain a concern
Insulin
initially basal; add
prandial if required
Injectable (continue MF/SU if tolerated)
GLP-1 agonist
if obese and usually
< 10 yrs from diagnosis
Third-line options Add or substitute with one of:
Sulphonylurea
If target not achieved despite adherence to treatment
and optimisation of dose
Thiazolidinedione
if hypoglycaemia a concern*
and if no cardiac failure
Second-line options Add one of:
Metformin (MF)
Set glycaemic target:
HbA1C < 53 mmol/mol (7%) or individualised as agreed
Establish and maintain lifestyle adjustments:
diet, exercise, etc.
Sulphonylurea (SU)
if intolerant of metformin
or if weight loss/osmotic symptoms
First-line options Start one of:
Insulin
Sulphonylureas 
and 
meglitinides
Metformin
Acarbose
Thiazolidinediones 
(glitazones)
DPP-4 inhibitors 
(gliptins)
GLP-1 
receptor 
agonists
SGLT2 
inhibitors
Fasting blood 
glucose
↓
↓
↓
↘
↓
↓
↓
↓
Post-prandial 
blood glucose
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
Plasma insulin
↑
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↓
Body weight
↑
↑
→
→
↑
→
↓
↓
Risk of 
hypoglycaemia
++
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
Tolerability
Good
Good
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Good
Moderate
Limited 
experience
(DPP-4 = dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GLP-1 = glucagon-like peptide 1; SGLT2 = sodium and glucose transporter 2)
21.27  Effects of drugs used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes
Mechanism of action
The mechanism of action of metformin has not been 
precisely defined. Whilst classically considered an 
‘insulin sensitiser’ because it lowers insulin levels, its 
main effects are on fasting glucose and are insulin-
independent. Metformin reduces hepatic glucose pro-
duction, may also increase insulin-mediated glucose 
uptake, and has effects on gut glucose uptake and 
as first-line therapy for type 2 diabetes, irrespective of 
body weight. Metformin is also given increasingly as an 
adjunct to insulin therapy in obese patients with type 1 
diabetes. Approximately 25% of patients develop mild 
gastrointestinal side-effects with metformin, but only 
5% are unable to tolerate it even at low dose. The main 
side-effects are diarrhoea, abdominal cramps, bloating 
and nausea.
Management of diabetes
21
823
utilisation. At the molecular level, metformin acts as a 
weak inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, which 
increases intracellular adenosine monophosphate (AMP) 
and reduces adenosine triphosphate (ATP). This has 
direct effects on the flux through gluconeogenesis, and 
activates the intracellular energy sensor AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK), leading to multiple beneficial 
metabolic effects.
Clinical use
Metformin is a potent blood glucose-lowering treatment 
that is weight-neutral, does not cause hypoglycaemia 
and has established benefits in microvascular disease. It 
is employed as first-line therapy in all patients who tol-
erate it, and its use is maintained when additional agents 
are added as glycaemia deteriorates (see Fig. 21.9). Met-
formin is usually introduced at low dose (500 mg twice 
daily) to minimise the risk of gastrointestinal side-
effects. The usual maintenance dose is 1 g twice daily. 
There is a modified-release formulation of metformin 
which may be better tolerated by patients with gastro­
intestinal side-effects.
Metformin can increase susceptibility to lactic acido-
sis, although this is much less common than was previ-
ously thought. As metformin is cleared by the kidneys, 
it can accumulate in renal impairment, so the dose 
should be halved when estimated glomerular filtration 
rate (eGFR) is 30–45 mL/min, and it should not be used 
below an eGFR of 30 mL/min. Its use is also contraindi-
cated in patients with impaired hepatic function and in 
those who drink alcohol in excess, in whom the risk of 
lactic acidosis is significantly increased. It should be dis-
continued, at least temporarily, if any other serious 
medical condition develops, especially one causing 
severe shock or hypoxia. In such circumstances, treat-
ment with insulin should be substituted if required.
Sulphonylureas
Sulphonylureas are ‘insulin secretagogues’, i.e. they 
promote pancreatic β-cell insulin secretion. Similar to 
metformin, the long-term benefits of sulphonylureas 
in lowering microvascular complications of diabetes 
were established in the UK Prospective Diabetes Study 
(p. 827).
Mechanism of action
Sulphonylureas act by closing the pancreatic β-cell 
ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel, decreasing K+ 
efflux, which ultimately triggers insulin secretion. Meg-
litinides (e.g. repaglinide and nateglinide) also work in 
this way and, although short-acting, are essentially 
sulphonyl­urea-like drugs.
Clinical use
Sulphonylureas are an effective therapy for lowering 
blood glucose and are often used as an add-on to met-
formin, if glycaemia is inadequately controlled on met-
formin alone (see Fig. 21.9). The main adverse effects of 
sulphonylureas are weight gain and hypoglycaemia. The 
weight gain is not ideal in patients with diabetes who 
are already overweight or obese, although sulphonyl­
ureas are effective treatments in this group. Hypo­
glycaemia occurs because the closure of KATP channels 
brings about unregulated insulin secretion, even with 
normal or low blood glucose levels.
There are a number of sulphonylureas. In the UK, 
gliclazide is the most commonly used; in contrast, in the 
USA, glibenclamide (also known as glyburide) is widely 
used. Glibenclamide, however, is long-acting and prone 
to induce hypoglycaemia, so should be avoided in the 
elderly. Other sulphonylureas include glimepiride and 
glipizide. The dose–response of all sulphonylureas is 
steepest at low doses; little additional benefit is obtained 
when the dose is increased to maximal levels.
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
The α-glucosidase inhibitors delay carbohydrate absorp-
tion in the gut by inhibiting disaccharidases. Acarbose 
and miglitol are available and are taken with each meal. 
Both lower post-prandial blood glucose and modestly 
improve overall glycaemic control. They can be com-
bined with a sulphonylurea. The main side-effects are 
flatulence, abdominal bloating and diarrhoea. They are 
used widely in the Far East but infrequently in the UK.
Thiazolidinediones
Mechanism of action
These drugs (also called TZDs, ‘glitazones’ or PPARγ 
agonists) bind and activate peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor-γ, a nuclear receptor present mainly 
in adipose tissue that regulates the expression of several 
genes involved in metabolism. TZDs enhance the actions 
of endogenous insulin, in part directly (in the adipose 
cells) and in part indirectly (by altering release of ‘adi-
pokines’, such as adiponectin, which alter insulin sensi-
tivity in the liver). Plasma insulin concentrations are not 
increased and hypoglycaemia does not occur. TZDs 
increase pre-adipocyte differentiation, resulting in an 
increase in fat mass and in body weight.
Clinical use
TZDs have been prescribed widely since the late 1990s, 
but recently a number of adverse effects have become 
apparent and their use has declined. One popular TZD, 
rosiglitazone, was reported to increase the risk of myo-
cardial infarction and was withdrawn in 2010. The other 
TZD in common use, pioglitazone, does not appear to 
increase the risk of myocardial infarction but it does 
exacerbate cardiac failure by causing fluid retention, and 
recent data show that it increases the risk of bone frac-
ture, and possibly bladder cancer. These observations 
have reduced the use of pioglitazone dramatically.
Pioglitazone can be very effective at lowering blood 
glucose in some patients and appears more effective in 
insulin-resistant patients. In addition, it has a beneficial 
effect in reducing fatty liver and NASH (p. 805). Piogli-
tazone is usually added to metformin with or without 
sulphonylurea therapy (see Fig. 21.9). It may be given 
with insulin therapy, when it can be very effective, but 
the combination of insulin and TZDs markedly increases 
fluid retention and risk of cardiac failure, so should be 
used with caution.
Incretin-based therapies: DPP-4 
inhibitors and GLP-1 analogues
The incretin effect is the augmentation of insulin secre-
tion seen when a glucose stimulus is given orally rather 
than intravenously, and reflects the release of incretin 
peptides from the gut (see Fig. 21.3, p. 802). The incretin 
Diabetes mellitus
21
824
solution, can be extended by the addition of protamine 
and zinc at neutral pH (isophane or NPH insulin) or 
excess zinc ions (lente insulins). These modified ‘depot’ 
insulins are cloudy preparations. Pre-mixed formula-
tions containing short-acting and isophane insulins in 
various proportions are available. The pharmacokinetics 
of these various insulins are shown in Box 21.28.
In most countries, the insulin concentration in avail-
able formulations has been standardised at 100 U/mL.
Subcutaneous multiple dose insulin therapy
In most patients, insulin is injected subcutaneously 
several times a day into the anterior abdominal wall, 
upper arms, outer thighs and buttocks (Box 21.29). Acci-
dental intramuscular injection often occurs in children 
and thin adults. The rate of absorption of insulin may be 
influenced by many factors other than the insulin for-
mulation, including the site, depth and volume of injec-
tion, skin temperature (warming), local massage and 
exercise. Absorption is delayed from areas of lipohyper-
trophy at injection sites (p. 799), which results from the 
local trophic action of insulin, so repeated injection at 
the same site should be avoided. Other routes of admin-
istration (intravenous and intraperitoneal) are reserved 
for specific circumstances.
Once absorbed into the blood, insulin has a half-life 
of just a few minutes. It is removed mainly by the liver 
and also the kidneys, so plasma insulin concentrations 
are elevated in patients with liver disease or renal failure. 
Rarely, the rate of clearance can be affected by binding 
to insulin antibodies (induced by use of animal 
insulins).
Insulin can be administered using a disposable plastic 
syringe with a fine needle (which can be re-used several 
times), but this has largely been replaced by pen 
hormones are primarily glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) 
and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP). These are 
rapidly broken down by the peptidase DPP-4 (dipepti-
dyl peptidase 4). The incretin effect is diminished in type 
2 diabetes, and this has stimulated the development of 
two incretin-based therapeutic approaches.
The ‘gliptins’, or DPP-4 inhibitors, prevent break-
down and therefore enhance concentrations of endo­
genous GLP-1 and GIP. The first DPP-4 inhibitor to 
market was sitagliptin; others now available include 
vildagliptin, saxagliptin and linagliptin. These drugs 
are very well tolerated and are weight-neutral (see 
Box 21.27).
The GLP-1 receptor agonists have a similar structure 
to GLP-1 but have been modified to resist breakdown by 
DPP-4. These agents are not orally active and have to be 
given by subcutaneous injection. However, they have a 
key advantage over the DPP-4 inhibitors: because the 
GLP-1 activity achieved is supra-physiological, it delays 
gastric emptying and, at the level of the hypothalamus, 
decreases appetite. Thus, injectable GLP-1 analogues 
lower blood glucose and result in weight loss – an 
appealing therapy, as the majority of patients with type 
2 diabetes are obese. Currently available GLP-1 receptor 
agonists include exenatide (twice daily), exenatide MR 
(once weekly) and liraglutide (once daily).
Unlike sulphonylureas, both incretin-based therapies 
only promote insulin secretion when there is a glucose 
‘trigger’ for insulin secretion. Thus, when the blood 
glucose is normal, the insulin secretion is not augmented 
and so these agents do not cause hypoglycaemia.
SGLT2 inhibitors
The sodium and glucose transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor, 
dapagliflozin, was licensed for use in 2012. Glucose is 
filtered freely in the renal glomeruli and reabsorbed in 
the proximal tubules. SGLT2 is involved in reabsorption 
of glucose. Inhibition results in approximately 25% of 
the filtered glucose not being reabsorbed, with conse-
quent glycosuria. Although this helps to lower blood 
glucose and results in calorie loss and subsequent weight 
loss, the glycosuria does result in increased urinary tract 
and genital fungal infections. With limited experience 
and evidence to date, the most appropriate position for 
SGLT2 inhibitors in the therapy of type 2 diabetes has 
yet to be established.
Insulin therapy
Manufacture and formulation
Insulin was discovered in 1921 and transformed the 
management of type 1 diabetes, until then a fatal disor-
der. Until the 1980s, insulin was obtained by extraction 
and purification from pancreata of cows and pigs 
(bovine and porcine insulins), and some patients still 
prefer to use animal insulins. Recombinant DNA tech-
nology enabled large-scale production of human insulin. 
More recently, the amino acid sequence of insulin has 
been altered to produce analogues of insulin, which 
differ in their rate of absorption from the site of 
injection.
The duration of action of short-acting, unmodified 
insulin (‘soluble’ or ‘regular’ insulin), which is a clear 
Insulin
Onset
Peak
Duration
Rapid-acting
(insulin analogues: 
lispro, aspart, glulisine)
< 0.5
0.5–2.5
3–4.5
Short-acting
(soluble (regular))
0.5–1
1–4
4–8
Intermediate-acting
(isophane (NPH), lente)
1–3
3–8
7–14
Long-acting
(bovine ultralente)
2–4
6–12
12–30
Long-acting
(insulin analogues: 
glargine, detemir)
1–2
None
18–24
21.28  Duration of action (in hours) of 
insulin preparations
• Needle sited at right angle to the skin
• Subcutaneous (not intramuscular) injection
• Delivery devices: glass syringe (requires re-sterilisation), 
plastic syringe (disposable), pen device (reusable, some 
disposable), infusion pump
21.29  How to inject insulin subcutaneously
Management of diabetes
21
825
times before administration. Fixed-mixture insulins also 
have altered pharmacodynamic profiles, such that the 
peak insulin action and time to peak effect are signifi-
cantly reduced compared with injecting the same insu-
lins separately.
Multiple 
injection 
regimens 
(intensive 
insulin 
therapy) are popular, with short-acting insulin being 
taken before each meal, and intermediate- or long-acting 
insulin being injected once or twice daily (basal-bolus 
regimen). This type of regimen allows greater freedom 
with regard to meal timing and more variable day-to-
day physical activity.
injectors containing insulin in cartridges sufficient for 
multiple dosing. These are also available as pre-loaded 
disposable pens.
For the most part, insulin analogues have replaced 
soluble and isophane insulins, especially for people with 
type 1 diabetes, because they allow more flexibility and 
convenience (see Box 21.28). Unlike soluble insulin, 
which should be injected 30 minutes before eating, 
rapid-acting insulin analogues can be administered 
immediately before, during or even after meals. Long-
acting insulin analogues are better able than isophane 
insulin to maintain ‘basal’ insulin levels for up to 
24 hours, so need only be injected once daily. Despite 
these pharmacokinetic benefits, the impact of insulin 
analogues on glycaemic control and adverse events 
appears to be minor.
The complications of insulin therapy are listed in 
Box 21.30; the most important of these is hypo­
glycaemia (p. 814). A common problem is fasting 
hyperglycaemia (‘the dawn phenomenon’), which 
arises through a combination of the normal circadian 
rhythm and release of counter-regulatory hormones 
(growth hormone and cortisol) during the later part 
of the night, as well as diminishing levels of overnight 
isophane insulin.
Insulin dosing regimens
The choice of regimen depends on the desired degree of 
glycaemic control, the severity of underlying insulin 
deficiency, the patient’s lifestyle, and his or her ability 
to adjust the insulin dose. The time–action profile of dif-
ferent insulin regimens, compared to the secretory 
pattern of insulin in the non-diabetic state, is shown in 
Figure 21.10. Most people with type 1 diabetes require 
two or more injections of insulin daily. In type 2 dia­
betes, insulin is usually initiated as a once-daily long-
acting insulin, either alone or in combination with oral 
hypoglycaemic agents. However, in time, more frequent 
insulin injections are usually required.
Twice-daily administration of a short-acting and 
intermediate-acting insulin (usually soluble and iso-
phane insulins), given in combination before breakfast 
and the evening meal, is the simplest regimen and is still 
used commonly in many countries. Initially, two-thirds 
of the total daily requirement of insulin is given in the 
morning in a ratio of short-acting to intermediate-acting 
of 1 : 2, and the remaining third is given in the evening. 
Pre-mixed formulations are available containing differ-
ent proportions of soluble and isophane insulins (e.g. 
30 : 70 and 50 : 50). These are useful for patients who have 
difficulty mixing insulins, but are inflexible as the indi-
vidual components cannot be adjusted independently. 
They need to be resuspended by shaking the vial several 
• Hypoglycaemia
• Weight gain
• Peripheral oedema (insulin treatment causes salt and water 
retention in the short term)
• Insulin antibodies (with animal insulins)
• Local allergy (rare)
• Lipohypertrophy or lipoatrophy at injection sites
21.30  Side-effects of insulin therapy
Fig. 21.10  Profiles of plasma insulin associated with different 
insulin regimens. The schematic profiles are compared with the insulin 
responses (mean ± one standard deviation) observed in non-diabetic adults 
shown in the top panel (shaded area). These are theoretical patterns of 
plasma insulin and may differ considerably in magnitude and duration of 
action between individuals. 
Plasma insulin
Soluble before meals, long-acting
insulin late evening
0600
0200
2200
1800
1400
1000
0600
Clock time (hrs)
Soluble before meals, isophane 
late evening
Soluble and isophane, twice daily
Non-diabetic state
Injection of insulin
Soluble or
fast-acting
analogue
Isophane
Long -acting
analogue
Meal
Key
Diabetes mellitus
21
826
Alternative insulin therapies
‘Open-loop’ systems are battery-powered portable 
pumps providing continuous subcutaneous (CSII), 
intraperitoneal or intravenous infusion of insulin 
without reference to the blood glucose concentration. 
The rate of insulin infusion is variable; it can be pro-
grammed to match the patient’s diurnal variation in 
requirements and then manually boosted at mealtimes. 
In practice, the ‘loop’ is closed by the patient performing 
blood glucose estimations, and the use of these devices 
requires a high degree of patient motivation. These 
increasingly sophisticated systems can achieve excellent 
glycaemic control but widespread therapeutic use is 
limited by cost. The ‘Artificial Pancreas’ project aims to 
close the loop by using miniaturised glucose sensors to 
communicate wirelessly with the insulin pump, which 
would automatically adjust its rate, but this has not yet 
reached widespread clinical practice.
Alternative routes of insulin delivery have been 
investigated. Clinical trials with intrapulmonary (inha-
lation), transdermal and oral insulins are ongoing but as 
yet none has proven commercially viable.
Transplantation
Whole pancreas transplantation is carried out in a small 
number of patients with diabetes each year, but it 
presents problems relating to exocrine pancreatic secre-
tions and long-term immunosuppression is necessary. 
While results are steadily improving, they remain less 
favourable than for renal transplantation. At present, the 
procedure is usually undertaken only in patients with 
end-stage renal failure who require a combined 
pancreas/kidney transplantation and in whom diabetes 
control is particularly difficult, e.g. because of recurrent 
hypoglycaemia.
Transplantation of isolated pancreatic islets (usually 
into the liver via the portal vein) has been achieved 
safely in an increasing number of centres around the 
world. Progress is being made towards meeting the 
needs of supply, purification and storage of islets, but 
the problems of transplant rejection, and of destruction 
by the patient’s autoantibodies against β cells, remain. 
Nevertheless, the development of methods of inducing 
tolerance to transplanted islets and the potential use of 
stem cells (p. 69) means that this may still prove the most 
promising approach in the long term.
COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Despite all the treatments now available, the outcome 
for patients with diabetes remains disappointing. Long-
term complications of diabetes still cause significant 
morbidity and mortality (Boxes 21.31 and 21.32).
Excess mortality in diabetes is caused mainly by large 
blood vessel disease, particularly myocardial infarction 
and stroke. Macrovascular disease also causes sub­
stantial morbidity from myocardial infarction, stroke, 
angina, cardiac failure and intermittent claudication. 
The pathological changes of atherosclerosis in diabetic 
patients are similar to those in the non-diabetic popula-
tion but occur earlier in life and are more extensive and 
severe. Diabetes amplifies the effects of the other major 
Microvascular/neuropathic
Retinopathy, cataract
• Impaired vision
Nephropathy
• Renal failure
Peripheral neuropathy
• Sensory loss
• Pain
• Motor weakness
Autonomic neuropathy
• Gastrointestinal problems (gastroparesis; altered bowel habit)
• Postural hypotension
Foot disease
• Ulceration
• Arthropathy
Macrovascular
Coronary circulation
• Myocardial ischaemia/infarction
Cerebral circulation
• Transient ischaemic attack
• Stroke
Peripheral circulation
• Claudication
• Ischaemia
21.31  Complications of diabetes
cardiovascular risk factors: smoking, hypertension and 
dyslipidaemia (Fig. 21.11). Moreover, patients with type 
2 diabetes are more likely to have additional cardiovas-
cular risk factors, which co-segregate with insulin resist-
ance in the metabolic syndrome (p. 805).
Disease of small blood vessels is a specific complica-
tion of diabetes and is termed diabetic microangiopathy. 
It contributes to mortality through renal failure caused 
21.32  Mortality in diabetes
Complications of diabetes
21
827
There was a 60% overall reduction in the risk of develop-
ing diabetic complications in patients with type 1 dia­
betes on intensive therapy with strict glycaemic control, 
compared with those on conventional therapy (Box 
21.33). No single factor other than glycaemic control had 
a significant effect on outcome. However, the group who 
were intensively treated to lower blood glucose had 
three times the rate of severe hypoglycaemia. The 
UKPDS showed that, in type 2 diabetes, the frequency 
of diabetic complications is lower and progression is 
slower with good glycaemic control and effective treat-
ment of hypertension, irrespective of the type of therapy 
used (Box 21.34). Extrapolation from the UKPDS sug-
gests that, for every 11 mmol/mol (1%) reduction in 
HbA1c, there is a 21% reduction in death related to dia-
betes, a 14% reduction in myocardial infarction and 
30–40% reduction in risk of microvascular complications 
(see Fig. 21.11).
These landmark trials demonstrated that diabetic 
complications are preventable and that the aim of treat-
ment should be ‘near-normal’ glycaemia. However, 
more recent studies, such as the Action to Control 
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD), showed 
increased mortality in a subgroup of patients who were 
aggressively treated to lower HbA1c to a target of less 
than 48 mmol/mol (6.5%). The patients in this study had 
poor glycaemic control at baseline, a long duration of 
diabetes and a high prevalence of cardiovascular disease. 
It appears that, whilst a low target HbA1c is appropriate 
in younger patients with earlier diabetes who do not 
by diabetic nephropathy, and is responsible for substan-
tial morbidity and disability: for example, blindness 
from diabetic retinopathy, difficulty in walking, chronic 
ulceration of the feet from peripheral neuropathy, and 
bowel and bladder dysfunction from autonomic neuro­
pathy. The risk of microvascular disease is positively 
correlated with the duration and degree of sustained 
hyperglycaemia, however caused and at whatever age it 
develops.
Pathophysiology
The histopathological hallmark of diabetic micro­
angiopathy is thickening of the capillary basement 
membrane, with associated increased vascular perme-
ability, which occurs throughout the body. The devel-
opment of the characteristic clinical syndromes of 
diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy and 
accelerated atherosclerosis is thought to result from 
the local response to generalised vascular injury. For 
example, in the wall of large vessels, increased perme-
ability of arterial endothelium, particularly when com-
bined with hyperinsulinaemia and hypertension, may 
increase the deposition of atherogenic lipoproteins. The 
mechanisms linking hyperglycaemia to these pathologi-
cal changes are, however, poorly characterised.
Preventing diabetes complications
Glycaemic control
The evidence that improved glycaemic control decreases 
the risk of developing microvascular complications of 
diabetes was established by the Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial (DCCT) in type 1 diabetes, and the 
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) in type 2 dia-
betes. The DCCT was a large study that lasted 9 years. 
Fig. 21.11  Association between HbA1c and risk of microvascular 
and macrovascular diabetes complications. These data were 
obtained amongst participants in the UK Prospective Diabetes Study and 
were adjusted for effects of age, sex and ethnicity; the incidences show 
what could be expected amongst white men aged 50–54 years at 
diagnosis of type 2 diabetes, followed up for 10 years. Microvascular 
disease included retinopathy requiring photocoagulation, vitreous 
haemorrhage and renal failure. Macrovascular disease included fatal and 
non-fatal myocardial infarction and sudden death. A 1% change in HbA1c is 
equivalent to a reduction of 11 mmol/mol. 
< 6
6–7
7–8
8–9
9–10
> 10
HbA1C (%)
0
20
40
60
Incidence per 1000 patient years
Microvascular disease
Macrovascular disease
(myocardial infarction)
‘In patients with type 1 diabetes, strict glycaemic control (mean 
HbA1c 53 mmol/mol (7%)) reduced the development of 
retinopathy and other microvascular complications by  
76% compared with conventional therapy (mean HbA1c 
75 mmol/mol (9%)). On longer-term follow-up, strict glycaemic 
control also reduced cardiovascular events, including myocardial 
infarction, stroke and death from cardiovascular disease.’
• Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. N Engl J Med 1993; 
329:977–986.
• Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions 
and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) Study Research Group. N Engl J Med 2005; 
353:2643–2653.
For further information: 
 www.diabetes.niddk.nih.gov/dm/pubs/control/
21.33  Glycaemic control in type 1 diabetes
‘In patients with type 2 diabetes, intensive glycaemic control 
(mean HbA1c 53 mmol/mol (7%)) with oral anti-diabetic drugs or 
insulin reduced the development of microvascular complications, 
particularly retinopathy, by 25% compared with conventional 
treatment (mean HbA1c 64 mmol/mol (8%)). On longer-term 
follow-up, there was a significant reduction in myocardial 
infarction and all-cause mortality in intensively controlled 
patients.’
• UKPDS Group. Lancet 1998; 352:837–853, 854–865.
• Holman RR, et al. N Engl J Med 2008; 359:1577–1589.
For further information: 
 www.dtu.ox.ac.uk
21.34  Glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes
Diabetes mellitus
21
828
• Glycaemic control: the optimal target for glycaemic control 
in older people has yet to be determined. Strict glycaemic 
control should be avoided in frail patients with comorbidities 
and in older patients with long duration of diabetes.
• Cognitive function and affect: may benefit from improving 
glycaemic control.
• Hypoglycaemia: older people have reduced symptomatic 
awareness of hypoglycaemia and limited knowledge of 
symptoms, and are at greater risk of, and from, 
hypoglycaemia.
• Mortality: the mortality rate of older people with diabetes is 
more than double that of age-matched non-diabetic people, 
largely because of increased deaths from cardiovascular 
disease.
21.35  Diabetes management in old age
Clinical features
The major risk factors for DR are shown in Box 21.36. 
DR is a progressive condition, often classified into 
two stages: non-proliferative (‘background’) and pro-
liferative. The earliest signs of non-proliferative DR 
are microaneurysms and retinal haemorrhages, some-
times inaccurately called ‘dot’ and ‘blot’ haemorrhages, 
respectively (Fig. 21.12A and B). As DR progresses and 
there is continuing capillary hypoperfusion, cotton wool 
spots, venous beading and intra-retinal microvascular 
abnormalities can be seen (Fig. 21.12C–E); this stage is 
referred to as pre-proliferative DR. The disease may 
then progress to proliferative DR, which is characterised 
by growth of new blood vessels on the retina or optic 
disc (Fig. 21.12F and G). The new vessels are abnormal 
and often bleed, leading to vitreous haemorrhage, sub-
sequent fibrosis and scarring, and finally tractional 
retinal detachment. 
In addition to proliferative and non-proliferative DR, 
patients may also develop clinically significant macular 
oedema (CSMO; see Fig. 21.12C). This can occur at any 
stage of DR and is characterised by increased vascular 
permeability and deposition of hard exudates in the 
central retina. CSMO is the most common cause of loss 
of vision in people with diabetes.
Proliferative retinopathy and severe ocular ischaemia 
may stimulate new vessels to grow on the anterior 
surface of the iris: ‘rubeosis iridis’. These vessels may 
obstruct the drainage angle of the eye and the outflow 
of aqueous fluid, causing secondary glaucoma.
Loss of visual acuity
Microaneurysms, abnormalities of the veins, and small 
haemorrhages and exudates situated in the periphery 
will not interfere with vision. However, if these changes 
are observed near the macula, and in particular if 
they are accompanied by loss of visual acuity, CSMO 
should be suspected. Macular oedema can cause impair-
ment of visual acuity even if this is associated with 
only mild peripheral non-proliferative retinopathy and 
no other obvious pathology. Macular oedema can 
only be confirmed or excluded on slit lamp retinal 
biomicroscopy.
Sudden visual loss occurs with vitreous haemorrhage 
or retinal detachment. In pre-proliferative and prolifera-
tive retinopathy, whether or not visual acuity is impaired, 
prompt laser treatment is important to reduce the risk 
of haemorrhage, fibrosis/gliosis and severe irreversible 
visual impairment.
Prevention
Glycaemic, blood pressure and lipid profile control
Many epidemiological studies have shown a clear rela-
tionship between glycaemic control and the incidence of 
DR. Large randomised controlled trials have shown con-
vincingly that improved glycaemic control, particularly 
have underlying cardiovascular disease, aggressive 
glucose-lowering is not beneficial in older patients with 
long duration of diabetes and multiple comorbidities 
(Box 21.35).
Control of other risk factors
Randomised controlled trials have shown that aggres-
sive management of blood pressure minimises the 
microvascular and macrovascular complications of dia-
betes. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
are valuable in improving outcome in heart disease and 
in treating diabetic nephropathy (p. 830). The manage-
ment of dyslipidaemia with a statin limits macrovascu-
lar disease in people with diabetes (p. 456). This often 
results in the necessary use of multiple medications, 
which exacerbates the problem of adherence to therapy 
by patients; it is not unusual for a patient to be taking 
two or more diabetes therapies, two or more blood pres-
sure drugs and a statin.
Diabetic retinopathy
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the most common 
causes of blindness in adults between 30 and 65 years of 
age in developed countries. The prevalence of DR 
increases with duration of diabetes, and almost all indi-
viduals with type 1 diabetes and the majority of those 
with type 2 diabetes will have some degree of DR after 
20 years.
Pathogenesis
Hyperglycaemia increases retinal blood flow and dis-
rupts intracellular metabolism in retinal endothelial cells 
and pericytes (pericytes wrap around the outside of the 
capillary wall and influence blood flow and capillary 
permeability). This leads to impaired vascular autoregu-
lation, increased production of vasoactive substances 
and endothelial cell proliferation. The resulting capillary 
hypoperfusion and closure cause chronic retinal ischae-
mia, stimulating the production of growth factors, 
including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 
which further stimulates deleterious endothelial cell 
growth (causing new vessel formation) and increased 
vascular permeability (causing retinal leakage and 
exudation).
• Long duration of diabetes
• Poor glycaemic control
• Hypertension
• Hyperlipidaemia
• Pregnancy
• Nephropathy/renal disease
• Others: obesity, smoking
21.36  Risk factors for diabetic retinopathy
Complications of diabetes
21
829
organised and audited programme. The preferred 
method is a digital photographic system for retinal 
imaging, with prompt referral of patients with sight-
threatening retinopathy to an ophthalmologist for 
examination with slit lamp biomicroscopy. If direct 
ophthalmoscopy is used, the pupils should be dilated 
for adequate examination. Unfortunately, many people 
with diabetes receive no regular supervision and do 
not attend for eye screening.
Management
Good glycaemic (HbA1c around 53 mmol/mol (7%)) 
control and an appropriate blood pressure (< 130/
80 mmHg) should be maintained to prevent onset and 
delay progression of diabetic eye disease. Novel agents 
are emerging, including ranibizumab, a monoclonal 
antibody fragment that binds to VEGF-A and is anti-
angiogenic; it is used for diabetic macular oedema.
Retinal photocoagulation (laser treatment) is indi-
cated in: severe proliferative or very severe non-
proliferative retinopathy; new vessels elsewhere with 
vitreous haemorrhage; new vessels without vitreous 
haemorrhage in type 2 diabetes; or CSMO. Photocoagu-
lation is used:
•	 to treat leaking microaneurysms and areas of retinal 
thickening in the macular area, and to reduce 
macular oedema (focal laser)
in the early stages of disease, reduces both the incidence 
and progression of DR in type 1 (see Box 21.33) and type 
2 (see Box 21.34) diabetes. When blood glucose is 
lowered, there can be a transient deterioration of retin-
opathy. This relates to loss of hyperglycaemia-induced 
hyperperfusion in the retinal circulation and a conse-
quent increase in ischaemia. However, this effect wears 
off within 18 months. Improvement in glycaemic control 
should therefore be effected gradually in patients with 
retinopathy, particularly when glycaemic control is ini-
tially poor.
Evidence from randomised controlled trials suggests 
that blood pressure control is also warranted to reduce 
the incidence and progression of DR. Early trials sug-
gested specific benefit from angiotensin II receptor 
antagonists, but later studies indicate that other anti­
hypertensive agents are similarly effective. Most guide-
lines recommend achieving a blood pressure of less 
than 130/80 mmHg. Observational studies suggest that 
hyperlipidaemia is a risk factor for DR, but intervention 
trials have not been conclusive.
Screening
Annual screening for retinopathy is essential in all 
diabetic patients, as the disease is asymptomatic in the 
early stages, when treatment is most effective. Screening 
is particularly important in those with risk factors. It 
should be undertaken by trained personnel in an 
Fig. 21.12  Diabetic retinopathy.  A Microaneurysms. Usually the earliest clinical abnormality, these tiny aneurysms arise mainly from the venous end 
of capillaries and appear as discrete, circular, dark red dots near to, but apparently separate from, the retinal vessels and no wider than a vessel at the 
optic disc margin (arrows).  B Haemorrhages. Larger than a microaneurysm, with indistinct margins and at least as wide as a vessel at the optic disc 
margin, these occur in deeper layers of the retina (arrows). They result either from microaneurysms that have burst or from leaky capillaries. Superficial 
flame-shaped haemorrhages in the nerve fibre layer may also occur, particularly if the patient is hypertensive.  C Hard exudates. These irregularly shaped 
lesions are formed from leaking of cholesterol, often through microaneurysms (black arrows). They can be associated with retinal oedema; if this affects 
the centre of the macula, it can cause clinically significant macular oedema (CSMO, white arrows), which is sight-threatening.  D Cotton wool spots. 
These white, feathery, fluffy lesions indicate capillary infarcts within the nerve fibre layer (arrows). They are most often seen in rapidly advancing 
retinopathy or in association with uncontrolled hypertension.  E Venous beading. In extensive retinal ischaemia, walls of veins develop saccular bulges, 
looking like a string of sausages (black arrow). Intra-retinal microvascular anomalies (IRMA) are spidery vessels, often with sharp corners that indicate 
dilatations of pre-existing capillaries (white arrow).  F and G Neovascularisation. New vessel formation in response to widespread retinal ischaemia may 
arise from the venous circulation either on the optic disc (NVD, arrows in F) or elsewhere in the retina (NVE, arrows in G). Initially, fine tufts of delicate 
vessels form arcades on the surface of the retina; later, they may extend forwards on to the posterior surface of the vitreous. Leaking of serous products 
from new vessels stimulates a connective tissue reaction, with gliosis and fibrosis, that first appears as a white, cloudy haze among the network of new 
vessels and later extends to obliterate the area with a dense white sheet. H Vitreous haemorrhage. New vessels are fragile and liable to rupture during 
vitreous movement, causing a pre-retinal (‘subhyaloid’) or a vitreous haemorrhage (arrows), which may lead to sudden visual loss. 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Diabetes mellitus
21
830
•	 to destroy areas of retinal ischaemia and hence 
lower intraocular levels of VEGF, which play a 
major role in the development of neovascularisation
•	 to reduce the risk of recurrent haemorrhage by 
inducing gliosis and fibrosis of new vessels 
(pan-retinal photocoagulation (PRP)).
Argon laser photocoagulation is the usual method. 
This simple procedure can be carried out under topical 
anaesthesia. Patients should be reviewed regularly to 
look for further development of new vessels and/or 
maculopathy. Extensive bilateral photocoagulation can 
cause significant visual field loss, which may interfere 
with driving ability and reduce night vision.
Vitrectomy is used in selected cases of advanced dia-
betic eye disease due to type 1 diabetes where visual loss 
has been caused by recurrent vitreous haemorrhage that 
has failed to clear or by tractional retinal detachment 
threatening the macula. The value of vitrectomy in type 
2 diabetes is less certain. Rubeosis iridis is a severe com-
plication requiring early and extensive PRP.
Other causes of visual loss in 
people with diabetes
Around 50% of visual loss in people with type 2 diabetes 
results from causes other than diabetic retinopathy. 
These include cataract, age-related macular degenera-
tion, retinal vein occlusion, retinal arterial occlusion, 
non-arteritic ischaemic optic neuropathy and glaucoma. 
Some of these conditions are to be expected in this 
group, as they relate to cardiovascular risk factors (e.g. 
hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and smoking), all of 
which are prevalent in people with type 2 diabetes.
Cataract
Cataract is a permanent lens opacity and is a common 
cause of visual deterioration in the elderly. The lens 
thickens and opacifies with age; with diabetes, the 
increased metabolic insult to the lens causes these 
changes to accelerate and occur prematurely. A rare type 
of ‘snow-flake’ cataract occurs in young patients with 
poorly controlled diabetes. This does not usually affect 
vision but tends to make fundal examination difficult.
The indications for cataract extraction are similar to 
those for the non-diabetic population and depend on the 
degree of visual impairment. An additional indication 
in diabetes is when adequate assessment of the fundus, 
or laser treatment to the retina, is prevented.
Diabetic nephropathy
Diabetic nephropathy is an important cause of morbid-
ity and mortality, and is now among the most common 
causes of end-stage renal failure in developed countries. 
About 30% of patients with type 1 diabetes have devel-
oped diabetic nephropathy 20 years after diagnosis, but 
the risk after this time falls to less than 1% per year, and 
from the outset the risk is not equal in all patients (Box 
21.37). Indeed, some patients do not develop nephro­
pathy, despite having long-standing, poorly controlled 
diabetes, suggesting that they are genetically protected 
from it. Whilst variants in a few genes have been impli-
cated in diabetic nephropathy, the major differences in 
individual risk remain unexplained. Epidemiological 
data have indicated that the overall incidence is 
• Poor glycaemic control
• Long duration of diabetes
• Presence of other microvascular complications
• Ethnicity (e.g. Asians, Pima Indians)
• Pre-existing hypertension
• Family history of diabetic nephropathy
• Family history of hypertension
21.37  Risk factors for diabetic nephropathy
declining as standards of glycaemic and blood pressure 
control have improved.
The pattern of progression of renal abnormalities in 
diabetes is shown schematically in Figure 21.13. Patho-
logically, the first changes coincide with the onset of 
microalbuminuria and include thickening of the glomer-
ular basement membrane and accumulation of matrix 
material in the mesangium. Subsequently, nodular 
deposits (Fig. 21.14) are characteristic, and glomerulo-
sclerosis worsens as heavy proteinuria develops, until 
Fig. 21.13  Natural history of diabetic nephropathy. In the first few 
years of type 1 diabetes mellitus, there is hyperfiltration, which declines 
fairly steadily to return to a normal value at approximately 10 years (blue 
line). In susceptible patients (about 30%), after about 10 years, there is 
sustained proteinuria, and by approximately 14 years it has reached the 
nephrotic range (red line). Renal function continues to decline, with the end 
stage being reached at approximately 16 years. 
Microalbuminuria
Sustained proteinuria
Nephrotic range proteinuria
10
5
120
0
10
20
GFR
(mL / min)
Proteinuria
(g / 24 hrs)
Years
Hyperfiltration
Hypertension
Renal
failure
Fig. 21.14  Nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis. There is thickening 
of basement membranes and mesangial expansion, and a Kimmelstiel–
Wilson nodule (arrow), which is pathognomonic of diabetic kidney disease. 
Complications of diabetes
21
831
Halving the amount of albuminuria with an ACE or 
ARB results in a nearly 50% reduction in long-term risk 
of progression to end-stage renal disease. However, 
some patients do progress, with worsening renal func-
tion. Renal replacement therapy (p. 488) may benefit 
diabetic patients at an earlier stage than other patients 
with end-stage renal failure.
Renal transplantation dramatically improves the life 
of many, and any recurrence of diabetic nephropathy 
in the allograft is usually too slow to be a serious 
problem, but associated macrovascular and microvas-
cular disease elsewhere may still progress. Pancreatic 
transplantation (generally carried out at the same time 
as renal transplantation) can produce insulin independ-
ence and delay or reverse microvascular disease, but 
the supply of organs is limited and this option is avail-
able to few. For further information on management, 
see Chapter 17.
Diabetic neuropathy
Although there is some evidence that the central nervous 
system is affected in long-term diabetes, the clinical 
impact of diabetes is mainly manifest in the peripheral 
nervous system. Diabetic neuropathy causes substantial 
morbidity and increases mortality. It is diagnosed on the 
basis of symptoms and signs, and after the exclusion of 
other causes of neuropathy (p. 1223). Depending on the 
criteria used for diagnosis, it affects between 50 and 90% 
of patients with diabetes, and of these, 15–30% will have 
painful diabetic neuropathy (PDN). Like retinopathy, 
neuropathy occurs secondary to metabolic disturbance, 
and prevalence is related to the duration of diabetes and 
the degree of metabolic control.
Pathological features can occur in any peripheral 
nerves. They include axonal degeneration of both myeli-
nated and unmyelinated fibres, with thickening of the 
Schwann cell basal lamina, patchy segmental demyeli-
nation, and abnormal intraneural capillaries (with base-
ment membrane thickening and microthrombi).
Various classifications of diabetic neuropathy have 
been proposed. One is shown in Box 21.40, but motor, 
sensory and autonomic nerves may be involved in 
varying combinations so that clinically mixed syn-
dromes usually occur.
Clinical features
Symmetrical sensory polyneuropathy
This is frequently asymptomatic. The most common 
clinical signs are diminished perception of vibration 
glomeruli are progressively lost and renal function 
deteriorates.
Diagnosis and screening
Microalbuminuria (Box 21.38) is the presence in the 
urine of small amounts of albumin, at a concentration 
below that detectable using a standard urine dipstick. 
Overt nephropathy is defined as the presence of macro­
albuminuria (albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR) 
> 300 mg/mmol; detectable on urine dipstick). Micro-
albuminuria is a good predictor of progression to 
nephro­pathy in type 1 diabetes. It is a less reliable pre-
dictor of nephropathy in older patients with type 2 dia-
betes, in whom it may be accounted for by other diseases 
(p. 476), although it is a potentially useful marker of an 
increased risk of macrovascular disease.
Management
The presence of established microalbuminuria or overt 
nephropathy should prompt vigorous efforts to reduce 
the risk of progression of nephropathy and of cardiovas-
cular disease by:
•	 aggressive reduction of blood pressure
•	 aggressive cardiovascular risk factor reduction  
(Box 21.39).
In type 1 diabetes, ACE inhibitors have been shown 
to provide greater protection than equal blood pressure 
reduction achieved with other drugs (p. 611), and sub-
sequent studies have shown similar benefits from angio­
tensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) in patients with type 
2 diabetes. This benefit from blockade of the renin–
angiotensin system arises from a reduction in the angio­
tensin II-mediated vasoconstriction of efferent arterioles 
in glomeruli (see Fig 17.1D, p. 465). The resulting dilata-
tion of these vessels decreases glomeruli filtration pres-
sure and therefore the hyperfiltration and protein leak. 
Both ACE inhibitors and ARBs increase risk of hyper­
kalaemia (p. 442) and, in the presence of renal artery 
stenosis (p. 494), may induce marked deterioration in 
renal function. Therefore, electrolytes and renal function 
should be checked after initiation or each dose increase. 
Non-dihydropyridine calcium antagonists (diltiazem, 
verapamil) may be suitable alternatives.
• Identifies incipient nephropathy in type 1 and type 2 
diabetes; is an independent predictor of macrovascular 
disease in type 2 diabetes
• Risk factors include high blood pressure, poor glycaemic 
control, smoking
• Who to screen:
Patients with type 1 diabetes annually from 5 yrs after 
diagnosis
Patients with type 2 diabetes annually from time of 
diagnosis
• Early morning urine measured for albumin : creatinine ratio 
(ACR). Microalbuminuria present if:
Males ACR 2.5–30 mg/mmol creatinine
Females ACR 3.5–30 mg/mmol creatinine
• An elevated ACR should be followed by a repeat test:
Established microalbuminuria if 2 out of 3 tests positive
An ACR > 30 mg/mmol creatinine is consistent with overt 
nephropathy
21.38  Screening for microalbuminuria
‘In type 2 patients with microalbuminuria, intensive treatment 
(including control of glycaemia and hypertension, with use of 
ACE inhibitors, statins and aspirin) reduced the risk of 
cardiovascular disease by 53%, of nephropathy by 61%, and  
of retinopathy by 58% compared with conventional treatment. 
On longer-term follow-up, there was a reduction in total 
mortality and death from cardiovascular causes.’
• Gaede P, et al. N Engl J Med 2003; 348:383–393.
• Gaede P, et al. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:580–591.
21.39  Multiple risk factor intervention in 
type 2 diabetes
Diabetes mellitus
21
832
Visceral (autonomic)
• Cardiovascular
• Gastrointestinal
• Genitourinary
• Sudomotor
• Vasomotor
• Pupillary
Somatic
• Polyneuropathy
Symmetrical, mainly sensory and distal
Asymmetrical, mainly motor and proximal (including 
amyotrophy)
• Mononeuropathy (including mononeuritis multiplex)
21.40  Classification of diabetic neuropathy
neuro­pathies, mononeuropathies are severe and of rapid 
onset, but they eventually recover. The nerves most 
commonly affected are the 3rd and 6th cranial nerves 
(resulting in diplopia), and the femoral and sciatic 
nerves. Rarely, involvement of other single nerves 
results in paresis and paraesthesiae in the thorax and 
trunk (truncal radiculopathies).
Nerve compression palsies are more common in dia-
betes, frequently affecting the median nerve, giving the 
clinical picture of carpal tunnel syndrome, and less com-
monly the ulnar nerve. Lateral popliteal nerve compres-
sion occasionally causes foot drop. Compression palsies 
may be more common because of glycosylation and 
thickening of connective tissue and/or because of 
increased susceptibility of nerves affected by diabetic 
microangiopathy.
Autonomic neuropathy
This is not necessarily associated with peripheral somatic 
neuropathy. Parasympathetic or sympathetic nerves 
may be predominantly affected in one or more visceral 
systems. The resulting symptoms and signs are listed in 
Box 21.41 and tests of autonomic function in Box 21.42. 
The development of autonomic neuropathy is less clearly 
related to poor metabolic control than somatic neuropa-
thy, and improved control rarely results in improved 
symptoms. Within 10 years of developing overt symp-
toms of autonomic neuropathy, 30–50% of patients are 
dead, many from sudden cardiorespiratory arrest. 
Patients with postural hypotension (a drop in systolic 
pressure of 30 mmHg or more on standing from the 
supine position) have the highest subsequent mortality.
sensation distally, ‘glove and stocking’ impairment of all 
other modalities of sensation (see Fig. 21.15), and loss of 
tendon reflexes in the lower limbs. In symptomatic 
patients, sensory abnormalities are predominant. Symp-
toms include paraesthesiae in the feet (and, rarely, in the 
hands), pain in the lower limbs (dull, aching and/or 
lancinating, worse at night, and mainly felt on the ante-
rior aspect of the legs), burning sensations in the soles 
of the feet, cutaneous hyperaesthesia and an abnormal 
gait (commonly wide-based), often associated with a 
sense of numbness in the feet. Weakness and atrophy, 
in particular of the interosseous muscles, may develop, 
leading to structural changes in the foot with loss of 
lateral and transverse arches, clawing of the toes and 
exposure of the metatarsal heads. This results in 
increased pressure on the plantar aspects of the metatar-
sal heads, with the development of callus skin at these 
and other pressure points. Electrophysiological tests 
(p. 1151) demonstrate slowing of both motor and sensory 
conduction, and tests of vibration sensitivity and thermal 
thresholds are abnormal.
A diffuse small-fibre neuropathy causes altered 
perception of pain and temperature, and is associated 
with symptomatic autonomic neuropathy; characteris-
tic features include foot ulcers and Charcot neuro­
arthropathy.
Asymmetrical motor diabetic neuropathy
Sometimes called diabetic amyotrophy, this presents as 
severe and progressive weakness and wasting of the 
proximal muscles of the lower (and occasionally the 
upper) limbs. It is commonly accompanied by severe 
pain, mainly felt on the anterior aspect of the leg, and 
hyperaesthesia and paraesthesiae. Sometimes there may 
also be marked loss of weight (‘neuropathic cachexia’). 
The patient may look extremely ill and be unable to get 
out of bed. Tendon reflexes may be absent on the affected 
side(s). Sometimes there are extensor plantar responses 
and the cerebrospinal fluid protein is often raised. This 
condition is thought to involve acute infarction of the 
lower motor neurons of the lumbosacral plexus. Other 
lesions involving this plexus, such as neoplasms and 
lumbar disc disease, must be excluded. Although recov-
ery usually occurs within 12 months, some deficits are 
permanent. Management is mainly supportive.
Mononeuropathy
Either motor or sensory function can be affected within 
a single peripheral or cranial nerve. Unlike the gradual 
progression of distal symmetrical and autonomic 
Cardiovascular
• Postural hypotension
• Resting tachycardia
• Fixed heart rate
Gastrointestinal
• Dysphagia, due to oesophageal atony
• Abdominal fullness, nausea and vomiting, unstable 
glycaemia, due to delayed gastric emptying (‘gastroparesis’)
• Nocturnal diarrhoea ± faecal incontinence
• Constipation, due to colonic atony
Genitourinary
• Difficulty in micturition, urinary incontinence, recurrent 
infection, due to atonic bladder
• Erectile dysfunction and retrograde ejaculation
Sudomotor
• Nocturnal sweats without 
hypoglycaemia
• Gustatory sweating
• Anhidrosis; fissures in the 
feet
Vasomotor
• Feet feel cold, due to loss of skin vasomotor responses
• Dependent oedema, due to loss of vasomotor tone and 
increased vascular permeability
• Bullous formation
Pupillary
• Decreased pupil size
• Resistance to mydriatics
• Delayed or absent reflexes 
to light
21.41  Clinical features of autonomic neuropathy
Complications of diabetes
21
833
Erectile dysfunction
Erectile failure (impotence) affects 30% of diabetic males 
and is often multifactorial. Although neuropathy and 
vascular causes are common, psychological factors, 
including depression, anxiety and reduced libido, may 
be partly responsible. Alcohol and antihypertensive 
drugs, such as thiazide diuretics and β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists (β-blockers), may cause sexual dysfunction 
and patients have an endocrine cause such as testoster-
one deficiency or hyperprolactinaemia. For further 
information, see page 474.
Management
Management of neuropathies is outlined in Box 21.43.
The diabetic foot
The foot is a frequent site of complications in patients 
with diabetes and for this reason foot care is particularly 
important. Tissue necrosis in the feet is a common 
reason for hospital admission in diabetic patients. Treat-
ment of the foot complications of diabetes accounts for 
more inpatient days than any other diabetes-related 
complication.
Aetiology
Foot ulceration occurs as a result of trauma (often 
trivial) in the presence of neuropathy and/or peripheral 
vascular disease (see p. 600 and Fig. 21.15), with infec-
tion occurring as a secondary phenomenon following 
disruption of the protective epidermis. Most ulcers 
develop at the site of a plaque of callus skin, beneath 
which tissue necrosis occurs and eventually breaks 
through to the surface. In many cases, multiple com-
ponents are involved, but sometimes neuropathy or 
ischaemia predominates, as illustrated in Box 21.44. 
Ischaemia alone accounts for a minority of foot ulcers 
in diabetic patients, with most being either neuropathic 
or neuro-ischaemic.
Charcot neuro-arthropathy is a progressive condition 
affecting the bones and joints of the foot; it is character-
ised by early inflammation and then joint dislocation, 
subluxation, and pathological fractures of the foot of 
Pain and paraesthesiae from peripheral somatic neuropathies
• Intensive insulin therapy (strict glycaemic control)
• Anticonvulsants (gabapentin, pregabalin, carbamazepine, 
phenytoin)
• Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, imipramine)
• Other antidepressants (duloxetine)
• Substance P depleter (capsaicin – topical)
• Opiates (tramadol, oxycodone)
• Membrane stabilisers (mexiletine, IV lidocaine)
• Antioxidant (α-lipoic acid)
21.43  Management options for peripheral 
sensorimotor and autonomic neuropathies
Postural hypotension
• Support stockings
• Fludrocortisone
• NSAIDs
• α-adrenoceptor agonist (midodrine)
Gastroparesis
• Dopamine antagonists (metoclopramide, domperidone)
• Erythromycin
• Gastric pacemaker; percutaneous enteral (jejunal) feeding 
(see Fig. 5.17, p. 123)
Diarrhoea (p. 857)
• Loperamide
• Broad-spectrum antibiotics
• Clonidine
• Octreotide
Constipation
• Stimulant laxatives (senna)
Atonic bladder
• Intermittent self-catheterisation (p. 1175)
Excessive sweating
• Anticholinergic drugs (propantheline, poldine, oxybutinin)
• Clonidine
• Topical antimuscarinic agent (glycopyrrolate cream)
Erectile dysfunction (p. 474)
• Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (sildenafil, vardenafil, 
tadalafil) – oral
• Dopamine agonist (apomorphine) – sublingual
• Prostaglandin E1 (alprostadil) – injected into corpus 
cavernosum or intra-urethral administration of pellets
• Vacuum tumescence devices
• Implanted penile prosthesis
• Psychological counselling; psychosexual therapy
(NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Simple reflex tests
Normal
Borderline
Abnormal
Heart rate responses
To Valsalva manœuvre 
(15 secs)1: ratio of 
longest to shortest 
R–R interval
≥ 1.21
≤ 1.20
To deep breathing  
(6 breaths over 1 min): 
maximum–minimum 
heart rate
≥ 15
11–14
≤ 10
To standing after lying: 
ratio of R–R interval of 
30th to 15th beats
≥ 1.04
1.01–1.03
≤ 1.00
Blood pressure response2
To standing: systolic 
BP fall (mmHg)
≤ 10
11–29
≥ 30
21.42  How to test cardiovascular autonomic 
function
Specialised tests
• Heart rate and blood pressure responses to sustained 
handgrip
• Heart rate variability using power spectral analysis of ECG 
monitoring
• Heart rate and blood pressure variability using time–domain 
analysis of ambulatory monitoring
• MIBG (met-iodobenzylguanidine) scan of the heart
2Avoid arm with arteriovenous fistula in dialysed patients.
1Omit in patients with previous laser therapy for proliferative retinopathy.
Diabetes mellitus
21
834
neuropathic patients, often resulting in debilitating 
deformity (see Fig. 21.15 and p. 798). Charcot neuro­
arthropathy can arise in any condition that causes 
neuropathy (including syphilis, spinal cord injury, 
syringomyelia and so on) but diabetes is the most 
common cause. The pathophysiological mechanisms 
remain poorly understood, but may involve unper-
ceived trauma leading to progressive destruction (the 
‘neurotraumatic’ theory), and/or increased blood flow 
resulting in a mismatch of bone destruction and synthe-
sis (the ‘neurovascular’ theory). More recent evidence 
points to disordered inflammation mediated via the 
nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB)/receptor activator of 
NFκB ligand (RANKL) pathway, opening the way for 
trials of the RANKL inhibitor, denosumab (p. 1124).
Management
Management can be divided into primary prevention 
and treatment of an active problem. All patients should 
be educated in preventive measures (Box 21.45). The feet 
of patients with diabetes should be screened annually, 
following the steps listed on page 799. Two simple tests 
are required to grade a patient’s risk: a 10 g monofila-
ment should be used to assess sensation at five points 
on each foot, and foot pulses should be palpated (dorsa-
lis pedis and/or posterior tibial). Combined with the 
clinical scenario, these tests guide appropriate referral 
and monitoring (Fig. 21.16). Removal of callus skin with 
a scalpel is usually best done by a podiatrist who has 
specialist training and experience in diabetic foot 
problems.
Foot ulcer
Once a foot ulcer develops, patients should ideally be 
referred to a multidisciplinary foot team, involving a 
diabetes specialist, a podiatrist, a vascular surgeon and 
an orthotist. Treatment involves: débridement of dead 
tissue; prompt, often prolonged, treatment with anti­
biotics if required, as infection can accelerate tissue 
necrosis and lead to gangrene; pressure relief using 
dressings; use of specialised bespoke orthotic footwear; 
Neuropathy
Ischaemia
Symptoms
None
Paraesthesiae
Pain
Numbness
None
Claudication
Rest pain
Structural damage
Ulcer
Sepsis
Abscess
Osteomyelitis
Digital gangrene
Charcot joint
Ulcer
Sepsis
Gangrene
21.44  Clinical features of the diabetic foot
Fig. 21.15  Diabetic foot disease. Patients with diabetes can have neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease or both. Clawing of the toes is thought to be 
caused by intrinsic muscle atrophy and subsequent imbalance of muscle function, and causes increased pressure on the metatarsal heads and pressure 
on flexed toes, leading to increased callus and risk of ulceration. A Charcot foot occurs only in the presence of neuropathy, and results in bony destruction 
and ultimately deformity (this X-ray shows a resulting ‘rocker bottom foot’). The angiogram shows disease of the superficial femoral arteries (occlusion of 
the left and stenosis of the right). Insets (Proximal arterial occlusion) From Medscape; (Toe clawing) Bowker and Pfeifer 2008; (Neuropathic foot ulcer) Levy 
and Valabhji 2008; (Digital gangrene) Swartz 2006 – see p. 836.
Glove and
stocking
neuropathy
Clawing of toes
Digital gangrene
Neuropathic
ulcer
Dry, cracked skin
Callus
Loss of leg hair
Peripheral vascular disease
Peripheral neuropathy
Charcot foot
Proximal arterial
occlusion
Absent pulses
Cold feet
Further information and acknowledgements
21
835
As about 40% of patients with a Charcot joint also have 
a foot ulcer, it can be difficult to differentiate from 
osteomyelitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the 
foot is often helpful. The mainstay of treatment for an 
active Charcot foot is immobilisation and, ideally, avoid-
ance of weight-bearing on the affected foot. The ration-
ale is that if no pressure is applied through the foot, 
the destructive process involving the bones will not 
result in significant deformity when the acute inflam-
matory process subsides. Immobilisation is often 
achieved by a total contact plaster cast or ‘aircast’ boot. 
The acute phase often lasts 3–6 months and sometimes 
longer. In the post-acute phase, there is consolidation 
and remodelling of fracture fragments, eventually 
resulting in a stable foot.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.cdc.gov/diabetes/ Diabetes Public Health Resource. 
Useful American site with resources for patients and health-
care professionals.
www.diabetes.org American Diabetes Association. Includes 
information on research and advocacy issues.
www.diabetes.org.uk Diabetes UK. Includes information for 
patients and leaflets.
www.idf.org International Diabetes Federation. Useful 
information on international aspects of care and education.
www.joslin.org Joslin Diabetes Center. Well-written resource for 
patients and health-care professionals, and information on 
diabetes research.
www.mydiabetesmyway.scot.nhs.uk/ An interactive diabetes 
website for patients with diabetes and their carers.
www.ndei.org National Diabetes Education Initiative. 
Web-based education for health-care professionals, including 
case studies and slides.
• Preventive advice to all diabetic patients includes:
Inspect feet every day
Wash feet every day
Moisturise skin if dry
Cut or file toenails regularly
Change socks or stockings every day
Avoid walking barefoot
Check footwear for foreign bodies
Wear suitable, well-fitting shoes
Cover minor cuts with sterile dressings
Do not burst blisters
Avoid over-the-counter corn/callus remedies
• Advice to moderate- and high-risk patients is as above plus:
Do not attempt corn removal
Avoid high and low temperatures
• A podiatrist is an integral part of the diabetes team to ensure 
regular and effective podiatry and to educate patients in care 
of the feet
• Specially manufactured and fitted orthotic footwear is 
required to prevent recurrence of ulceration and to protect 
the feet of patients with Charcot neuroarthropathy
21.45  Care of the feet in patients with diabetes
Fig. 21.16  Risk assessment and management of foot problems in diabetes. Adapted from SIGN 116 – see p. 836.
Moderate
Low
High
Active
Urgent referral to
specialist team
Current foot ulcer, infection,
critical ischaemia, gangrene or
unexplained hot, red swollen foot
Previous foot ulcer or amputation
Sensation impaired
and
foot pulses absent
Skin callus or
foot deformity?
Yes
No
Inability to self-
care for feet
Sensation impaired
and
foot pulses absent
Sensation
unimpaired,
foot pulses present
Annual assessment
by podiatrist
Annual assessment
by podiatrist
Annual screening by
health-care professional
Management
Screening
and sometimes total contact plaster cast or irremovable 
aircast boot. If an ulcer is neuro-ischaemic, a vascular 
assessment is often carried out, by ultrasound or angio­
graphy, as revascularisation by angioplasty or surgery 
may be required to allow the ulcer to heal. In cases of 
severe secondary infection or gangrene, an amputation 
may be required. This can be limited to the affected toe 
or involve more extensive limb amputation.
Charcot foot
Acute Charcot arthropathy almost always presents with 
signs of inflammation – a hot, red, swollen foot. Initial 
X-ray may show bony destruction but is often normal. 
Diabetes mellitus
21
836
Figure acknowledgements
Page 798 inset (Acanthosis nigricans) Shotliff K. Diabetes and 
other metabolic diseases. In: Lim E (ed). Medicine and 
surgery: an integrated textbook. Elsevier; 2007, Fig. 7.11. 
Copyright © 2007 Edinburgh: Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.
Fig. 21.6B Adapted from Holman RR. Diabetes Res Clin 
Pract 1998; 40 (Suppl.):S21–S25.
Fig. 21.7 Adapted from UK Prospective Diabetes 
Study Group. UKPDS 33. Lancet 1998; 352: 
837–853.
Figs 21.9 and 21.16 Adapted from Scottish Intercollegiate 
Guidelines Network (SIGN) guideline number 116.
Fig. 21.15 insets (Proximal arterial occlusion) http://emedicine.
medscape.com/article/460178-overview#a0104; (Toe 
clawing) Bowker JH, Pfeifer MA. Levin and O’Neal’s The 
diabetic foot, 7th edn. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008; Fig. 
26-9. Copyright © 2008 by Mosby, Inc., an affiliate of 
Elsevier; (Neuropathic foot ulcer) Levy MJ, Valabhji J. 
Vascular II: The diabetic foot. Surgery 2008; 26:25–28,  
Fig. 2; copyright © 2007 Elsevier Ltd; (Digital gangrene) 
Swartz MH. Textbook of physical diagnosis, 5th edn. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2006.
837
22 
Clinical examination of the gastrointestinal 
tract 838
Functional anatomy and physiology 840
Control of gastrointestinal function 844
Gut hormones 845
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease 845
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal 
disease 851
Dysphagia 851
Dyspepsia 852
Heartburn and regurgitation 852
Vomiting 853
Gastrointestinal bleeding 853
Diarrhoea 857
Malabsorption 857
Weight loss 859
Constipation 860
Abdominal pain 861
Diseases of the mouth and salivary  
glands 863
Alimentary tract and 
pancreatic disease
Diseases of the pancreas 889
Acute pancreatitis 889
Chronic pancreatitis 892
Congenital abnormalities affecting the 
pancreas 894
Tumours of the pancreas 895
Inflammatory bowel disease 897
Irritable bowel syndrome 907
AIDS and the gastrointestinal tract 909
Ischaemic gut injury 909
Disorders of the colon and rectum 910
Tumours of the colon and rectum 910
Diverticulosis 916
Constipation and disorders of defecation 917
Anorectal disorders 918
Diseases of the peritoneal cavity 919
Other disorders 919
I.D. Penman
C.W. Lees
Diseases of the oesophagus 865
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 865
Motility disorders 868
Tumours of the oesophagus 870
Perforation of the oesophagus 871
Diseases of the stomach and duodenum 871
Gastritis 871
Peptic ulcer disease 872
Functional disorders 876
Tumours of the stomach 877
Diseases of the small intestine 880
Disorders causing malabsorption 880
Motility disorders 886
Miscellaneous disorders of the small  
intestine 886
Adverse food reactions 887
Infections of the small intestine 888
Tumours of the small intestine 888
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
838
Observation
Hands
Clubbing
Koilonychia
Signs of liver disease
(Ch. 23)
Head and neck
Pallor
Jaundice
Angular stomatitis
Glossitis
Parotid enlargement
Mouth ulcers
Dentition
Lymphadenopathy
Abdominal examination
(see opposite)
Multiple surgical scars,
a prolapsing ileostomy
and enterocutaneous
fistulae in a patient
with Crohn’s disease
4
• Distressed/in pain?
• Fever?
• Dehydrated?
• Habitus
• Skin
Skin and nutritional
status
Muscle bulk
Signs of weight loss
1
Groin
Herniae
Lymph nodes
5
Perineum/rectal
(see opposite)
Fistulae
Skin tags
Haemorrhoids
Masses
6
2
Clubbing in patient with
malabsorption
Virchow’s gland in
gastric cancer
3
Pyoderma gangrenosum
in ulcerative colitis
Atrophic glossitis and
angular stomatitis in
vitamin B12 deficiency
Observe
Distension
Respiratory
movements
Scars
Colour
Palpate
Tender/guarding
Masses
Viscera
  Liver (Ch. 23)
  Kidneys (Ch. 17)
  Spleen
Percuss
Ascites
Viscera
Auscultate
Bowel sounds
Bruits
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Clinical examination of the gastrointestinal tract
839
Epigastric mass
Gastric cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Aortic aneurysm
Left upper quadrant mass
?Spleen
Edge
Can’t get above it
Moves towards right
iliac fossa
Dull percussion note
Notch
?Kidney
Rounded
Can get above it
Moves down
Resonant to percussion
Ballotable
Tender to palpation
?Peritonitis
Guarding and rebound
Absent bowel sounds
Rigidity
?Obstruction
Distended
Tinkling bowel sounds
Visible peristalsis
Left iliac fossa mass
Sigmoid colon cancer
Constipation
Diverticular mass
Right iliac fossa mass
Caecal carcinoma
Crohn’s disease
Appendix abscess
Hepatomegaly
Palpable gallbladder
(Ch. 23)
Generalised distension
Fat (obesity)
Fluid (ascites)
Flatus (obstruction/ileus)
Faeces (constipation)
Fetus (pregnancy)
Suprapubic mass
Bladder
Pregnancy
Fibroids/carcinoma
4  Abdominal examination: possible findings
Tumour
Polyp
Cancer
Extrinsic
Tumour
Abscess
Prostate
Uterus/cervix
Prolapse
Stool
Consistency
Colour
Steatorrhoea
Bloody/black
Faecal occult blood
Anal disease
Tags
Haemorrhoids
Polyps
Crohn’s disease
6  Rectal examination: common findings
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
840
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY
Oesophagus, stomach and 
duodenum
This muscular tube extends 25 cm from the cricoid 
cartilage to the cardiac orifice of the stomach. It has 
an upper and a lower sphincter. A peristaltic swallow-
ing wave propels the food bolus into the stomach 
(Fig. 22.1).
The stomach acts as a ‘hopper’, retaining and grind-
ing food, then actively propelling it into the upper small 
bowel (Fig. 22.2).
Diseases of the gastrointestinal tract are a major cause 
of morbidity and mortality. Approximately 10% of all 
general practitioner consultations in the United Kingdom 
are for indigestion, and 1 in 14 is for diarrhoea. Infective 
diarrhoea and malabsorption are responsible for much 
ill health and many deaths in the developing world. The 
gastrointestinal tract is the most common site for cancer 
development. Colorectal cancer is the second most 
common cancer in men, and population-based screening 
programmes exist in many countries. Functional bowel 
disorders affect up to 10–15% of the population and 
consume considerable health-care resources. The inflam-
matory bowel diseases, Crohn’s disease and ulcerative 
colitis, together affect 1 in 250 people in the Western 
world, with substantial associated morbidity.
Fig. 22.2  Normal gastric and duodenal anatomy. 
Vagus nerves
Cardia
Fundus
Antrum
Body
Pancreas
First part of
duodenum
Second part of
duodenum
Common bile duct
Endoscopic view
Endoscopic view
Third part of
duodenum
Diaphragm
Fig. 22.1  The oesophagus: anatomy and function. The swallowing wave. 
Swallowing begins as a
voluntary process. The
food bolus is forcibly
propelled by the tongue
into the pharynx
The upper oesophageal
sphincter relaxes
Peristaltic activity,
controlled by a brain-
stem centre, is mediated
by autonomic nerves
The lower oesophageal
sphincter relaxes. The
food enters the stomach
1
2
3
4
Upper sphincter
(cricopharyngeus
muscle)
Lower
oesophageal
sphincter
Endoscopic
view
Normal
high-resolution
manometry
Functional anatomy and physiology
22
841
Gastric secretion
Gastrin, histamine and acetylcholine are the key stimu-
lants of acid secretion. Hydrogen and chloride ions are 
secreted from the apical membrane of gastric parietal 
cells into the lumen of the stomach by a hydrogen–
potassium adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) (‘proton 
pump’) (Fig. 22.3). The hydrochloric acid sterilises the 
upper gastrointestinal tract and converts pepsinogen – 
which is secreted by chief cells – to pepsin. The glyco-
protein intrinsic factor, secreted in parallel with acid, is 
necessary for vitamin B12 absorption.
Gastrin, somatostatin and ghrelin
The hormone gastrin is produced by G cells in the 
antrum, whereas somatostatin is secreted from D cells 
throughout the stomach. Gastrin stimulates acid secre-
tion and mucosal growth, whilst somatostatin sup-
presses it. Ghrelin, secreted from oxyntic glands, 
stimulates acid secretion but also appetite and gastric 
emptying.
Protective factors
Bicarbonate ions, stimulated by prostaglandins, mucins 
and trefoil factor family (TFF) peptides together protect 
the gastroduodenal mucosa from the ulcerative proper-
ties of acid and pepsin.
Fig. 22.3  Control of acid secretion. Gastrin released from antral G 
cells in response to food (protein) binds to cholecystokinin receptors 
(CCK-2R) on the surface of enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells, which in turn 
release histamine. The histamine binds to H2 receptors on parietal cells and 
this leads to secretion of hydrogen ions, in exchange for potassium ions at 
the apical membrane. Parietal cells also express CCK-2R and it is thought 
that activation of these receptors by gastrin is involved in regulatory 
proliferation of parietal cells. Cholinergic (vagal) activity and gastric 
distension also stimulate acid secretion; somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal 
polypeptide (VIP) and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) may inhibit it. 
(ACh-R = acetylcholine receptor; ATPase = adenosine triphosphatase) 
Enterochromaffin-like
(ECL) cell
Parietal cell
Histamine
Gastrin
CCK-2R
Gastrin
CCK-2R
H2
ACh-R
(M3)
Vagal
stimulation
Anticipation or
smell of food
Gastric
distension
H+/K+ ATPase
K+ H+
Cl–
Fig. 22.4  Small intestine: anatomy. Epithelial cells are formed in 
crypts and differentiate as they migrate to the tip of the villi to form 
enterocytes (absorptive cells) and goblet cells. 
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Jejunum
Arteries
Veins
Lymphatics
Paneth
cells
Ligament
of Treitz
Brush border microvilli
Crypts
Villi
Ileum
Small intestine
The small bowel extends from the ligament of Treitz to 
the ileocaecal valve (Fig. 22.4). During fasting, a wave of 
peristaltic activity passes down the small bowel every 
1–2 hours. Entry of food into the gastrointestinal tract 
stimulates small bowel peristaltic activity. Functions of 
the small intestine are:
•	 digestion (mechanical, enzymatic and peristaltic)
•	 absorption – the products of digestion, water, 
electrolytes and vitamins
•	 protection against ingested toxins
•	 immune regulation.
Digestion and absorption
Fat
Dietary lipids comprise long-chain triglycerides, choles-
terol esters and lecithin. Lipids are insoluble in water 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
842
Fig. 22.5  Fat digestion. Step 1: Luminal phase. Fatty acids stimulate cholecystokinin (CCK) release from the duodenum and upper jejunum. The CCK 
stimulates release of amylase, lipase, colipase and proteases from the pancreas, causes gallbladder contraction and relaxes the sphincter of Oddi, leading 
bile to flow into the intestine. Step 2: Fat solubilisation. Bile acids and salts combine with dietary fat to form mixed micelles, which also contain cholesterol 
and fat-soluble vitamins. Step 3: Digestion. Pancreatic lipase, in the presence of its co-factor, colipase, cleaves long-chain triglycerides, yielding fatty acids 
and monoglycerides. Step 4: Absorption. Mixed micelles diffuse to the brush border of the enterocytes. Within the brush border, long-chain fatty acids bind 
to proteins, which transport the fatty acids into the cell, whereas cholesterol, short-chain fatty acids, phospholipids and fat-soluble vitamins enter the cell 
directly. The bile salts remain in the small intestinal lumen and are actively transported from the terminal ileum into the portal circulation and returned to 
the liver (the enterohepatic circulation). Step 5: Re-esterification. Within the enterocyte, fatty acids are re-esterified to form triglycerides. Triglycerides 
combine with cholesterol ester, fat-soluble vitamins, phospholipids and apoproteins to form chylomicrons. Step 6: Transport. Chylomicrons leave the 
enterocytes by exocytosis, enter mesenteric lymphatics, pass into the thoracic duct, and eventually reach the systemic circulation. 
Simple
micelles
Enterohepatic
circulation
Pancreatic
enzyme
secretion
Gallbladder
contraction
C V P
Digestion of
triglycerides
C
V
P
C V P
Apoproteins
Absorption
Chylomicrons
Bile acids resorbed
in terminal ileum
1
3
2
4
5
6
Fat
emulsification
by motor
activity
CCK
release from
duodenum
Dietary
fat
Fat solubilisation
(‘mixed’ micelles)
Bile acids
and salts
Fat
Lipase
Colipase
Monoglycerides Free fatty
acids
Triglycerides
Lymphatics
Enterocyte
Triglyceride
Glycerol
Fatty acids
Cholesterol (C)
Phospholipids (P)
Vitamins A, D, E and K (V)
and undergo lipolysis and incorporation into mixed 
micelles before they can be absorbed into enterocytes 
along with the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, K and E. The 
lipids are processed within enterocytes and pass via 
lymphatics into the systemic circulation. Fat absorption 
and digestion can be considered as a stepwise process, 
as outlined in Figure 22.5.
Carbohydrates
Starch is hydrolysed by salivary and pancreatic amy-
lases to alpha-limit dextrins containing 4–8 glucose 
molecules; to the disaccharide, maltose; and to the trisac-
charide, maltotriose.
Disaccharides are digested by enzymes fixed to the 
microvillous membrane to form the monosaccharides, 
glucose, galactose and fructose. Glucose and galactose 
enter the cell by an energy-requiring process involving a 
carrier protein, and fructose enters by simple diffusion.
Protein
The steps involved in protein digestion are shown in 
Figure 22.6. Intragastric digestion by pepsin is quantita-
tively modest but important because the resulting 
polypeptides and amino acids stimulate CCK release 
from the mucosa of the proximal jejunum, which in turn 
stimulates release of pancreatic proteases, including 
trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, pro-elastases and pro-
carboxypeptidases, from the pancreas. On exposure to 
brush border enterokinase, inert trypsinogen is con-
verted to the active proteolytic enzyme trypsin, which 
activates the other pancreatic proenzymes. Trypsin 
digests proteins to produce oligopeptides, peptides and 
amino acids. Oligopeptides are further hydrolysed by 
brush border enzymes to yield dipeptides, tripeptides 
and amino acids. These small peptides and the amino 
acids are actively transported into the enterocytes, 
where intracellular peptidases further digest peptides to 
amino acids. Amino acids are then actively transported 
across the basal cell membrane of the enterocyte into the 
portal circulation and the liver.
Water and electrolytes
Absorption and secretion of electrolytes and water occur 
throughout the intestine. Electrolytes and water are 
transported by two pathways:
•	 the paracellular route, in which passive flow through 
tight junctions between cells is a consequence of 
osmotic, electrical or hydrostatic gradients
•	 the transcellular route across apical and basolateral 
membranes by energy-requiring specific active 
transport carriers (pumps).
Functional anatomy and physiology
22
843
into the lumen of the intestine. Intestinal T lymphocytes 
help localise plasma cells to the site of antigen exposure, 
as well as producing inflammatory mediators. Macro-
phages in the gut phagocytose foreign materials 
and secrete a range of cytokines, which mediate 
Fig. 22.6  Protein digestion. 
CCK
release
Minor digestion
by pepsins
Trypsinogen
Enterokinase
Trypsin
Proteins
Activation of other
pro-enzymes
Peptides
Amino acids
Oligopeptides
Brush border
enzymes
Small peptides
Amino acids
Enterocyte
Peptides
Peptidase
Amino acids
Portal
circulation
Liver
Peptides
Peptidase
Amino acids
Stomach
Small intestine
Pancreas
Pancreatic
pro-enzyme
secretion
Fig. 22.7  Fluid homeostasis in the gastrointestinal tract. 
Saliva
1500 mL
Gastric
2000 mL
Pancreas
1500 mL
Small
intestine
1500 mL
100 mL
Food + H2O intake
1200 mL
Bile
500 mL
Colonic
reabsorption
1400 mL
Portal
vein
6700 mL
Total in
Reabsorbed
Stool excretion
8200 mL
8100 mL
100 mL
In healthy individuals, fluid balance is tightly con-
trolled, such that only 100 mL of the 8 litres of fluid 
entering the gastrointestinal tract daily is excreted in 
stools (Fig. 22.7).
Vitamins and trace elements
Water-soluble vitamins are absorbed throughout the 
intestine. The absorption of folic acid, vitamin B12, 
calcium and iron is described on page 1024.
Protective function of the small intestine
Physical defence mechanisms
There are several levels of defence in the small bowel 
(Fig. 22.8). Firstly, the gut lumen contains host bacteria, 
mucins and secreted antibacterial products, including 
defensins and immunoglobulins which help combat 
pathogenic infections. Secondly, epithelial cells have 
relatively impermeable brush border membranes, and 
passage between cells is prevented by tight and adher-
ens junctions. These cells can react to foreign peptides 
(‘innate immunity’) using pattern recognition receptors 
found on cell surfaces (Toll receptors) or intracellularly. 
Lastly, in the subepithelial layer, immune responses 
occur under control of the adaptive immune system in 
response to pathogenic compounds.
Immunological defence mechanisms
Gastrointestinal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT) constitutes 25% of the total lymphatic tissue of 
the body and is at the heart of adaptive immunity. 
Within Peyer’s patches, B lymphocytes differentiate to 
plasma cells following exposure to antigens, and these 
migrate to mesenteric lymph nodes, to enter the blood 
stream via the thoracic duct. The plasma cells return to 
the lamina propria of the gut through the circulation and 
release immunoglobulin A (IgA), which is transported 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
844
Fig. 22.9  Pancreatic structure and function. Ductular cells secrete alkaline fluid in response to secretin. Acinar cells secrete digestive enzymes from 
zymogen granules in response to a range of secretagogues. The photograph shows a normal pancreatic duct (PD) and side branches, as defined at 
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). Note the incidental calculi in the gallbladder and common bile duct (arrow). (CCK = cholecystokinin; 
VIP = vasoactive intestinal polypeptide) 
Duodenum
MRCP–normal pancreas
CCK
Acetylcholine
Secretin
VIP
Bombesin
Substance P
Acinus
Ductule
Secretin
Proenzyme
HCO3- + water
5 cm
Ampulla of Vater
Accessory ampulla
PD
Fig. 22.8  Intestinal defence mechanisms. See text for details. 
1
Lumen
2
Epithelium
3
Subepithelial
layer
Enzyme
Substrate
Product
Amylase
Starch and 
glycogen
Limit dextrans
Maltose
Maltriose
Lipase
Colipase
Triglycerides
Monoglycerides 
and free fatty acids
Proteolytic enzymes
Trypsinogen
Chymotrypsinogen
Pro-elastase
Pro-carboxypeptidases
Proteins and 
polypeptides
Short polypeptides
22.1  Pancreatic enzymes
inflammation. Similarly, activation of mast-cell surface 
IgE receptors leads to degranulation and release of other 
molecules involved in inflammation.
Pancreas
The exocrine pancreas (Box 22.1) is necessary for the 
digestion of fat, protein and carbohydrate. Proenzymes 
are secreted from pancreatic acinar cells in response to 
circulating gastrointestinal hormones (Fig. 22.9) and are 
activated by trypsin. Bicarbonate-rich fluid is secreted 
from ductular cells to produce an optimum alkaline pH 
for enzyme activity.
Colon
The colon (Fig. 22.10) absorbs water and electrolytes. It 
also acts as a storage organ and has contractile activity. 
Two types of contraction occur. The first of these is seg-
mentation (ring contraction), which leads to mixing but 
not propulsion; this promotes absorption of water and 
electrolytes. Propulsive (peristaltic contraction) waves 
occur several times a day and propel faeces to the 
rectum. All activity is stimulated after meals, probably 
in response to release of motilin and CCK. Faecal conti-
nence depends upon maintenance of the anorectal angle 
and tonic contraction of the external anal sphincters. On 
defecation, there is relaxation of the anorectal muscles, 
increased intra-abdominal pressure from the Valsalva 
manœuvre and contraction of abdominal muscles, and 
relaxation of the anal sphincters.
Control of gastrointestinal function
Secretion, absorption, motor activity, growth and dif-
ferentiation of the gut are all modulated by a combina-
tion of neuronal and hormonal factors.
The nervous system and 
gastrointestinal function
The central nervous system (CNS), the autonomic 
system (ANS) and the enteric nervous system (ENS) 
interact to regulate gut function. The ANS comprises:
•	 parasympathetic pathways (vagal and sacral efferent), 
which are cholinergic, and increase smooth muscle 
tone and promote sphincter relaxation
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease 
22
845
Fig. 22.10  The normal colon, rectum and anal canal. 
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Caecum
Appendix
Inferior
mesenteric
artery
Rectum
Anal canal
External anal
sphincter
Internal anal
sphincter
Sigmoid
colon
Descending
colon
Ascending colon
Ileocaecal valve
Transverse colon
•	 sympathetic pathways, which release noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine), reduce smooth muscle tone and 
stimulate sphincter contraction.
The enteric nervous system
In conjunction with the ANS, the ENS senses gut contents 
and conditions, and regulates motility, fluid exchange, 
secretion, blood flow and other key gut functions. It com-
prises two major networks intrinsic to the gut wall. The 
myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexus in the smooth muscle 
layer regulates motor control; and the submucosal 
(Meissner’s) plexus exerts secretory control over the epi-
thelium, enteroendocrine cells and submucosal vessels. 
Together, these plexuses form a two-layered neuronal 
mesh along the length of the gut. Although connected 
centrally via the ANS, the ENS can function autono-
mously, using a variety of transmitters, including 
acetylcholine, 
noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine), 
5- 
hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin), nitric oxide, sub-
stance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). 
There are local reflex loops within the ENS but also loops 
involving the coeliac and mesenteric ganglia and the 
paravertebral ganglia. The parasympathetic system gen-
erally stimulates motility and secretion, while the sym-
pathetic system generally acts in an inhibitory manner.
Peristalsis
Peristalsis is a reflex triggered by gut wall distension, 
which consists of a wave of circular muscle contraction 
to propel contents from the oesophagus to the rectum. 
It can be influenced by innervation but functions inde-
pendently. It results from a basic electrical rhythm 
originating from the interstitial cells of Cajal in the cir-
cular layer of intestinal smooth muscle. These are stellate 
cells of mesenchymal origin with smooth muscle fea-
tures, which act as the ‘pacemaker’ of the gut.
Migrating motor complexes
Migrating motor complexes (MMC) are waves of con-
traction spreading from the stomach to the ileum, occur-
ring at a frequency of about 5 per minute every 
90 minutes or so, between meals and during fasting. 
They may serve to sweep intestinal contents distally in 
preparation for the next meal and are inhibited by eating.
Gut hormones
The origin, action and control of the major gut hor-
mones, peptides and non-peptide signalling transmit-
ters are summarised in Box 22.2.
INVESTIGATION OF  
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
A wide range of tests are available for the investigation 
of patients with gastrointestinal symptoms. These can be 
classified broadly into tests of structure, tests for infec-
tion and tests of function.
Imaging
Plain X-rays
Plain X-rays of the abdomen are useful in the diagnosis 
of intestinal obstruction or paralytic ileus, where dilated 
loops of bowel and (in the erect position) fluid levels 
may be seen. Calcified lymph nodes, gallstones and 
renal stones can also be detected. Chest X-ray 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
846
evaluation of intra-abdominal disease. They are non-
invasive and offer detailed images of the abdominal 
contents. Their main applications are summarised in 
Box 22.4 and Figure 22.12.
Endoscopy
Videoendoscopes provide high-definition imaging and 
accessories can be passed down the endoscope to allow 
both diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, some of 
which are illustrated in Figure 22.13. Endoscopes 
with magnifying lenses allow almost microscopic detail 
to be observed, and imaging modalities, such as con­
focal endomicroscopy, autofluorescence and ‘narrow 
band imaging’, are increasingly used to detect subtle 
abnormalities not visible by standard ‘white light’ 
endoscopy.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
This is performed under light intravenous benzo­
diazepine sedation, or using only local anaesthetic throat 
spray after the patient has fasted for at least 4 hours. 
With the patient in the left lateral position, the entire 
oesophagus (excluding pharynx), stomach and first two 
parts of duodenum can be seen. Indications, contraindi-
cations and complications are given in Box 22.5.
(performed with the patient in erect position) is useful 
in the diagnosis of suspected perforation, as it shows 
subdiaphragmatic free air.
Contrast studies
X-rays with contrast medium are usually performed to 
assess not only anatomical abnormalities but also motil-
ity. Barium sulphate provides good mucosal coating and 
excellent opacification but can precipitate impaction 
proximal to an obstructive lesion. Water-soluble contrast 
is used to opacify bowel prior to abdominal computed 
tomography and in cases of suspected perforation. The 
double contrast technique improves mucosal visualisa-
tion by using gas to distend the barium-coated intestinal 
surface. Contrast studies are useful for detecting filling 
defects, such as tumours, strictures, ulcers and motility 
disorders, but are inferior to endoscopic procedures and 
more sophisticated cross-sectional imaging techniques, 
such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging. The major uses and limitations of various con-
trast studies are shown in Box 22.3 and Figure 22.11.
Ultrasound, computed tomography and 
magnetic resonance imaging
Ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT) and mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) are key tests in the 
Hormone
Origin
Stimulus
Action
Gastrin
Stomach (G cell)
Products of protein digestion
Suppressed by acid and 
somatostatin
Stimulates gastric acid secretion
Stimulates growth of gastrointestinal 
mucosa
Somatostatin
Throughout GI tract (D cell)
Fat ingestion
Inhibits gastrin and insulin secretion
Decreases acid secretion
Decreases absorption
Inhibits pancreatic secretion
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Duodenum and jejunum  
(I cells); also ileal and  
colonic nerve endings
Products of protein digestion
Fat and fatty acids
Suppressed by trypsin
Stimulates pancreatic enzyme secretion
Gallbladder contraction
Sphincter of Oddi relaxation
Satiety
Decreases gastric acid secretion
Reduces gastric emptying
Regulates pancreatic growth
Secretin
Duodenum and jejunum  
(S cells)
Duodenal acid
Fatty acids
Stimulates pancreatic fluid and bicarbonate 
secretion
Decreases acid secretion
Reduces gastric emptying
Motilin
Duodenum, small intestine and 
colon (Mo cells)
Fasting
Dietary fat
Regulates peristaltic activity, including 
migrating motor complexes (MMC)
Gastric inhibitory 
polypeptide (GIP)
Duodenum (K cells) and 
jejunum
Glucose and fat
Stimulates insulin release (also known as 
glucose-dependent insulinotrophic 
polypeptide)
Inhibits acid secretion
Vasoactive intestinal 
peptide (VIP)
Nerve fibres throughout GI tract
Unknown
Vasodilator
Smooth muscle relaxation
Water and electrolyte secretion
Ghrelin
Stomach
Fasting
Inhibited by eating
Stimulates appetite, acid secretion and 
gastric emptying
Peptide YY
Ileum and colon
Feeding
Modulates satiety
Amylin
Pancreatic islet β-cells
Feeding
Glycaemic control
22.2  Gut hormones and peptides
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease 
22
847
Barium swallow/meal
Barium follow-through
Barium enema
Indications and 
major uses
Motility disorders (achalasia and 
gastroparesis)
Perforation or fistula (non-ionic 
contrast)
Diarrhoea and abdominal pain of small 
bowel origin
Possible obstruction by strictures
Suspected malabsorption
Crohn’s disease assessment
Altered bowel habit
Evaluation of strictures or diverticular 
disease
Megacolon
Chronic constipation
Limitations
Risk of aspiration
Poor mucosal detail
Low sensitivity for early cancer
Inability to biopsy
Time-consuming
Radiation exposure
Relative insensitivity
Difficult in frail or incontinent 
patients
Sigmoidoscopy needed to see rectum
Low sensitivity for lesions < 1 cm
22.3  Contrast radiology in the investigation of gastrointestinal disease
Fig. 22.11  Examples of contrast radiology.  A  Non-ionic contrast swallow shows leakage of contrast (arrow) into the mediastinum following 
stricture dilatation.  B  Barium follow-through. There are multiple diverticula (arrows) in this patient with jejunal diverticulosis.  C  Barium enema 
showing severe diverticular disease. There is tortuosity and narrowing of the sigmoid colon with multiple diverticula (arrows). 
A
B
C
Ultrasound
CT
MRI
CT-PET
Indications and 
major uses
Abdominal masses
Organomegaly
Ascites
Biliary tract dilatation
Gallstones
Guided biopsy of lesions
Small bowel imaging
Assess pancreatic disease
Hepatic tumour deposits
CT colonography (‘virtual 
colonoscopy’)
Tumour staging
Assess lesion vascularity 
Abscesses and collections
Hepatic tumour staging
MRCP
Pelvic/perianal disease
Crohn’s fistulae
Small bowel visualisation
Detection of metastases 
not seen on ultrasound  
or CT
Images can be fused with 
CT to form composite 
image
Limitations
Low sensitivity for small 
lesions
Little functional 
information
Operator-dependent
Gas and obesity may 
obscure view
Cost
Radiation dose
Claustrophobic patients
Contraindicated in 
presence of metallic 
prostheses, cardiac 
pacemaker, cochlear 
implants
Signal detection depends 
on metabolic activity 
within tumour – not all are 
metabolically active
22.4  Imaging in gastroenterology
Fig. 22.12  Examples of ultrasound, CT and MRI.  A  Ultrasound showing large gallstone (arrow) with acoustic shadowing.  B  Multidetector 
coronal CT showing large solid and cystic malignant tumour in the pancreatic tail (arrow). (PV = portal vein; L = liver)  C  Pelvic MRI showing large 
pelvic abscess (arrow) posterior to the rectum in a patient with Crohn’s disease. D  Fused CT-PET image showing two liver metastases (arrows). 
A
B
C
D
L
PV
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
848
Indications
•	 Dyspepsia over 55 yrs of age or with alarm symptoms
•	 Atypical chest pain
•	 Dysphagia
•	 Vomiting
•	 Weight loss
•	 Acute or chronic gastrointestinal bleeding
•	 Screening for oesophageal varices in patients with chronic 
liver disease
•	 Abnormal CT scan or barium meal
•	 Duodenal biopsies in the investigation of malabsorption and 
to confirm a diagnosis of coeliac disease prior to 
commencement of gluten-free diet
•	 Therapeutic, including treatment of bleeding lesions, 
banding/injection of varices, dilatation of strictures, insertion 
of stents, placement of percutaneous gastrostomies
Contraindications
•	 Severe shock
•	 Recent myocardial 
infarction, unstable angina, 
cardiac arrhythmia*
•	 Severe respiratory disease*
•	 Atlantoaxial subluxation*
•	 Possible visceral 
perforation
Complications
•	 Cardiorespiratory 
depression due to sedation
•	 Aspiration pneumonia
•	 Perforation
*These are ‘relative’ contraindications; in experienced hands, endoscopy 
can be safely performed.
22.5  Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Fig. 22.13  Examples of 
therapeutic techniques 
in endoscopy. 
Control of
bleeding
Injection sclerotherapy
Diathermy
Variceal ligation
Laser therapy
Treatment of
tumours
Laser therapy
Polypectomy
Photodynamic
therapy/radiofrequency
ablation
Treatment of
strictures
Stent insertion
Balloon dilatation
Bouginage
Management
of biliary and
pancreatic
disease
Basket retrieval
Endoscopic clipping
Endoscopic mucosal
resection
Stent insertion
Pseudocyst drainage
Sphincterotomy
patient’s waist. After approximately 8 hours, the capsule 
is excreted. Images from the capsule are analysed as a 
video sequence and it is usually possible to localise the 
segment of small bowel in which lesions are seen. 
Abnormalities detected usually require enteroscopy for 
confirmation and therapy. Indications, contraindications 
and complications are listed in Box 22.6.
Double balloon enteroscopy
While endoscopy can reach the proximal small intestine 
in most patients, a newer technique called double 
balloon enteroscopy is also available, which uses a long 
endoscope with a flexible overtube. Sequential and 
repeated inflation and deflation of balloons on the tip of 
the overtube and enteroscope allow the operator to 
push and pull along the entire length of the small intes-
tine to the terminal ileum, in order to diagnose or treat 
small bowel lesions detected by capsule endoscopy or 
other imaging modalities. Indications, contraindications 
and complications are listed in Box 22.7.
Sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy
Sigmoidoscopy can be carried out either in the outpa-
tient clinic using a 20 cm rigid plastic sigmoidoscope or 
in the endoscopy suite using a 60 cm flexible colono-
scope following bowel preparation. When sigmoidos-
copy is combined with proctoscopy, accurate detection 
of haemorrhoids, ulcerative colitis and distal colorectal 
neoplasia is possible. After full bowel cleansing, it is 
possible to examine the entire colon and the terminal 
ileum using a longer colonoscope. Indications, contrain-
dications and complications of colonoscopy are listed in 
Box 22.8.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
has 
largely 
replaced 
endoscopic 
retrograde 
Capsule endoscopy
Capsule endoscopy (Fig. 22.14) uses a capsule contain-
ing an imaging device, battery, transmitter and antenna; 
as it traverses the small intestine, it transmits images to 
a battery-powered recorder worn on a belt round the 
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease 
22
849
Fig. 22.14  Wireless capsule 
endoscopy. A  Examples of 
capsules. B  Capsule endoscopy 
image of bleeding jejunal vascular 
malformation. 
A
B
Indications
•	 Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding
•	 Small bowel Crohn’s disease
•	 Assessment of coeliac disease and its complications
•	 Screening and surveillance in familial polyposis syndromes
Contraindications
•	 Known or suspected small bowel stricture (risk of capsule 
retention)
•	 Caution in people with pacemakers or implantable 
defibrillators
Complications
•	 Capsule retention (< 1%)
22.6  Wireless capsule endoscopy
Indications
Diagnostic
•	 Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding
•	 Malabsorption or unexplained diarrhoea
•	 Suspicious radiological findings
•	 Suspected small bowel tumour
•	 Surveillance of polyposis syndromes
Therapeutic
•	 Coagulation/diathermy of bleeding lesions
•	 Jejunostomy placement
Contraindications
•	 As for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Complications
•	 As for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
•	 Post-procedure abdominal pain (≤20%)
•	 Pancreatitis (1–3%)
•	 Perforation (especially after resection of large polyps)
22.7  Double balloon enteroscopy
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in the evaluation of 
obstructive jaundice since it provides comparable 
images of the biliary tree and pancreas, providing infor-
mation that complements that obtained from CT and 
endoscopic ultrasound examination (EUS).
Indications*
•	 Suspected inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Chronic diarrhoea
•	 Altered bowel habit
•	 Rectal bleeding or iron deficiency anaemia
•	 Assessment of abnormal CT colonogram or barium enema
•	 Colorectal cancer screening
•	 Colorectal adenoma and carcinoma follow-up
•	 Therapeutic procedures, including endoscopic resection, 
dilatation of strictures, laser, stent insertion and argon 
plasma coagulation
Contraindications
•	 Acute severe ulcerative colitis (prefer unprepared flexible 
sigmoidoscopy)
•	 As for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Complications
•	 Cardiorespiratory depression due to sedation
•	 Perforation
•	 Bleeding following polypectomy
22.8  Colonoscopy
*Colonoscopy is not useful in the investigation of constipation.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Using a side-viewing duodenoscope, it is possible to 
cannulate the main pancreatic duct and common bile 
duct. Nowadays, ERCP is mainly used in the treatment 
of a range of biliary and pancreatic diseases that have 
been identified by other imaging techniques such as 
MRCP, EUS and CT. Indications for and risks of ERCP 
are listed in Box 22.9.
Histology
Biopsy material obtained during endoscopy or percuta-
neously can provide useful information (Box 22.11).
Tests of infection
Bacterial cultures
Stool cultures are essential in the investigation of diar-
rhoea, especially when it is acute or bloody, in order to 
identify pathogenic organisms (Ch. 13).
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
850
•	 Suspected malignant lesions
•	 Assessment of mucosal abnormalities
•	 Diagnosis of infection (Candida, Helicobacter pylori, Giardia 
lamblia)
•	 Analysis of genetic mutations
22.11  Reasons for biopsy or cytological 
examination
•	 Tolerance: endoscopic procedures are generally well 
tolerated, even in very old people.
•	 Side-effects from sedation: older people are more 
sensitive, and respiratory depression, hypotension and 
prolonged recovery times are more common.
•	 Bowel preparation for colonoscopy: can be difficult in frail, 
immobile people. Sodium phosphate-based preparations can 
cause dehydration or hypotension and should be avoided in 
those with underlying cardiac or renal failure. Minimal 
preparation CT colonograms provide an excellent alternative 
in these individuals.
•	 Antiperistaltic agents: hyoscine should be avoided in those 
with glaucoma and can also cause tachyarrhythmias. 
Glucagon is preferred if an antiperistaltic agent is needed.
22.10  Endoscopy in old age
Indications
Diagnostic ERCP
•	 Biliary or pancreatic disease where other imaging is 
equivocal or is contraindicated
•	 Ampullary biopsy or biliary cytology
Therapeutic ERCP
•	 Biliary disease
Removal of common bile duct calculi*
Palliation of malignant biliary obstruction
Management of biliary leaks/damage complicating surgery
Dilatation of benign strictures
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
•	 Pancreatic disease
Drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts and fistulae
Removal of pancreatic calculi (selected cases)
Contraindications
•	 Severe cardiopulmonary comorbidity
•	 Coagulopathy
Complications
•	 Occur in 5–10% with a 30-day mortality of 0.5–1%
General
•	 As for upper endoscopy
Specific
•	 Biliary disease
Bleeding following sphincterotomy
Cholangitis (if biliary obstruction is not relieved by ERCP)
Gallstone impaction
•	 Pancreatic disease
Acute pancreatitis
Infection of pseudocyst
22.9  Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
*Laparoscopic surgery is preferred in fit individuals who also require 
cholecystectomy.
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth are discussed on 
page 882.
Tests of function
A number of dynamic tests can be used to investigate 
aspects of gut function, including digestion, absorption, 
inflammation and epithelial permeability. Some of the 
more commonly used ones are listed in Box 22.12. In the 
assessment of suspected malabsorption, blood tests 
(full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 
C-reactive protein (CRP), folate, vitamin B12, iron status, 
albumin, calcium and phosphate) are essential, and 
endoscopy is undertaken to obtain mucosal biopsies. 
Faecal calprotectin is very sensitive at detecting mucosal 
inflammation.
Oesophageal motility
A barium swallow can give useful information about 
oesophageal motility. Videofluoroscopy, with joint 
assessment by a speech and language therapist and a 
radiologist, may be necessary in difficult cases. Oesopha-
geal manometry (see Fig. 22.1, p. 840), often in conjunc-
tion with 24-hour pH measurements, is of value in 
diagnosing cases of refractory gastro-oesophageal reflux, 
achalasia and non-cardiac chest pain. Oesophageal 
impedance testing is useful for detecting non-acid or gas 
reflux events, especially in patients with atypical symp-
toms or those who respond poorly to acid suppression.
Gastric emptying
This involves administering a test meal containing solids 
and liquids labelled with different radioisotopes and 
measuring the amount retained in the stomach after-
wards (Box 22.13). It is useful in the investigation of 
suspected delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis) 
when other studies are normal.
Colonic and anorectal motility
A plain abdominal X-ray taken on day 5 after ingestion 
of different-shaped inert plastic pellets on days 1–3 gives 
an estimate of whole gut transit time. The test is useful 
in the evaluation of chronic constipation, when the posi-
tion of any retained pellets can be observed, and helps 
to differentiate cases of slow transit from those due to 
obstructed defecation. The mechanism of defecation 
and anorectal function can be assessed by anorectal 
manometry, electrophysiological tests and defecating 
proctography.
Radioisotope tests
Many different radioisotope tests are used (see Box 
22.13). In some, structural information is obtained, such 
as the localisation of a Meckel’s diverticulum. Others 
provide functional information, such as the rate of 
gastric emptying or ability to reabsorb bile acids. Yet 
Serology
Detection of antibodies plays a limited role in the diag-
nosis of gastrointestinal infection caused by organisms 
such as Helicobacter pylori, Salmonella species and Ent­
amoeba histolytica.
Breath tests
Non-invasive breath tests for H. pylori infection are 
discussed on page 873. Breath tests for suspected 
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease
22
851
Test
Isotope
Major uses and principle of test
Gastric emptying study
99mTc-sulphur
111In-DTPA
Used in assessment of gastric emptying, particularly for possible gastroparesis
Urea breath test
13C-urea
Used in non-invasive diagnosis of H. pylori. Bacterial urease enzyme splits urea 
to ammonia and CO2, which is detected in expired air
Meckel’s scan
99mTc-pertechnate
Diagnosis of Meckel’s diverticulum in cases of obscure gastrointestinal 
bleeding. Isotope is injected IV and localises in ectopic parietal mucosa within 
diverticulum
Somatostatin receptor 
scan (SRS)
111In-DTPA-DPheoctreotide
Labelled somatostatin analogue binds to cell surface somatostatin receptors on 
pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours
22.13  Commonly used radioisotope tests in gastroenterology
Process
Test
Principle
Comments
Absorption
Lactose
Lactose H2 breath 
test
Measurement of breath H2 content after 
50 g oral lactose. Undigested sugar is 
metabolised by colonic bacteria in 
hypolactasia, and expired hydrogen is 
measured
Non-invasive and accurate. May provoke pain 
and diarrhoea in sufferers
Bile acids
75SeHCAT test
Isotopic quantification of 7-day whole-body 
retention of oral dose 75Se-labelled 
homocholyltaurine (> 15% = normal, 
5–15% borderline, < 5% = abnormal)
Accurate and specific but requires two visits 
and involves radiation. Results can be 
equivocal. Serum 7α-hydroxycholestenone is 
as sensitive and specific
Pancreatic 
exocrine function
Pancreolauryl test
Pancreatic esterases cleave fluoroscein 
dilaurate after oral ingestion. Fluoroscein is 
absorbed and quantified in urine
Accurate and avoids duodenal intubation 
Takes 2 days. Accurate urine collection 
essential. Rarely performed
Faecal elastase
Immunoassay of pancreatic enzymes on 
stool sample
Simple, quick and avoids urine collection. 
Does not detect mild disease
Mucosal 
inflammation/ 
permeability
Faecal 
calprotectin
A protein secreted non-specifically by 
neutrophils into the colon in response to 
inflammation or neoplasia
Useful screening test for gastrointestinal 
inflammation and for monitoring patients with 
Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Poor 
sensitivity for cancer
22.12  Dynamic tests of gastrointestinal function
others are tests of infection and rely on the presence of 
bacteria to hydrolyse a radio-labelled test substance fol-
lowed by detection of the radioisotope in expired air, 
such as the urea breath test for H. pylori.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN 
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
Dysphagia
Dysphagia is defined as difficulty in swallowing. It may 
coexist with heartburn or vomiting but should be dis-
tinguished from both globus sensation (in which 
anxious people feel a lump in the throat without organic 
cause) and odynophagia (pain during swallowing, 
usually from gastro-oesophageal reflux or candidiasis).
Dysphagia can occur due to problems in the oro­
pharynx or oesophagus (Fig. 22.15). Oropharyngeal dis-
orders affect the initiation of swallowing at the pharynx 
and upper oesophageal sphincter. The patient has 
difficulty initiating swallowing and complains of 
choking, nasal regurgitation or tracheal aspiration. 
Drooling, dysarthria, hoarseness and cranial nerve or 
other neurological signs may be present. Oesophageal 
disorders cause dysphagia by obstructing the lumen or 
by affecting motility. Patients with oesophageal disease 
complain of food ‘sticking’ after swallowing, although 
the level at which this is felt correlates poorly with the 
true site of obstruction. Swallowing of liquids is normal 
until strictures become extreme.
Investigations
Dysphagia should always be investigated urgently. 
Endoscopy is the investigation of choice because it 
allows biopsy and dilatation of strictures. If no abnor-
mality is found, then barium swallow with videofluoro-
scopic swallowing assessment is indicated to detect 
major motility disorders. In some cases, oesophageal 
manometry is required. High-resolution manometry 
allows accurate classification of abnormalities. Figure 
22.15 summarises a diagnostic approach to dysphagia 
and lists the major causes.
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
852
Fig. 22.15  Investigation of dysphagia. 
Benign
Malignant
Oesophagitis
Dysmotility
Stricture
Manometry/
barium swallow
Endoscopy
and biopsy
Oesophageal
dysphagia
Videofluoroscopic
swallowing assessment
and neurological
investigation
Oropharyngeal
dysphagia
Food 'sticking' after
swallowing ± regurgitation
Dysphagia
Neurological disease
• Bulbar palsy
• Pseudobulbar palsy
• Myasthenia gravis
• Achalasia
• Non-specific
  motility disorder
• Peptic
• Candidiasis
• Eosinophilic
• Peptic
• Fibrous rings
• Eosinophilic
   oesophagitis
• Drugs, e.g.
   bisphosphonates
• Carcinoma of
   the oesophagus
• Carcinoma of
   the stomach
• Extrinsic
   compression
Difficulty initiating swallow
± choking or aspiration
Upper gastrointestinal disorders
•	 Peptic ulcer disease
•	 Acute gastritis
•	 Gallstones
•	 Oesophageal spasm
•	 Non-ulcer dyspepsia
•	 Irritable bowel syndrome
Other gastrointestinal disorders
•	 Pancreatic disease (cancer, 
chronic pancreatitis)
•	 Colonic carcinoma
•	 Hepatic disease (hepatitis, 
metastases)
Systemic disease
•	 Renal failure
•	 Hypercalcaemia
Drugs
•	 Non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)
•	 Corticosteroids
•	 Iron and potassium 
supplements
•	 Digoxin
Others
•	 Psychological (anxiety, 
depression)
•	 Alcohol
22.14  Causes of dyspepsia
•	 Weight loss
•	 Anaemia
•	 Vomiting
•	 Haematemesis and/or melaena
•	 Dysphagia
•	 Palpable abdominal mass
22.15  Alarm features in dyspepsia
Dyspepsia
Dyspepsia describes symptoms such as discomfort, 
bloating and nausea, which are thought to originate from 
the upper gastrointestinal tract. There are many causes 
(Box 22.14), including some arising outside the digestive 
system. Heartburn and other ‘reflux’ symptoms are sepa-
rate entities and are considered elsewhere. Although 
symptoms often correlate poorly with the underlying 
diagnosis, a careful history is important to detect ‘alarm’ 
features requiring urgent investigation (Box 22.15) and 
to detect atypical symptoms which might be due to prob-
lems outside the gastrointestinal tract.
Dyspepsia affects up to 80% of the population at 
some time in life and most patients have no serious 
underlying disease. Patients who present with new 
dyspepsia at an age of more than 55 years and 
younger patients unresponsive to empirical treatment 
require investigation to exclude serious disease. An 
algorithm for the investigation of dyspepsia is outlined 
in Figure 22.16.
Heartburn and regurgitation
Heartburn describes retrosternal, burning discomfort, 
often rising up into the chest and sometimes accompa-
nied by regurgitation of acidic or bitter fluid into the 
throat. These symptoms often occur after meals, on lying 
down or with bending, straining or heavy lifting. They 
are classical of gastro-oesophageal reflux but up to 50% 
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease
22
853
of patients present with other symptoms, such as chest 
pain, belching, halitosis, chronic cough or sore throats. 
In young patients with typical symptoms and a good 
response to dietary changes, antacids or acid suppres-
sion, investigation is not required, but in patients over 
55 years of age, those with alarm symptoms or atypical 
features, urgent endoscopy is necessary.
Vomiting
Vomiting is a complex reflex involving both autonomic 
and somatic neural pathways. Synchronous contraction 
of the diaphragm, intercostal muscles and abdominal 
muscles raises intra-abdominal pressure and, combined 
with relaxation of the lower oesophageal sphincter, 
results in forcible ejection of gastric contents. It is impor-
tant to distinguish true vomiting from regurgitation and 
to elicit whether the vomiting is acute or chronic (recur-
rent), as the underlying causes may differ. The major 
causes are shown in Figure 22.17.
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Acute upper gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage
This is the most common gastrointestinal emergency, 
accounting for 50–170 admissions to hospital per 100 000 
of the population each year in the UK. The mortality of 
patients admitted to hospital is about 10% but there is 
some evidence that outcome is better when patients are 
treated in specialised units. Risk scoring systems have 
been developed to stratify risk of needing endoscopic 
therapy or a poor outcome (Box 22.16). The advantage 
Fig. 22.16  Investigation of dyspepsia. 
< 55 years
Dyspepsia
Are there
'alarm' features?
Yes
Urgent
endoscopy
No
> 55 years
Test for H. pylori, e.g. serology, stool
antigen or 13C urea breath test
Endoscopy
Positive
Negative
H. pylori eradication
Treat
symptomatically
or 
consider other
diagnoses
Symptoms
resolve
Symptoms
persist
No
follow-up
Endoscopy
Fig. 22.17  Causes of vomiting. 
Alcoholism
CNS disorders
• Vestibular neuronitis
• Migraine
• Raised intracranial pressure
• Meningitis
Gastroduodenal
• Peptic ulcer disease
• Gastric cancer
• Gastroparesis
The acute abdomen
• Appendicitis
• Cholecystitis
• Pancreatitis
• Intestinal obstruction
Metabolic
• Diabetic ketoacidosis
• Addison’s disease
• Cyclical vomiting syndrome
Uraemia
Infections
• Hepatitis
• Gastroenteritis
• Urinary tract infection
Drugs
• NSAIDs
• Opiates
• Digoxin
• Antibiotics
• Cytotoxins
Psychogenic
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
854
Admission risk marker
Score component value
Blood urea
≥ 25 mmol/L (≥ 70 mg/dL)
6
10–25 mmol/L (28–70 mg/dL)
4
8–10 mmol/L (22.4–28 mg/dL)
3
6⋅5–8 mmol/L (18.2–22.4 mg/dL)
2
< 6.5 mmol/L (18.2 mg/dL) 
0
Haemoglobin for men
< 100 g/L (10 g/dL)
6
100–119 g/L (10–11.9 g/dL)
3
120–129 g/L (12–12.9 g/dL)
1
≥ 130 g/L (13 g/dL)
0
Haemoglobin for women
< 100 g/L (10 g/dL)
6
100–119 g/L (10–11.9 g/dL)
1
≥ 120 g/L (12 g/dL)
0
Systolic blood pressure
< 90 mmHg
3
90–99 mmHg
2
100–109 mmHg
1
> 109 mmHg
0
Other markers
Presentation with syncope
2
Hepatic disease
2
Cardiac failure
2
Pulse ≥ 100 beats/min
1
Presentation with melaena
1
None of the above
0
22.16  Modified Blatchford score: risk 
stratification in acute upper GI bleeding
Fig. 22.18  Causes of acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage. (Frequency in parentheses.) (NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) 
Liver
disease
Portal vein
thrombosis
Varices
(2 – 9%)
Oesophagitis
(10%)
Usually with
hiatus hernia
Retching
Mallory–Weiss tear
(5%)
Cancer of
stomach or
oesophagus
(2%)
NSAIDs
H. pylori
Peptic ulcer
(35 – 50%)
Vascular
malformations
(5%)
Aortic graft
Aorto-duodenal
fistula
(0.2%)
NSAIDs
Alcohol
Gastric erosions
(10 – 20%)
Clinical assessment
Haematemesis is red with clots when bleeding is rapid 
and profuse, or black (‘coffee grounds’) when less 
severe. Syncope may occur and is due to hypotension 
from intravascular volume depletion. Symptoms of 
anaemia suggest chronic bleeding. Melaena is the 
passage of black, tarry stools containing altered blood; 
it is usually caused by bleeding from the upper gastro­
intestinal tract, although haemorrhage from the right 
side of the colon is occasionally responsible. The charac-
teristic colour and smell are the result of the action of 
digestive enzymes and of bacteria upon haemoglobin. 
Severe acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding can some-
times cause maroon or bright red stool.
Management
The principles of emergency management of non-
variceal bleeding are summarised in Box 22.17 and are 
discussed in detail below. Management of variceal 
bleeding is discussed on page 946.
1.  Intravenous access
The first step is to gain intravenous access using at least 
one large-bore cannula.
2.  Initial clinical assessment
•	 Define circulatory status. Severe bleeding causes 
tachycardia, hypotension and oliguria. The patient 
is cold and sweating, and may be agitated.
•	 Seek evidence of liver disease (p. 922). Jaundice, 
cutaneous stigmata, hepatosplenomegaly and 
ascites may be present in decompensated cirrhosis.
•	 Identify comorbidity. The presence of 
cardiorespiratory, cerebrovascular or renal disease 
is important, both because these may be worsened 
by acute bleeding and because they increase the 
hazards of endoscopy and surgical operations.
of the Blatchford score is that it may be used before 
endoscopy to predict the need for intervention to treat 
bleeding. Low scores (2 or less) are associated with 
a very low risk of adverse outcome. The common 
causes are shown in Figure 22.18.
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease
22
855
when the patient is actively bleeding with low blood 
pressure and tachycardia. Comorbidities should be 
managed as appropriate. Patients with suspected chronic 
liver disease should receive broad-spectrum antibiotics. 
Central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring may be 
useful in severe bleeding, particularly in patients with 
cardiac disease, to assist in defining the volume of fluid 
replacement and in identifying rebleeding.
5.  Oxygen
This should be given to all patients in shock.
6.  Endoscopy
This should be carried out after adequate resuscitation, 
ideally within 24 hours, and will yield a diagnosis in 
80% of cases. Patients who are found to have major 
endoscopic stigmata of recent haemorrhage (Fig. 22.19) 
can be treated endoscopically using a thermal or 
mechanical modality, such as a ‘heater probe’ or endo-
scopic clips, combined with injection of dilute adrena-
line (epinephrine) into the bleeding point (‘dual 
therapy’). This may stop active bleeding and, com-
bined with intravenous proton pump inhibitor (PPI) 
therapy, prevent rebleeding, thus avoiding the need 
for surgery (Boxes 22.18 and 22.19). Patients found to 
have bled from varices should be treated by band liga-
tion (p. 946).
7.  Monitoring
Patients should be closely observed, with hourly 
measurements of pulse, blood pressure and urine 
output.
Fig. 22.19  Major stigmata of recent haemorrhage and endoscopic treatment. A  Active arterial spurting from a gastric ulcer. An endoscopic 
clip is about to be placed on the bleeding vessel. When associated with shock, 80% of cases will continue to bleed or rebleed. B  ‘Visible vessel’ (arrow). 
In reality, this is a pseudoaneurysm of the feeding artery seen here in a pre-pyloric peptic ulcer. It carries a 50% chance of rebleeding. C  Haemostasis is 
achieved after endoscopic clipping of the bleeding vessel in the duodenum. 
A
B
C
•	 Gain IV access with large-bore cannula × 2
•	 Check full blood count, routine biochemistry and coagulation 
screen; cross-match blood
•	 Perform hourly measurements of blood pressure, pulse and 
urine output; consider central venous pressure monitoring in 
the high-dependency unit for severe bleeding
•	 Give IV crystalloids in patients with hypotension and 
tachycardia
•	 Transfuse with blood if blood pressure remains low and 
patient is actively bleeding
•	 Organise endoscopy for diagnosis and treatment once patient 
is resuscitated
•	 Give 72-hr proton pump inhibitor IV infusion for bleeding 
peptic ulcer
•	 Consider surgery or interventional radiological intervention 
(e.g. arterial embolisation) if bleeding recurs
22.17  Emergency management of acute 
non-variceal upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage
‘Adding a second procedure to adrenaline (epinephrine) injection 
further reduces bleeding rates from 18.5% to 10% (relative risk 
0.55) and emergency surgery from 10.8% to 6.7% (relative risk 
0.69). Mortality falls from 4.7% to 2.5% (relative risk 0.52; 95% 
confidence interval 0.38 to 1.05), without statistical significance. 
The risk of further bleeding decreased, regardless of which 
second procedure was applied (clips or thermal).’
•	 Vergara M, et al. Epinephrine injection versus epinephrine injection and a second 
endoscopic method in high risk bleeding ulcers. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, 2007, issue 2. Art. no. CD005584 (updated 2009).
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
22.18  Single versus dual modality endoscopic 
therapy in high-risk bleeding ulcers
These factors can be combined using the Blatchford 
score (see Box 22.16), which can be calculated at the 
bedside. A score of less than 3 is associated with a good 
prognosis, while progressively higher scores are associ-
ated with poorer outcomes.
3.  Basic investigations
•	 Full blood count. Chronic or subacute bleeding leads 
to anaemia, but the haemoglobin concentration may 
be normal after sudden, major bleeding until 
haemodilution occurs. Thrombocytopenia may be a 
clue to the presence of hypersplenism in chronic 
liver disease.
•	 Urea and electrolytes. This test may show evidence of 
renal failure. The blood urea rises as the absorbed 
products of luminal blood are metabolised by the 
liver; an elevated blood urea with normal creatinine 
concentration implies severe bleeding.
•	 Liver function tests. These may show evidence of 
chronic liver disease.
•	 Prothrombin time. Check with clinical suggestion of 
liver disease or in anticoagulated patients.
•	 Cross-matching. At least 2 units of blood should be 
cross-matched.
4.  Resuscitation
Intravenous crystalloid fluids should be given to raise 
the blood pressure, and blood should be transfused 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
856
‘Intravenous proton pump inhibitor infusions reduce rebleeding 
(NNTB = 12) and need for surgery (NNTB = 20), but not 
mortality, in patients who have been subjected to endoscopic 
therapy for major peptic ulcer haemorrhage. When given  
prior to endoscopy, they reduce the need for endoscopic  
therapy and hospital stay, but not the need for surgery or 
mortality.’
•	 Leontiadis GI, et al. BMJ 2005; 330:568–575.
•	 Lau JY, et al. New Engl J Med 2007; 356:1631–1640.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk
22.19  Adjunctive drug therapy for 
bleeding ulcers
Severe acute
•	 Diverticular disease
•	 Angiodysplasia
•	 Ischaemia
•	 Meckel’s diverticulum
•	 Inflammatory bowel 
disease (rarely)
Moderate, chronic/subacute
•	 Fissure
•	 Haemorrhoids
•	 Inflammatory bowel 
disease
•	 Carcinoma
•	 Large polyps
•	 Angiodysplasia
•	 Radiation enteritis
•	 Solitary rectal ulcer
22.20  Causes of lower gastrointestinal bleeding
8.  Surgery
Surgery is indicated when endoscopic haemostasis fails 
to stop active bleeding and if rebleeding occurs on one 
occasion in an elderly or frail patient, or twice in a 
younger, fitter patient. If available, angiographic emboli-
sation is an effective alternative to surgery in frail 
patients.
The choice of operation depends on the site and diag-
nosis of the bleeding lesion. Duodenal ulcers are treated 
by under-running, with or without pyloroplasty. Under-
running for gastric ulcers can also be carried out (a 
biopsy must be taken to exclude carcinoma). Local exci-
sion may be performed, but when neither is possible, 
partial gastrectomy is required. Following surgery for 
ulcer bleeding, all patients should be treated with H. 
pylori eradication therapy if they test positive for it, and 
should avoid NSAIDs. Successful eradication should be 
confirmed by urea breath or faecal antigen testing.
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding
This may be due to haemorrhage from the colon, anal 
canal or small bowel. It is useful to distinguish those 
patients who present with profuse, acute bleeding from 
those who present with chronic or subacute bleeding of 
lesser severity (Box 22.20).
Severe acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding
This presents with profuse red or maroon diarrhoea and 
with shock. Diverticular disease is the most common 
cause and is often due to erosion of an artery within the 
mouth of a diverticulum. Bleeding almost always stops 
spontaneously, but if it does not, the diseased segment 
of colon should be resected after confirmation of the site 
by angiography or colonoscopy. Angiodysplasia is a 
disease of the elderly, in which vascular malformations 
develop in the proximal colon. Bleeding can be acute 
and profuse; it usually stops spontaneously but com-
monly recurs. Diagnosis is often difficult. Colonoscopy 
may reveal characteristic vascular spots and, in the acute 
phase, visceral angiography can show bleeding into the 
intestinal lumen and an abnormal large, draining vein. 
In some patients, diagnosis is only achieved by laparot-
omy with on-table colonoscopy. The treatment of choice 
is endoscopic thermal ablation, but resection of the 
affected bowel may be required if bleeding continues. 
Bowel ischaemia due to occlusion of the inferior 
mesenteric artery can present with abdominal colic and 
rectal bleeding. It should be considered in patients (par-
ticularly the elderly) who have evidence of generalised 
atherosclerosis. The diagnosis is made at colonoscopy. 
Resection is required only in the presence of peritonitis. 
Meckel’s diverticulum with ectopic gastric epithelium 
may ulcerate and erode into a major artery. The diagno-
sis should be considered in children or adolescents who 
present with profuse or recurrent lower gastrointestinal 
bleeding. A Meckel’s 99mTc-pertechnate scan is some-
times positive but the diagnosis is commonly made only 
by laparotomy, at which time the diverticulum is excised.
Subacute or chronic lower  
gastrointestinal bleeding
This can occur at all ages and is usually due to haemor-
rhoids or anal fissure. Haemorrhoidal bleeding is bright 
red and occurs during or after defecation. Proctoscopy 
can be used to make the diagnosis but subjects who have 
altered bowel habit and those who present over the age 
of 40 years should undergo colonoscopy to exclude 
coexisting colorectal cancer. Anal fissure should be sus-
pected when fresh rectal bleeding and anal pain occur 
during defecation.
Major gastrointestinal bleeding of 
unknown cause
In some patients who present with major gastrointesti-
nal bleeding, upper endoscopy and colonoscopy fail to 
reveal a diagnosis. When severe life-threatening bleed-
ing continues, urgent CT mesenteric angiography is 
indicated. This will usually identify the site if the bleed-
ing rate exceeds 1 mL/min and then formal angio-
graphic embolisation can often stop the bleeding. If 
angiography is negative or bleeding is less severe, push 
or double balloon enteroscopy can visualise the small 
intestine (Fig. 22.20) and treat the bleeding source. Wire-
less capsule endoscopy is often used to define a source 
of bleeding prior to enteroscopy. When all else fails, 
laparotomy with on-table endoscopy is indicated.
Chronic occult gastrointestinal 
bleeding
In this context, occult means that blood or its breakdown 
products are present in the stool but cannot be seen by 
the naked eye. Occult bleeding may reach 200 mL per 
day and cause iron deficiency anaemia. Any cause of 
gastrointestinal bleeding may be responsible but the 
most important is colorectal cancer, particularly carci-
noma of the caecum, which may produce no gastro­
intestinal symptoms. In clinical practice, investigation of 
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease
22
857
Fig. 22.20  Jejunal angiodysplastic lesion seen at enteroscopy in 
a patient with recurrent obscure bleeding. 
Colonic
Malabsorption
Small bowel
Clinical features
Blood and mucus in stool
Cramping lower abdominal pain
Steatorrhoea
Undigested food in the stool
Weight loss and nutritional disturbances
Large-volume, watery stool
Abdominal bloating
Cramping mid-abdominal pain
Some causes
Inflammatory bowel disease
Microscopic colitis
Neoplasia
Ischaemia
Irritable bowel syndrome
Pancreatic
Chronic pancreatitis
Cancer of pancreas
Cystic fibrosis
Enteropathy
Coeliac disease
Tropical sprue
Lymphoma
Lymphangiectasia
Crohn’s disease
VIPoma
Drug-induced
NSAIDs
Aminosalicylates
Selective serotonin re-uptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)
Investigations
Faecal calprotectin
Ileocolonoscopy with biopsies
Faecal elastase
Ultrasound, CT and MRCP
Small-bowel biopsy
Barium follow-through or small-bowel MRI
Faecal calprotectin
Stool volume
Gut hormone profile
Barium follow-through or 
small-bowel MRI
22.21  Chronic or relapsing diarrhoea
the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract should be con-
sidered whenever a patient presents with unexplained 
iron deficiency anaemia. Testing the stool for the pres-
ence of blood is unnecessary and should not influence 
whether or not the gastrointestinal tract is imaged 
because bleeding from tumours is often intermittent and 
a negative faecal occult blood (FOB) test does not exclude 
the diagnosis. The only value of FOB testing is as a 
means of population screening for colonic neoplasia in 
asymptomatic individuals (p. 916).
Diarrhoea
Diarrhoea is defined as the passage of more than 200 g 
of stool daily, and measurement of stool volume is 
helpful in confirming this. The most severe symptom in 
many patients is urgency of defecation, and faecal incon-
tinence is a common event in acute and chronic diar-
rhoeal illnesses.
Acute diarrhoea
This is extremely common and is usually due to faecal–
oral transmission of bacteria or their toxins, viruses or 
parasites (Ch. 13). Infective diarrhoea is usually short-
lived and patients who present with a history of diar-
rhoea lasting more than 10 days rarely have an infective 
cause. A variety of drugs, including antibiotics, cytotoxic 
drugs, PPIs and NSAIDs, may be responsible.
Chronic or relapsing diarrhoea
The most common cause is irritable bowel syndrome 
(p. 907), which can present with increased frequency of 
defecation and loose, watery or pellety stools. Diarrhoea 
rarely occurs at night and is most severe before and after 
breakfast. At other times, the patient is constipated and 
there are other characteristic symptoms of irritable 
bowel syndrome. The stool often contains mucus but 
never blood, and 24-hour stool volume is less than 200 g. 
Chronic diarrhoea can be categorised as being due to 
disease of the colon or small bowel, or to malabsorption 
(Box 22.21). Clinical presentation, examination of the 
stool, routine blood tests and imaging reveal a diagnosis 
in many cases. A series of negative investigations usually 
implies irritable bowel syndrome but some patients 
clearly have organic disease and need more extensive 
investigations.
Malabsorption
Diarrhoea and weight loss in patients with a normal diet 
is likely to be caused by malabsorption. The symptoms 
are diverse in nature and variable in severity. A few 
patients have apparently normal bowel habit but diar-
rhoea is usual and may be watery and voluminous. 
Bulky, pale and offensive stools which float in the toilet 
(steatorrhoea) signify fat malabsorption. Abdominal dis-
tension, borborygmi, cramps, weight loss and undi-
gested food in the stool may be present. Some patients 
complain only of malaise and lethargy. In others, 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
858
symptoms related to deficiencies of specific vitamins, 
trace elements and minerals may occur (Fig. 22.21).
Pathophysiology
Malabsorption results from abnormalities of the three 
processes which are essential to normal digestion:
1.	
Intraluminal maldigestion occurs when deficiency of 
bile or pancreatic enzymes results in inadequate 
solubilisation and hydrolysis of nutrients. Fat and 
protein malabsorption results. This may also occur 
with small bowel bacterial overgrowth.
2.	
Mucosal malabsorption results from small bowel 
resection or conditions which damage the small 
intestinal epithelium, thereby diminishing the 
surface area for absorption and depleting brush 
border enzyme activity.
3.	
‘Post-mucosal’ lymphatic obstruction prevents the 
uptake and transport of absorbed lipids into 
lymphatic vessels. Increased pressure in these 
vessels results in leakage into the intestinal lumen, 
leading to protein-losing enteropathy.
Investigations
Investigations should be performed both to confirm the 
presence of malabsorption and to determine the under-
lying cause. Routine blood tests may show one or more 
of the abnormalities listed in Box 22.22. Tests to confirm 
fat and protein malabsorption should be performed, as 
described on page 851. An approach to the investigation 
of malabsorption is shown in Figure 22.22.
Fig. 22.21  Possible physical consequences of malabsorption. 
Purpura and bruising
(vitamins C, K)
Poor wound healing
(vitamin C, protein, zinc)
Distension, steatorrhoea,
watery diarrhoea
Lethargy
Depression
Night blindness
(vitamin A)
Anaemia
(iron, folate, B12)
Angular stomatitis, glossitis
(iron, folate, B12)
Bleeding gums
(vitamin C)
Follicular
hyperkeratosis
(vitamin A)
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
(zinc)
Koilonychia
(iron)
Paraesthesia, tetany
(calcium, magnesium)
Clubbing
Osteomalacia, rickets
(calcium, vitamin D)
Muscle-wasting
(protein)
Proximal myopathy
(vitamin D)
Peripheral neuropathy
(B12)
Peripheral oedema
(hypoalbuminaemia)
Fig. 22.22  Investigation for suspected malabsorption. 
Clinical features of steatorrhoea
   • Blood tests (urea and electrolytes,
     immunoglobulins, Ca++, Mg++,
     full blood count, clotting, albumin,
     folate, B12, coeliac antibodies)
Investigate small intestine
   • Duodenal biopsy
   • Barium studies or small bowel MRI
   • Faecal calprotectin
   • Lactulose/glucose hydrogen                             
      breath test
Investigate pancreas
   • Pancreatic function tests, e.g.
      faecal elastase
   • Ultrasound scan/CT
   • MRCP
Consider bile salt malabsorption
   • SeHCAT scan
   • Serum 7α-hydroxycholestenone 
Normal
Normal
? Malabsorption
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease
22
859
Physiological
Weight loss can occur in the absence of serious disease 
in healthy individuals who have changes in physical 
activity or social circumstances. It may be difficult to 
be sure of this diagnosis in older patients, when the 
dietary history may be unreliable, and professional 
help from a dietitian is often valuable under these 
circumstances.
Psychiatric illness
Features of anorexia nervosa (p. 255), bulimia (p. 256) 
and affective disorders (p. 243) may only be apparent 
after formal psychiatric input. Alcoholic patients lose 
weight as a consequence of self-neglect and poor dietary 
intake. Depression may cause weight loss.
Systemic diseases
Chronic infections, including tuberculosis (p. 688), 
recurrent urinary or chest infections, and a range of 
parasitic and protozoan infections (Ch. 13), should be 
considered. A history of foreign travel, high-risk activi-
ties and specific features, such as fever, night sweats, 
rigors, productive cough and dysuria, must be sought. 
Promiscuous sexual activity and drug misuse suggest 
HIV-related illness (Ch. 14). Weight loss is a late feature 
of disseminated malignancy, but by the time the patient 
presents, other features of cancer are often present. 
Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis (p. 1096), and polymyalgia rheumatica (p. 1117) 
are often associated with weight loss.
Haematology
•	 Microcytic anaemia (iron deficiency)
•	 Macrocytic anaemia (folate or B12 deficiency)
•	 Increased prothrombin time (vitamin K  
deficiency)
Biochemistry
•	 Hypoalbuminaemia
•	 Hypocalcaemia (p. 768)
•	 Hypomagnesaemia
•	 Hypophosphataemia
•	 Low serum zinc
22.22  Routine blood test abnormalities in 
malabsorption
Fig. 22.23  Some important causes of weight loss. 
Chronic infection
HIV/AIDS
Tuberculosis
Brucellosis
Gut infestations
Gastrointestinal
Poor dentition
Any cause of oral pain,
dysphagia
Malabsorption
Malignancy at any site
Inflammatory bowel disease
Chronic infection
Cirrhosis
Respiratory
COPD
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Occult malignancy (especially
small-cell carcinoma)
Empyema
Psychosocial
Deprivation, starvation
Eating disorders
Depression, bipolar illness
Bereavement
Chronic pain/sleep
deprivation
Alcoholism
Rheumatological
Rheumatoid arthritis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Scleroderma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Renal
Occult malignancy
Chronic renal failure
Salt-losing
nephropathy
Cardiac
Congestive cardiac failure
Infective endocarditis
Endocrine
Diabetes mellitus
Thyrotoxicosis
Addison’s disease
Hypopituitarism
Diabetes insipidus
Neurodegenerative
Parkinsonism
Dementia
Motor neuron disease
Weight loss
Weight loss may be physiological, due to dieting, exer-
cise, starvation, or the decreased nutritional intake 
which accompanies old age. Weight loss of more than 
3 kg over 6 months is significant and often indicates the 
presence of an underlying disease. Hospital and general 
practice weight records may be valuable in confirming 
that weight loss has occurred, as may reweighing 
patients at intervals; sometimes weight is regained or 
stabilises in those with no obvious cause. Pathological 
weight loss can be due to psychiatric illness, systemic 
disease, gastrointestinal causes or advanced disease of 
many organ systems (Fig. 22.23).
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
860
Gastrointestinal disease
Almost any disease of the gastrointestinal tract can cause 
weight loss. Dysphagia and gastric outflow obstruction 
(pp. 851 and 875) cause weight loss by reducing food 
intake. Malignancy at any site may cause weight loss by 
mechanical obstruction, anorexia or cytokine-mediated 
systemic effects. Malabsorption from pancreatic diseases 
(p. 889) or small bowel causes may lead to profound 
weight loss with specific nutritional deficiencies (Ch. 5). 
Inflammatory diseases, such as Crohn’s disease or ulcer-
ative colitis (p. 897), cause anorexia, fear of eating and 
loss of protein, blood and nutrients from the gut.
Metabolic disorders and miscellaneous causes
Weight loss may occur in association with metabolic 
disorders, as well as end-stage respiratory and cardiac 
disease. Some easily overlooked causes of weight loss 
are listed in Box 22.23.
Investigations
In cases where the cause of weight loss is not obvious 
after thorough history-taking and physical examination, 
or where an existing condition is considered unlikely, 
the following investigations are indicated: urinalysis for 
sugar, protein and blood; blood tests, including liver 
function tests, random blood glucose and thyroid func-
tion tests; CRP and ESR (may be raised in unsuspected 
infections, such as tuberculosis, connective tissue disor-
ders and malignancy); and faecal calprotectin. Some-
times invasive tests, such as bone marrow aspiration or 
liver biopsy, may be necessary to identify conditions like 
cryptic miliary tuberculosis (p. 689). Rarely, abdominal 
and pelvic imaging by CT may be necessary, but before 
embarking on invasive or very costly investigations, it 
is always worth revisiting the patient’s history and 
reweighing at intervals.
Constipation
Constipation is defined as infrequent passage of hard 
stools. Patients may also complain of straining, a sensa-
tion of incomplete evacuation and either perianal or 
abdominal discomfort. Constipation may occur in many 
gastrointestinal and other medical disorders (Box 22.24).
Clinical assessment and management
The onset, duration and characteristics are important; 
for example, a neonatal onset suggests Hirschsprung’s 
disease, while a recent change in bowel activity in 
middle age should raise the suspicion of organic disor-
ders, such as colonic carcinoma. The presence of rectal 
bleeding, pain and weight loss is important, as are exces-
sive straining, symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel 
syndrome, a history of childhood constipation and emo-
tional distress.
Careful examination contributes more to the diagno-
sis than extensive investigation. A search should be 
made for general medical disorders, as well as signs of 
intestinal obstruction. Neurological disorders, especially 
spinal cord lesions, should be sought. Perineal inspec-
tion and rectal examination are essential and may reveal 
abnormalities of the pelvic floor (abnormal descent, 
impaired sensation), anal canal or rectum (masses, faecal 
impaction, prolapse).
It is neither possible nor appropriate to investigate 
every person with constipation. Most respond to 
increased fluid intake, dietary fibre supplementation, 
exercise and the judicious use of laxatives. Middle-aged 
or elderly patients with a short history or worrying 
symptoms (rectal bleeding, pain or weight loss) must be 
investigated promptly, by either barium enema or colon-
oscopy. For those with simple constipation, investiga-
tion will usually proceed along the following lines.
Initial visit
Digital rectal examination, proctoscopy and sigmoid­
oscopy (to detect anorectal disease), routine biochemis-
try, including serum calcium and thyroid function tests, 
and a full blood count should be carried out. If these are 
normal, a 1-month trial of dietary fibre and/or laxatives 
is justified.
•	 Depression/anxiety
•	 Chronic pain or sleep deprivation
•	 Psychosocial deprivation/malnutrition in the elderly
•	 Existing conditions (severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, cardiac failure)
•	 Diabetes mellitus/hyperthyroidism
•	 Occult malignancy
•	 Anorexia nervosa in atypical groups
•	 Addison’s disease/panhypopituitarism
22.23  Some easily overlooked causes of 
unexplained weight loss
Gastrointestinal disorders
Dietary
•	 Lack of fibre and/or fluid intake
Motility
•	 Slow-transit constipation
•	 Irritable bowel syndrome
•	 Drugs (see below)
•	 Chronic intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction
Structural
•	 Colonic carcinoma
•	 Diverticular disease
•	 Hirschsprung’s disease
Defecation
•	 Anorectal disease (Crohn’s, 
fissures, haemorrhoids)
•	 Obstructed defecation
Non-gastrointestinal disorders
Drugs
•	 Opiates
•	 Anticholinergics
•	 Calcium antagonists
•	 Iron supplements
•	 Aluminium-containing 
antacids
Neurological
•	 Multiple sclerosis
•	 Spinal cord lesions
•	 Cerebrovascular accidents
•	 Parkinsonism
Metabolic/endocrine
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Hypercalcaemia
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Pregnancy
Others
•	 Any serious illness with 
immobility, especially in the 
elderly
•	 Depression
22.24  Causes of constipation
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease
22
861
parietal peritoneum is involved, when it becomes 
localised. Movement exacerbates the pain; 
abdominal rigidity and guarding occur.
•	 Perforation. When a viscus perforates, pain starts 
abruptly; it is severe and leads to generalised 
peritonitis.
•	 Obstruction. Pain is colicky, with spasms which 
cause the patient to writhe around and double up. 
Colicky pain which does not disappear between 
spasms suggests complicating inflammation.
Initial clinical assessment
If there are signs of peritonitis (guarding and rebound 
tenderness with rigidity), the patient should be resusci-
tated with oxygen, intravenous fluids and antibiotics. In 
other circumstances, further investigations are required 
(Fig. 22.24).
Investigations
Patients should have a full blood count, urea and elec-
trolytes, and amylase taken to look for evidence of 
dehydration, leucocytosis and pancreatitis. An erect 
chest X-ray may show air under the diaphragm, sug-
gestive of perforation, and a plain abdominal film may 
show evidence of obstruction or ileus. An abdominal 
ultrasound may help if gallstones or renal stones are 
suspected. Ultrasonography is also useful in the detec-
tion of free fluid and any possible intra-abdominal 
abscess. Contrast studies, by either mouth or anus, are 
useful in the further evaluation of intestinal obstruc-
tion, and essential in the differentiation of pseudo-
obstruction from mechanical large-bowel obstruction. 
Other investigations commonly used include CT 
(seeking evidence of pancreatitis, retroperitoneal collec-
tions or masses, including an aortic aneurysm) and 
angiography (mesenteric ischaemia).
Diagnostic laparotomy should be considered when 
the diagnosis has not been revealed by other investiga-
tions. All patients must be carefully and regularly 
re-assessed (every 2–4 hours) so that any change in 
condition that might alter both the suspected diagno-
sis and clinical decision can be observed and acted 
upon early.
Management
The general approach is to close perforations, treat 
inflammatory conditions with antibiotics or resection, 
and relieve obstructions. The speed of intervention and 
the necessity for surgery depend on the organ that is 
involved and on a number of other factors, of which the 
presence or absence of peritonitis is the most important. 
A treatment summary of some of the more common 
surgical conditions follows.
Acute appendicitis
This should be treated by early surgery, since there is a 
risk of perforation and recurrent attacks with non-
operative treatment. The appendix can be removed 
through a conventional right iliac fossa skin crease inci-
sion or by laparoscopic techniques.
Acute cholecystitis
This can be successfully treated non-operatively but the 
high risk of recurrent attacks and the low morbidity of 
Next visit
If symptoms persist, then examination of the colon by 
barium enema or CT colonography is indicated to look 
for structural disease.
Further investigation
If no cause is found and disabling symptoms are present, 
then specialist referral for investigation of possible dys-
motility may be necessary. The problem may be one of 
infrequent desire to defecate (‘slow transit’) or else may 
result from neuromuscular incoordination and excessive 
straining (‘functional obstructive defecation’, p. 913). 
Intestinal marker studies, anorectal manometry, electro-
physiological studies and magnetic resonance proctog-
raphy can all be used to define the problem.
Abdominal pain
There are four types of abdominal pain:
•	 Visceral. Gut organs are insensitive to stimuli such 
as burning and cutting but are sensitive to 
distension, contraction, twisting and stretching. Pain 
from unpaired structures is usually but not always 
felt in the midline.
•	 Parietal. The parietal peritoneum is innervated 
by somatic nerves, and its involvement by 
inflammation, infection or neoplasia causes sharp, 
well-localised and lateralised pain.
•	 Referred pain. (For example, gallbladder pain is 
referred to the back or shoulder tip.)
•	 Psychogenic. Cultural, emotional and psychosocial 
factors influence everyone’s experience of pain. In 
some patients, no organic cause can be found 
despite investigation, and psychogenic causes 
(depression or somatisation disorder) may be 
responsible (pp. 235 and 245).
The acute abdomen
This accounts for approximately 50% of all urgent 
admissions to general surgical units. The acute abdomen 
is a consequence of one or more pathological processes 
(Box 22.25):
•	 Inflammation. Pain develops gradually, usually over 
several hours. It is initially rather diffuse until the 
Inflammation
•	 Appendicitis
•	 Diverticulitis
•	 Cholecystitis
•	 Pelvic inflammatory disease
•	 Pancreatitis
•	 Pyelonephritis
•	 Intra-abdominal abscess
Perforation/rupture
•	 Peptic ulcer
•	 Diverticular disease
•	 Ovarian cyst
•	 Aortic aneurysm
Obstruction
•	 Intestinal obstruction
•	 Biliary colic
•	 Ureteric colic
Other (rare)
•	 See Box 22.27
22.25  Causes of acute abdominal pain
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
862
Fig. 22.24  Management of acute abdominal pain: an algorithm. 
Symptoms and signs
of peritonitis
Resuscitation
Pain
No clear evidence
of peritonitis
Blood tests
↑ Amylase/lipase
Acute
pancreatitis
Free air
Perforation
Dilated loops
of bowel
Intestinal
obstruction/ileus
Gallstones
and thickened
gallbladder wall
Cholecystitis
Pseudo-obstruction
CT scan
Pancreatitis
Abscess
Aortic aneurysm
Malignancy
Erect
chest X-ray
Abdominal
X-ray
Ultrasound
Contrast
radiology
Abnormality
detected
Abnormality
detected
Perforation
Inconclusive
investigations
No diagnosis
No free air
No abnormality
No abnormality
No abnormality
No abnormality
Symptoms persist
Symptoms
settle
Laparotomy
Laparoscopy
Observe
surgery have made early laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
the treatment of choice.
Acute diverticulitis
Conservative therapy is standard but if perforation has 
occurred, resection is advisable. Depending on perito-
neal contamination and the state of the patient, primary 
anastomosis is preferable to a Hartmann’s procedure 
(oversew of rectal stump and end colostomy).
Small bowel obstruction
If the cause is obvious and surgery inevitable (such as 
with a strangulated hernia), an early operation is appro-
priate. If the suspected cause is adhesions from previous 
surgery, only those patients who do not resolve within 
the first 48 hours or who develop signs of strangulation 
(colicky pain becomes constant, peritonitis, tachycardia, 
fever, leucocytosis) should have surgery.
Large bowel obstruction
Pseudo-obstruction should be treated non-operatively. 
Some patients benefit from colonoscopic decompres-
sion, but mechanical obstruction merits resection, 
usually with a primary anastomosis. Differentiation 
between the two is made by water-soluble contrast 
enema.
•	 Presentation: severity and localisation may blunt with age. 
Presentation may be atypical, even with perforation of a 
viscus.
•	 Cancer: a more common cause of acute pain in those over 
70 yrs than in those under 50 yrs. Older people with vague 
abdominal symptoms should therefore be carefully assessed.
•	 Non-specific symptoms: intra-abdominal inflammatory 
conditions, such as diverticulitis, may present with 
non-specific symptoms, such as acute confusion or anorexia 
and relatively little abdominal tenderness. The reasons for 
this are not clear but may result from altered sensory 
perception.
•	 Outcome of abdominal surgery: determined by the degree 
of comorbid disease and whether surgery is elective or 
emergency, rather than by chronological age.
22.26  Acute abdominal pain in old age
Perforated peptic ulcer
Surgical closure of the perforation is standard practice 
but some patients without generalised peritonitis can be 
treated non-operatively once a water-soluble contrast 
meal has confirmed spontaneous sealing of the per­
foration. Adequate and aggressive resuscitation with 
Diseases of the mouth and salivary glands
22
863
•	 Colonoscopy is indicated for patients with altered 
bowel habit, rectal bleeding or features of 
obstruction suggesting colonic disease.
•	 CT or MR angiography should be considered when 
pain is provoked by food in a patient with 
widespread atherosclerosis, since this may indicate 
mesenteric ischaemia.
•	 Persistent symptoms require exclusion of colonic or 
small bowel disease. However, young patients with 
pain relieved by defecation, bloating and alternating 
bowel habit are likely to have irritable bowel 
syndrome (p. 907). Simple investigations (blood 
tests, faecal calprotectin and sigmoidoscopy) are 
sufficient in the absence of rectal bleeding, weight 
loss and abnormal physical findings.
•	 Ultrasound, CT and faecal elastase are required for 
patients with upper abdominal pain radiating to  
the back. A history of alcohol misuse, weight loss 
and diarrhoea suggests chronic pancreatitis or 
pancreatic cancer.
•	 Recurrent attacks of pain in the loins radiating to 
the flanks with urinary symptoms should prompt 
investigation for renal or ureteric stones by 
abdominal X-ray, ultrasound and CT urography.
•	 A past history of psychiatric disturbance, repeated 
negative investigations or vague symptoms which 
do not fit any disease or organ pattern suggest a 
psychological origin for the pain (p. 236). Careful 
review of case notes and previous investigations, 
along with open and honest discussion with the 
patient, reduces the need for further cycles of 
unnecessary and invasive tests. Care must always 
be taken, however, not to miss rare pathology or 
atypical presentations of common diseases.
Constant abdominal pain
Patients with chronic pain that is constant or nearly 
always present usually have features to suggest the 
underlying diagnosis. In a minority, no cause will be 
found, despite thorough investigation, leading to the 
diagnosis of ‘chronic functional abdominal pain’. In 
these patients, there appears to be abnormal CNS 
processing of normal visceral afferent sensory input, 
psychosocial factors are often operative (p. 240), and the 
most important tasks are to provide symptom control, if 
not relief, and to minimise the effects of the pain on 
social, personal and occupational life. Patients are best 
managed in specialised pain clinics where, in addition 
to psychological support, appropriate use of drugs, 
including tricyclic antidepressants, gabapentin or prega-
balin, ketamine and opioids, may be necessary.
DISEASES OF THE MOUTH AND 
SALIVARY GLANDS
Aphthous ulceration
Aphthous ulcers are superficial and painful; they occur 
in any part of the mouth. Recurrent ulcers afflict up to 
30% of the population and are particularly common in 
women prior to menstruation. The cause is unknown, 
but in severe cases other causes of oral ulceration must 
be considered (Box 22.29). Occasionally, biopsy is neces-
sary for diagnosis.
Retroperitoneal
•	 Aortic aneurysm
•	 Malignancy
•	 Lymphadenopathy
•	 Abscess
Psychogenic
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Hypochondriasis
•	 Somatisation
Locomotor
•	 Vertebral compression/
fracture
•	 Abdominal muscle strain
Metabolic/endocrine
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Addison’s disease
•	 Acute intermittent porphyria
•	 Hypercalcaemia
Drugs/toxins
•	 Corticosteroids
•	 Azathioprine
•	 Lead
•	 Alcohol
Haematological
•	 Sickle-cell disease
•	 Haemolytic disorders
Neurological
•	 Spinal cord lesions
•	 Tabes dorsalis
•	 Radiculopathy
22.27  Extra-intestinal causes of chronic or 
recurrent abdominal pain
•	 Duration
•	 Site and radiation
•	 Severity
•	 Precipitating and relieving factors (food, drugs, alcohol, 
posture, movement, defecation)
•	 Nature (colicky, constant, sharp or dull, wakes patient at night)
•	 Pattern (intermittent or continuous)
•	 Associated features (vomiting, dyspepsia, altered bowel habit)
22.28  How to assess abdominal pain
intravenous fluids, antibiotics and analgesia is manda-
tory before surgery.
For a more detailed discussion of acute abdominal 
pain, the reader is referred to the sister volume of this 
text, Principles and Practice of Surgery.
Chronic or recurrent  
abdominal pain
It is essential to take a detailed history, paying particular 
attention to features of the pain and any associated 
symptoms (Boxes 22.27 and 22.28).
Note should be made of the patient’s general demean-
our, mood and emotional state, signs of weight loss, 
fever, jaundice or anaemia. If a thorough abdominal and 
rectal examination is normal, a careful search should be 
made for evidence of disease affecting other structures, 
particularly the vertebral column, spinal cord, lungs and 
cardiovascular system.
Investigations will depend on the clinical features 
elicited during the history and examination:
•	 Endoscopy and ultrasound are indicated for 
epigastric pain, and for dyspepsia and symptoms 
suggestive of gallbladder disease
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
864
Aphthous
•	 Idiopathic
•	 Premenstrual
Infection
•	 Fungal (candidiasis)
•	 Viral (herpes simplex, HIV)
•	 Bacterial, including 
syphilis, tuberculosis
Gastrointestinal diseases
•	 Crohn’s disease
•	 Coeliac disease
Dermatological conditions
•	 Lichen planus
•	 Immunobullous disorders 
(p. 1292)
•	 Dermatitis herpetiformis
•	 Erythema multiforme
Drugs
•	 Nicorandil, NSAIDs, 
methotrexate, 
penicillamine, losartan, ACE 
inhibitors
•	 Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome (pp. 1264  
and 1302)
•	 Cytotoxic drugs
Systemic diseases
•	 Systemic lupus 
erythematosus (p. 1109)
•	 Behçet’s syndrome  
(p. 1119)
Neoplasia
•	 Carcinoma
•	 Leukaemia
•	 Kaposi’s sarcoma
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAIDs = non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs)
22.29  Causes of oral ulceration
Management is with topical corticosteroids (such as 
0.1% triamcinolone in Orabase) or choline salicylate 
(8.7%) gel. Symptomatic relief is achieved using local 
anaesthetic mouthwashes. Rarely, patients with very 
severe, recurrent aphthous ulcers may need oral 
corticosteroids.
Oral cancer
Squamous carcinoma of the oral cavity is common 
worldwide and the incidence has increased by 25% in 
the last decade in the UK. The mortality rate is around 
50%, largely as a result of late diagnosis. Poor diet, 
alcohol excess and smoking or tobacco chewing are the 
traditional risk factors but high-risk, oncogenic strains 
of human papillomavirus (HPV-16 and HPV-18) have 
been identified as responsible for much of the recent 
increase in incidence, especially in cases affecting the 
base of tongue, soft palate and tonsils. In parts of Asia, 
the disease is common among people who chew areca 
nuts wrapped in leaves of the betel plant (‘betel nuts’).
Oral cancer may present in many ways (Box 22.30) 
and a high index of suspicion is required. Patients with 
suspicious lesions should have all possible sources of 
local trauma or infection treated and should be reviewed 
after 2 weeks, with biopsy if the lesion persists. Small 
cancers can be resected but extensive surgery, with neck 
dissection to remove involved lymph nodes, may be 
necessary. Some patients can be treated with radical 
radiotherapy alone, and sometimes radiotherapy is also 
given after surgery to treat microscopic residual disease. 
Some tumours may be amenable to photodynamic 
therapy (PDT), avoiding the need for surgery.
•	 Solitary ulcer without precipitant, e.g. local trauma
•	 Solitary white patch (‘leukoplakia’) which fails to wipe off
•	 Solitary red patch
•	 Fixed lump
•	 Lip numbness in absence of trauma or infection
•	 Trismus (painful/difficult mouth opening)
•	 Cervical lymphadenopathy
22.30  Symptoms and signs of oral cancer
•	 Infection
Mumps
Bacterial (post-operative)
•	 Calculi
•	 Sjögren’s syndrome (p. 1114)
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Tumours
Benign: pleomorphic 
adenoma (95% of cases)
Intermediate: 
mucoepidermoid tumour
Malignant: carcinoma
22.31  Causes of salivary gland swelling
Candidiasis
The yeast Candida albicans is a normal mouth commensal 
but it may proliferate to cause thrush. This occurs in 
babies, debilitated patients, patients receiving cortico­
steroid or antibiotic therapy, patients with diabetes and 
immunosuppressed patients, especially those receiving 
cytotoxic therapy and those with HIV infection. White 
patches are seen on the tongue and buccal mucosa. 
Odynophagia or dysphagia suggests pharyngeal and 
oesophageal candidiasis. A clinical diagnosis is suffi-
cient to instigate therapy, although brushings or biop-
sies can be obtained for mycological examination. Oral 
thrush is treated using nystatin or amphotericin suspen-
sions or lozenges. Resistant cases or immunosuppressed 
patients may require oral fluconazole.
Parotitis
Parotitis is due to viral or bacterial infection. Mumps 
causes a self-limiting acute parotitis (p. 319). Bacterial 
parotitis usually occurs as a complication of major 
surgery. It is a consequence of dehydration and poor 
oral hygiene, and can be avoided by good post-operative 
care. Patients present with painful parotid swelling and 
this can be complicated by abscess formation. Broad-
spectrum antibiotics are required, whilst surgical drain-
age is necessary for abscesses. Other causes of salivary 
gland enlargement are listed in Box 22.31.
•	 Dry mouth: affects around 40% of healthy older people.
•	 Gustatory and olfactory sensation: declines and chewing 
power is diminished.
•	 Salivation: baseline salivary flow falls but stimulated 
salivation is unchanged.
•	 Root caries and periodontal disease: common partly 
because oral hygiene deteriorates with increasing frailty.
•	 Bacteraemia and septicaemia: may complicate Gram-
negative anaerobic infection in the periodontal pockets of the 
very frail.
22.32  Oral health in old age
Diseases of the oesophagus
22
865
DISEASES OF THE OESOPHAGUS
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
Gastro-oesophageal reflux resulting in heartburn affects 
approximately 30% of the general population.
Pathophysiology
Occasional episodes of gastro-oesophageal reflux are 
common in healthy individuals. Reflux is normally fol-
lowed by oesophageal peristaltic waves which efficiently 
clear the gullet, alkaline saliva neutralises residual acid, 
and symptoms do not occur. Gastro-oesophageal reflux 
disease develops when the oesophageal mucosa is 
exposed to gastroduodenal contents for prolonged 
periods of time, resulting in symptoms and, in a propor-
tion of cases, oesophagitis. Several factors are known to 
be involved in the development of gastro-oesophageal 
reflux disease and these are shown in Figure 22.25.
Fig. 22.25  Factors associated with the development of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. 
Acid-pepsin
(bile)
Delayed
gastric
emptying
Hiatus hernia
Defective
oesophageal
clearance
Abnormal lower
oesophageal
sphincter
 • Reduced tone
 • Inappropriate
    relaxation
Increased
intra-abdominal
pressure
Obesity
Dietary
factors
•	 Herniation of the stomach through the diaphragm into the 
chest
•	 Occurs in 30% of the population over the age of 50 yrs
•	 Often asymptomatic
•	 Heartburn and regurgitation can occur
•	 Gastric volvulus may complicate large para-oesophageal 
hernias
22.33  Important features of hiatus hernia
Fig. 22.26  Types of hiatus hernia. 
Lower
oesophageal
sphincter
Sliding
Rolling or para-oesophageal
Lower
oesophageal
sphincter
Diaphragm
Abnormalities of the lower oesophageal sphincter
The lower oesophageal sphincter is tonically contracted 
under normal circumstances, relaxing only during swal-
lowing (p. 840).
Some patients with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
have reduced lower oesophageal sphincter tone, permit-
ting reflux when intra-abdominal pressure rises. In 
others, basal sphincter tone is normal but reflux occurs 
in response to frequent episodes of inappropriate 
sphincter relaxation.
Hiatus hernia
Hiatus hernia (Box 22.33 and Fig. 22.26) causes reflux 
because the pressure gradient between the abdominal 
and thoracic cavities, which normally pinches the hiatus, 
is lost. In addition, the oblique angle between the cardia 
and oesophagus disappears. Many patients who have 
large hiatus hernias develop reflux symptoms, but the 
relationship between the presence of a hernia and symp-
toms is poor. Hiatus hernia is very common in individu-
als who have no symptoms, and some symptomatic 
patients have only a very small or no hernia. Neverthe-
less, almost all patients who develop oesopha­gitis, Bar-
rett’s oesophagus or peptic strictures have a hiatus 
hernia.
Delayed oesophageal clearance
Defective oesophageal peristaltic activity is commonly 
found in patients who have oesophagitis. It is a 
primary abnormality, since it persists after oesophagitis 
has been healed by acid-suppressing drug therapy. 
Poor oesophageal clearance leads to increased acid 
exposure time.
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
866
white), the obese and those over 50 years of age. It is 
weakly associated with smoking but not alcohol intake. 
The risk of cancer seems to relate to the severity and 
duration of reflux rather than the presence of CLO per 
se and it has been suggested that duodenogastro-
oesophageal reflux of bile, pancreatic enzymes and 
pepsin, as well as gastric acid, may be important in 
pathogenesis. The molecular events underlying pro-
gression of CLO to dysplasia and cancer are incom-
pletely understood but inactivation of the tumour 
suppression protein p16 by loss of heterozygosity 
or promoter hypermethylation is a key event, followed 
by somatic inactivation of p53, which promotes 
Gastric contents
Gastric acid is the most important oesophageal irritant 
and there is a close relationship between acid exposure 
time and symptoms. Pepsin and bile also contribute to 
mucosal injury.
Defective gastric emptying
Gastric emptying is delayed in patients with gastro-
oesophageal reflux disease. The reason is unknown.
Increased intra-abdominal pressure
Pregnancy and obesity are established predisposing 
causes. Weight loss may improve symptoms.
Dietary and environmental factors
Dietary fat, chocolate, alcohol and coffee relax the lower 
oesophageal sphincter and may provoke symptoms. The 
foods that trigger symptoms vary widely between 
affected individuals.
Patient factors
Visceral sensitivity and patient vigilance play a role in 
determining symptom severity and consulting behav-
iour in individual patients.
Clinical features
The major symptoms are heartburn and regurgitation, 
often provoked by bending, straining or lying down. 
‘Waterbrash’, which is salivation due to reflex salivary 
gland stimulation as acid enters the gullet, is often 
present. The patient is often overweight. Some patients 
are woken at night by choking as refluxed fluid irritates 
the larynx. Others develop odynophagia or dysphagia. 
A variety of other features have been described, such as 
atypical chest pain which may be severe and can mimic 
angina, and may be due to reflux-induced oesophageal 
spasm. Others include hoarseness (‘acid laryngitis’), 
recurrent chest infections, chronic cough and asthma 
(Box 22.34). The true relationship of these features to 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease remains unclear.
Complications
Oesophagitis
A range of endoscopic findings, from mild redness to 
severe, bleeding ulceration with stricture formation, are 
recognised, although appearances may be completely 
normal (Fig. 22.27). There is a poor correlation between 
symptoms and histological and endoscopic findings.
Barrett’s oesophagus
Barrett’s oesophagus is a pre-malignant condition, in 
which the normal squamous lining of the lower 
oesophagus is replaced by columnar mucosa (columnar 
lined oesophagus; CLO) that may contain areas of intes-
tinal metaplasia (Fig. 22.28). It is an adaptive response 
to chronic gastro-oesophageal reflux and is found in 
10% of patients undergoing gastroscopy for reflux 
symptoms. Community-based epidemiological studies 
suggest that the true prevalence may be up to 1.5–5% of 
the population, as the condition is often asymptomatic 
until discovered when the patient presents with 
oesophageal cancer. The relative risk of oesophageal 
cancer is 40–120-fold increased but the absolute risk is 
low (0.1–0.5% per year). The epidemiology and aetiol-
ogy of CLO are poorly understood. The prevalence is 
increasing, and it is more common in men (especially 
‘Reflux is significantly more common in asthma patients (odds 
ratio 5.5) and asthma is more common in patients with 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (odds ratio 2.3), compared to 
controls. Evidence for the direction of causality, however, is 
lacking.’
•	 Havemann BD, et al. Gut 2007; 56:1654–1664.
For further information: 
 www.evidbasedgastro.com
22.34  The association between 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and asthma
Fig. 22.27  Severe reflux oesophagitis. There is near-circumferential 
superficial ulceration and inflammation extending up the gullet. 
Fig. 22.28  Barrett’s oesophagus. Tongues of pink columnar mucosa 
are seen extending upwards above the oesophago-gastric junction. 
Diseases of the oesophagus
22
867
rise to complete oesophageal or gastric obstruction and 
the patient presents with severe chest pain, vomiting 
and dysphagia. The diagnosis is made by chest X-ray 
(air bubble in the chest) and barium swallow. Most cases 
spontaneously resolve but recurrence is common, and 
surgery is usually advised after the acute episode has 
been treated by nasogastric decompression.
Investigations
Young patients who present with typical symptoms of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux, without worrying features 
such as dysphagia, weight loss or anaemia, can be 
treated empirically without investigation. Investigation 
is advisable if patients present over the age of 
50–55 years, if symptoms are atypical or if a complica-
tion is suspected. Endoscopy is the investigation of 
choice. This is performed to exclude other upper gas-
trointestinal diseases that can mimic gastro-oesophageal 
reflux and to identify complications. A normal endos-
copy in a patient with compatible symptoms should 
not preclude treatment for gastro-oesophageal reflux 
disease.
Twenty-four-hour pH monitoring is indicated if the 
diagnosis is unclear or surgical intervention is under 
consideration. This involves tethering a slim catheter 
with a terminal radiotelemetry pH-sensitive probe 
above the gastro-oesophageal junction. The intraluminal 
pH is recorded whilst the patient undergoes normal 
activities, and episodes of symptoms are noted and 
related to pH. A pH of less than 4 for more than 6–7% 
of the study time is diagnostic of reflux disease. In a few 
patients with difficult reflux, impedance testing can 
detect weakly acidic or alkaline reflux that is not revealed 
by standard pH testing.
Management
A treatment algorithm for gastro-oesophageal reflux is 
outlined in Figure 22.29. Lifestyle advice, including 
weight loss, avoidance of dietary items that the patient 
finds worsen symptoms, elevation of the bed head in 
those who experience nocturnal symptoms, avoidance 
of late meals and giving up smoking, should be recom-
mended. Patients who fail to respond to these meas-
ures should be offered PPIs, which are usually effective 
in resolving symptoms and healing oesophagitis. 
Recurrence of symptoms is common when therapy is 
stopped and some patients require life-long treatment 
at the lowest acceptable dose. When dysmotility fea-
tures are prominent, domperidone can be helpful. 
There is no evidence that H. pylori eradication has any 
therapeutic value. Proprietary antacids and alginates 
can also provide symptomatic benefit. H2-receptor 
antagonist drugs also help symptoms without healing 
oesophagitis.
Long-term PPI therapy is associated with reduced 
absorption of iron, B12 and magnesium, and a small but 
increased risk of osteoporosis and fractures (odds ratio 
1.2–1.5). The drugs also predispose to enteric infections 
with Salmonella, Campylobacter and possibly Clostridium 
difficile. Long-term therapy increases the risk of 
Helicobacter-associated progression of gastric mucosal 
atrophy (see below) and H. pylori eradication is advised 
in patients requiring PPIs for more than 1 year.
Patients who fail to respond to medical therapy, those 
who are unwilling to take long-term PPIs and those 
aneuploidy and tumour progression. Studies are in 
progress to develop biomarkers that will allow detec-
tion of those at higher cancer risk.
Diagnosis.  This requires multiple systematic biopsies to 
maximise the chance of detecting intestinal metaplasia 
and/or dysplasia.
Management.  Neither potent acid suppression nor anti-
reflux surgery stops progression or induces regression 
of CLO, and treatment is only indicated for symptoms 
of reflux or complications, such as stricture. Endoscopic 
therapies, such as radiofrequency ablation or photo­
dynamic therapy, can induce regression but, at present, 
are used only for those with dysplasia or intramucosal 
cancer. Regular endoscopic surveillance can detect dys-
plasia at an early stage and may improve survival but, 
because most CLO is undetected until cancer develops, 
surveillance strategies are unlikely to influence the 
overall mortality rate of oesophageal cancer. Surveil-
lance is expensive and cost-effectiveness studies have 
been conflicting, but it is currently recommended that 
patients with CLO without dysplasia should undergo 
endoscopy at 3–5-yearly intervals and those with low-
grade dysplasia at 6–12-monthly intervals.
For those with high-grade dysplasia (HGD) or intra-
mucosal carcinoma, the treatment options are either 
oesophagectomy or endoscopic therapy with a combina-
tion of endoscopic resection (ER) of any visibly abnor-
mal areas and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of the 
remaining Barrett’s mucosa as an ‘organ-preserving’ 
alternative to surgery. These cases should be discussed 
in a multidisciplinary team meeting and managed in 
specialist centres.
Anaemia
Iron deficiency anaemia can occur as a consequence of 
occult blood loss from long-standing oesophagitis. Most 
patients have a large hiatus hernia and bleeding can 
stem from subtle erosions in the neck of the sac 
(‘Cameron lesions’). Nevertheless, hiatus hernia is very 
common and other causes of blood loss, particularly 
colorectal cancer, must be considered in anaemic 
patients, even when endoscopy reveals oesophagitis.
Benign oesophageal stricture
Fibrous strictures can develop as a consequence of long-
standing oesophagitis, especially in the elderly and 
those with poor oesophageal peristaltic activity. The 
typical presentation is with dysphagia that is worse for 
solids than for liquids. Bolus obstruction following 
ingestion of meat causes absolute dysphagia. A history 
of heartburn is common but not invariable; many elderly 
patients presenting with strictures have no preceding 
heartburn.
Diagnosis is by endoscopy, when biopsies of the stric-
ture can be taken to exclude malignancy. Endoscopic 
balloon dilatation or bouginage is helpful. Subsequently, 
long-term therapy with a PPI drug at full dose should 
be started to reduce the risk of recurrent oesophagitis 
and stricture formation. The patient should be advised 
to chew food thoroughly, and it is important to ensure 
adequate dentition.
Gastric volvulus
Occasionally, a massive intrathoracic hiatus hernia may 
twist upon itself, leading to a gastric volvulus. This gives 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
868
whose major symptom is severe regurgitation should 
be considered for laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery (see 
Principles and Practice of Surgery). Although heartburn 
and regurgitation are alleviated in most patients, a small 
minority develop complications, such as inability to 
vomit and abdominal bloating (‘gas-bloat’ syndrome’).
Other causes of oesophagitis
Infection
Oesophageal candidiasis occurs in debilitated patients 
and those taking broad-spectrum antibiotics or cytotoxic 
drugs. It is a particular problem in patients with HIV-
AIDS, who are also susceptible to a spectrum of other 
oesophageal infections (p. 399).
Corrosives
Suicide attempt by strong household bleach or battery 
acid is followed by painful burns of the mouth and 
pharynx and by extensive erosive oesophagitis. This may 
be complicated by oesophageal perforation with medi-
astinitis and by stricture formation. At the time of pres-
entation, treatment is conservative, based upon analgesia 
and nutritional support; vomiting and endoscopy should 
Fig. 22.29  Treatment of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: a 
‘step-down’ approach. 
Symptoms
Antacids/alginates
Proton pump inhibitor at full dose
Good response
Poor response
or side-effects
Reconsider
diagnosis
Consider pH
monitoring
Normal
Positive
Proton pump inhibitor
at maintenance dose
H2-receptor
antagonists
Antacids
Fundoplication
•	 Prevalence: higher.
•	 Severity of symptoms: does not correlate with the degree of 
mucosal inflammation.
•	 Complications: late complications, such as peptic strictures 
or bleeding from oesophagitis, are more common.
•	 Recurrent pneumonia: consider aspiration from occult 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.
22.35  Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
in old age
be avoided because of the high risk of oesophageal per-
foration. After the acute phase, a barium swallow should 
be performed to demonstrate the extent of stricture for-
mation. Endoscopic dilatation is usually necessary but it 
is difficult and hazardous because strictures are often 
long, tortuous and easily perforated.
Drugs
Potassium supplements and NSAIDs may cause 
oesophageal ulcers when the tablets are trapped above 
an oesophageal stricture. Liquid preparations of these 
drugs should be used in such patients. Bisphosphonates 
cause oesophageal ulceration and should be used with 
caution in patients with known oesophageal disorders.
Eosinophilic oesophagitis
This is more common in children but increasingly rec-
ognised in young adults. It occurs more often in atopic 
individuals and is characterised by eosinophilic infiltra-
tion of the oesophageal mucosa. Patients present with 
dysphagia or food bolus obstruction more often than 
heartburn, and other symptoms, such as chest pain and 
vomiting, may be present. Endoscopy is usually normal 
but mucosal rings (that sometimes need endoscopic dila-
tation), strictures or a narrow-calibre oesophagus can 
occur. Children may respond to elimination diets but 
these are less successful in adults, who should first be 
treated with PPIs. The condition can be treated with 
8–12 weeks of therapy with topical corticosteroids, such 
as fluticasone or betamethasone. The usual approach is 
to prescribe a metered-dose inhaler but to tell the patient 
to spray this into the mouth and swallow it rather than 
inhale it. Refractory symptoms sometimes respond to 
montelukast, a leukotriene inhibitor.
Motility disorders
Pharyngeal pouch
This occurs because of incoordination of swallowing 
within the pharynx, which leads to herniation through 
the cricopharyngeus muscle and formation of a pouch. 
It is rare, affecting 1 in 100 000 people; it usually devel-
ops in middle life but can arise at any age. Many 
patients have no symptoms, but regurgitation, halitosis 
and dysphagia can be present. Some notice gurgling in 
the throat after swallowing. The investigation of choice 
is a barium swallow, which demonstrates the pouch 
and reveals incoordination of swallowing, often with 
pulmonary aspiration. Endoscopy may be hazardous, 
since the instrument may enter and perforate the pouch. 
Surgical myotomy (‘diverticulotomy’), with or without 
resection of the pouch, is indicated in symptomatic 
patients.
Achalasia of the oesophagus
Pathophysiology
Achalasia is characterised by:
•	 a hypertonic lower oesophageal sphincter, which 
fails to relax in response to the swallowing wave
•	 failure of propagated oesophageal contraction, 
leading to progressive dilatation of the gullet.
The cause is unknown. Defective release of nitric 
oxide by inhibitory neurons in the lower oesophageal 
Diseases of the oesophagus
22
869
sphincter has been reported, and there is degeneration 
of ganglion cells within the sphincter and the body of 
the oesophagus. Loss of the dorsal vagal nuclei within 
the brainstem can be demonstrated in later stages. Infec-
tion with Trypanosoma cruzi in Chagas’ disease (p. 360) 
causes a syndrome that is clinically indistinguishable 
from achalasia.
Clinical features
The presentation is with dysphagia. This develops 
slowly, is initially intermittent, and is worse for solids 
and eased by drinking liquids, and by standing and 
moving around after eating. Heartburn does not occur 
because the closed oesophageal sphincter prevents 
gastro-oesophageal reflux. Some patients experience 
episodes of chest pain due to oesophageal spasm. As the 
disease progresses, dysphagia worsens, the oesophagus 
empties poorly and nocturnal pulmonary aspiration 
develops. Achalasia predisposes to squamous carci-
noma of the oesophagus.
Investigations
Endoscopy should always be carried out because carci-
noma of the cardia can mimic the presentation and 
radiological and manometric features of achalasia 
(‘pseudo-achalasia’). A barium swallow shows tapered 
narrowing of the lower oesophagus and, in late disease, 
the oesophageal body is dilated, aperistaltic and food-
filled (Fig. 22.30A). Manometry confirms the high-
pressure, non-relaxing lower oesophageal sphincter 
with poor contractility of the oesophageal body 
(Fig. 22.30B).
Management
Endoscopic
Forceful pneumatic dilatation using a 30–35-mm diam-
eter fluoroscopically positioned balloon disrupts the 
oesophageal sphincter and improves symptoms in 80% 
of patients. Some patients require more than one dilata-
tion but those needing frequent dilatation are best 
treated surgically. Endoscopically directed injection of 
botulinum toxin into the lower oesophageal sphincter 
induces clinical remission but relapse is common.
Surgical
Surgical myotomy (Heller’s operation), performed either 
laparoscopically or as an open operation, is effective but 
is more invasive than endoscopic dilatation. Both pneu-
matic dilatation and myotomy may be complicated by 
gastro-oesophageal reflux, and this can lead to severe 
oesophagitis because oesophageal clearance is so poor. 
For this reason, Heller’s myotomy is accompanied by a 
partial fundoplication anti-reflux procedure. PPI therapy 
is often necessary after surgery. Recently, a complex 
endoscopic technique has been developed in specialist 
centres (peroral endoscopic myotomy, POEM).
Other oesophageal motility 
disorders
Diffuse oesophageal spasm presents in late middle age 
with episodic chest pain that may mimic angina, but is 
sometimes accompanied by transient dysphagia. Some 
cases occur in response to gastro-oesophageal reflux. 
Treatment is based upon the use of PPI drugs when 
gastro-oesophageal reflux is present. Oral or sublingual 
nitrates or nifedipine may relieve attacks of pain. The 
results of drug therapy are often disappointing, as are 
the alternatives: pneumatic dilatation and surgical 
myotomy. ‘Nutcracker’ oesophagus is a condition in 
which extremely forceful peristaltic activity leads to epi-
sodic chest pain and dysphagia. Treatment is with 
nitrates or nifedipine. Some patients present with 
oesophageal motility disorders which do not fit into a 
specific disease entity. The patients are usually elderly 
and present with dysphagia and chest pain. Manometric 
abnormalities, ranging from poor peristalsis to spasm, 
occur. Treatment is with dilatation and/or vasodilators 
for chest pain.
Secondary causes of oesophageal 
dysmotility
In systemic sclerosis or CREST syndrome, the muscle 
of the oesophagus is replaced by fibrous tissue, 
which causes failure of peristalsis leading to heartburn 
and dysphagia. Oesophagitis is often severe, and 
benign fibrous strictures occur. These patients require 
Fig. 22.30  Achalasia. A  X-ray showing a dilated, barium-filled oesophagus (O) with fluid level and distal tapering, and a closed lower oesophageal 
sphincter (LOS). (D = diaphragm) B  High-resolution manometry in achalasia showing absence of peristaltic swallowing wave in oesophageal body (black 
arrows) and raised LOS pressure with failure of relaxation on swallowing (white arrow). Compare with normal appearances in Figure 22.1 (p. 840). 
Time (secs)
LOS
D
O
A
B
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
870
•	 Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
•	 Webs and rings
•	 Carcinoma of the oesophagus or cardia
•	 Eosinophilic oesophagitis
•	 Extrinsic compression from bronchial carcinoma
•	 Corrosive ingestion
•	 Post-operative scarring following oesophageal resection
•	 Post-radiotherapy
•	 Following long-term nasogastric intubation
•	 Bisphosphonates
22.36  Causes of oesophageal stricture
after swallowing, pneumonia and pleural effusion. 
Physical signs may be absent but, even at initial presen-
tation, cachexia, cervical lymphadenopathy or other evi-
dence of metastatic spread is common.
Investigations
The investigation of choice is upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy (Fig. 22.31) with biopsy. A barium swallow 
demonstrates the site and length of the stricture but adds 
little useful information. Once a diagnosis has been 
made, investigations should be performed to stage the 
tumour and define operability. Thoracic and abdominal 
CT, often combined with positron emission tomography 
(CT-PET), should be carried out to identify metastatic 
spread and local invasion. Invasion of the aorta, major 
airways or coeliac axis usually precludes surgery, but 
patients with resectable disease on imaging should 
undergo EUS to determine the depth of penetration of 
the tumour into the oesophageal wall and to detect 
locoregional lymph node involvement (Fig. 22.32). 
These investigations will define the TNM stage of the 
disease (p. 268).
Management
The treatment of choice is surgery if the patient presents 
at a point at which resection is possible. Patients with 
tumours that have extended beyond the wall of the 
oesophagus (T3) or which have lymph node involve-
ment (N1) have a 5-year survival of around 10%. 
However, this figure improves significantly if the 
tumour is confined to the oesophageal wall and there is 
no spread to lymph nodes. Overall survival following 
long-term therapy with PPIs. Dermatomyositis, rheuma-
toid arthritis and myasthenia gravis may also cause 
dysphagia.
Benign oesophageal stricture
Benign oesophageal stricture is usually a consequence of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (Box 22.36) and occurs 
most often in elderly patients who have poor oesopha-
geal clearance. Rings, due to submucosal fibrosis, are 
found at the oesophago-gastric junction (‘Schatzki ring’) 
and cause intermittent dysphagia, often starting in 
middle age. A post-cricoid web is a rare complication of 
iron deficiency anaemia (Paterson–Kelly or Plummer–
Vinson syndrome), and may be complicated by the 
development of squamous carcinoma. Benign strictures 
can be treated by endoscopic dilatation, in which wire-
guided bougies or balloons are used to disrupt the 
fibrous tissue of the stricture.
•	 Smoking
•	 Alcohol excess
•	 Chewing betel nuts or 
tobacco
•	 Achalasia of the 
oesophagus
•	 Coeliac disease
•	 Post-cricoid web
•	 Post-caustic stricture
•	 Tylosis (familial 
hyperkeratosis of palms 
and soles)
22.37  Squamous carcinoma: aetiological factors
Fig. 22.31  Adenocarcinoma of the lower oesophagus. 
Adenocarcinoma in association with Barrett’s oesophagus (arrow). 
Tumours of the oesophagus
Benign tumours
The most common is a leiomyoma. This is usually 
asymptomatic but may cause bleeding or dysphagia.
Carcinoma of the oesophagus
Squamous oesophageal cancer (Box 22.37) is relatively 
rare in Caucasians (4 : 100 000) but is more common in 
Iran, parts of Africa and China (200 : 100 000). Squamous 
cancer can occur in any part of the oesophagus, and 
almost all tumours in the upper oesophagus are squa-
mous cancers. Adenocarcinomas typically arise in the 
lower third of the oesophagus from Barrett’s oesopha-
gus or from the cardia of the stomach. The incidence is 
increasing and is now approximately 5 : 100 000 in the 
UK; this is possibly because of the high prevalence of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux and Barrett’s oesophagus in 
Western populations. Despite modern treatment, the 
overall 5-year survival of patients presenting with 
oesophageal cancer is only 13%.
Clinical features
Most patients have a history of progressive, painless 
dysphagia for solid foods. Others present acutely 
because of food bolus obstruction. In late stages, weight 
loss is often extreme; chest pain or hoarseness suggests 
mediastinal invasion. Fistulation between the oesopha-
gus and the trachea or bronchial tree leads to coughing 
Diseases of the stomach and duodenum
22
871
DISEASES OF THE STOMACH AND 
DUODENUM
Gastritis
Gastritis is a histological diagnosis, although it can 
sometimes be recognised at endoscopy.
Acute gastritis
Acute gastritis is often erosive and haemorrhagic. Neu-
trophils are the predominant inflammatory cell in the 
superficial epithelium. Many cases result from aspirin or 
NSAID ingestion (Box 22.38). Acute gastritis often pro-
duces no symptoms but may cause dyspepsia, anorexia, 
nausea or vomiting, and haematemesis or melaena. 
Many cases resolve quickly and do not merit investiga-
tion; in others, endoscopy and biopsy may be necessary 
to exclude peptic ulcer or cancer. Treatment should be 
directed at the underlying cause. Short-term sympto-
matic therapy with antacids, and acid suppression using 
PPIs, prokinetics (domperidone) or antiemetics (meto-
clopramide) may be necessary.
Chronic gastritis due to 
Helicobacter pylori infection
This is the most common cause of chronic gastritis (see 
Box 22.38). The predominant inflammatory cells are 
lymphocytes and plasma cells. Correlation between 
symptoms and endoscopic or pathological findings is 
poor. Most patients are asymptomatic and do not require 
treatment, but patients with dyspepsia may benefit from 
H. pylori eradication.
Autoimmune chronic gastritis
This involves the body of the stomach but spares the 
antrum; it results from autoimmune damage to parietal 
‘potentially curative’ surgery (all macroscopic tumour 
removed) is about 30% at 5 years, but recent studies have 
suggested that this can be improved by neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy. Although squamous carcinomas are 
radiosensitive, radiotherapy alone is associated with a 
5-year survival of only 5%, but combined chemoradio-
therapy for these tumours can achieve 5-year survival 
rates of 25–30%.
Approximately 70% of patients have extensive 
disease at presentation; in these, treatment is palliative 
and should focus on relief of dysphagia and pain. Endo-
scopic laser therapy or self-expanding metallic stents 
can be used to improve swallowing. Palliative radio-
therapy may induce shrinkage of both squamous cancers 
and adenocarcinomas but symptomatic response may be 
slow. Quality of life can be improved by nutritional 
support and appropriate analgesia.
Perforation of the oesophagus
The most common cause is endoscopic perforation com-
plicating dilatation or intubation. Malignant, corrosive 
or post-radiotherapy strictures are more likely to be 
perforated than peptic strictures. A perforated peptic 
stricture is managed conservatively using broad-
spectrum antibiotics and parenteral nutrition; most 
cases heal within days. Malignant, caustic and radio-
therapy stricture perforations require resection or 
stenting.
Spontaneous oesophageal perforation (‘Boerhaave’s 
syndrome’) results from forceful vomiting and retching. 
Severe chest pain and shock occur as oesophago-gastric 
contents enter the mediastinum and thoracic cavity. 
Subcutaneous emphysema, pleural effusions and pneu-
mothorax develop. The diagnosis can be made using a 
water-soluble contrast swallow but, in difficult cases, 
both CT and careful endoscopy (usually in an intubated 
patient) may be required. Treatment is surgical. Delay 
in diagnosis is a key factor in the high mortality associ-
ated with this condition.
Fig. 22.32  Endoscopic ultrasound staging of oesophageal 
carcinoma. The tumour (T) has extended through the oesophageal wall 
(stage T3, arrows). A small peritumoral lymph node (LN) is also seen.  
(Ao = aorta; LA = left atrium; E = echoendoscope) 
E
Ao        
LA
T
LN
Acute gastritis (often erosive and haemorrhagic)
•	 Aspirin, NSAIDs
•	 H. pylori (initial infection)
•	 Alcohol
•	 Other drugs, e.g. iron preparations
•	 Severe physiological stress, e.g. burns, multi-organ failure, 
CNS trauma
•	 Bile reflux, e.g. following gastric surgery
•	 Viral infections, e.g. CMV, herpes simplex virus in HIV-AIDS  
(p. 399)
Chronic non-specific gastritis
•	 H. pylori infection
•	 Autoimmune (pernicious anaemia)
•	 Post-gastrectomy
Chronic ‘specific’ forms (rare)
•	 Infections, e.g. CMV, tuberculosis
•	 Gastrointestinal diseases, e.g. Crohn’s disease
•	 Systemic diseases, e.g. sarcoidosis, graft-versus-host 
disease
•	 Idiopathic, e.g. granulomatous gastritis
(CMV = cytomegalovirus; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
22.38  Common causes of gastritis
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
872
adults. These infections are probably acquired in child-
hood by person-to-person contact. The vast majority of 
colonised people remain healthy and asymptomatic and 
only a minority develop clinical disease. Around 90% of 
duodenal ulcer patients and 70% of gastric ulcer patients 
are infected with H. pylori. The remaining 30% of gastric 
ulcers are caused by NSAIDs and this proportion is 
increasing in Western countries as a result of H. pylori 
eradication strategies.
H. pylori is Gram-negative and spiral, and has multi-
ple flagella at one end, which make it motile, allowing 
it to burrow and live beneath the mucus layer adherent 
to the epithelial surface. It uses an adhesin molecule 
(BabA) to bind to the Lewis b antigen on epithelial cells. 
Here the surface pH is close to neutral and any acidity 
is buffered by the organism’s production of the enzyme 
urease. This produces ammonia from urea and raises the 
pH around the bacterium and between its two cell mem-
brane layers. H. pylori exclusively colonises gastric-type 
epithelium and is only found in the duodenum in asso-
ciation with patches of gastric metaplasia. It causes 
chronic gastritis by provoking a local inflammatory 
response in the underlying epithelium (Fig. 22.33). This 
depends on numerous factors, notably expression of 
bacterial cagA and vacA genes. The cagA gene product 
is injected into epithelial cells, interacting with numer-
ous cell-signalling pathways involved in cell replication 
and apoptosis. H. pylori strains expressing cagA (cagA+) 
are more often associated with disease than cagA− 
strains. Most strains also secrete a large pore-forming 
protein called vacA, which causes increased cell perme-
ability, efflux of micronutrients from the epithelium, 
induction of apoptosis and suppression of local immune 
cell activity. Several forms of vacA exist and pathology 
is most strongly associated with the s1/ml form of the 
toxin.
In most people, H. pylori causes localised antral gas-
tritis associated with depletion of somatostatin (from D 
cells) and increased gastrin release from G cells. The 
subsequent hypergastrinaemia stimulates increased acid 
cells. The histological features are diffuse chronic 
inflammation, atrophy and loss of fundic glands, 
intestinal metaplasia and sometimes hyperplasia of 
enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells. Circulating antibod-
ies to parietal cell and intrinsic factor may be present. In 
some patients, the degree of gastric atrophy is severe, 
and loss of intrinsic factor secretion leads to pernicious 
anaemia (p. 1025). The gastritis itself is usually asymp-
tomatic. Some patients have evidence of other organ-
specific autoimmunity, particularly thyroid disease. 
Long-term, there is a two- to threefold increase in the 
risk of gastric cancer (see also p. 877).
Ménétrier’s disease
In this rare condition, the gastric pits are elongated and 
tortuous, with replacement of the parietal and chief cells 
by mucus-secreting cells. The cause is unknown but 
there is excessive production of TGF-α. As a result, the 
mucosal folds of the body and fundus are greatly 
enlarged. Most patients are hypochlorhydric. Whilst 
some patients have upper gastrointestinal symptoms, 
the majority present in middle or old age with protein-
losing enteropathy (p. 886) due to exudation from the 
gastric mucosa. Endoscopy shows enlarged, nodular 
and coarse folds, although biopsies may not be deep 
enough to show all the histological features. Treatment 
with antisecretory drugs, such as PPIs with or without 
octreotide, may reduce protein loss and H. pylori eradi-
cation may be effective, but unresponsive patients 
require partial gastrectomy.
Peptic ulcer disease
The term ‘peptic ulcer’ refers to an ulcer in the lower 
oesophagus, stomach or duodenum, in the jejunum after 
surgical anastomosis to the stomach or, rarely, in the 
ileum adjacent to a Meckel’s diverticulum. Ulcers in the 
stomach or duodenum may be acute or chronic; both 
penetrate the muscularis mucosae but the acute ulcer 
shows no evidence of fibrosis. Erosions do not penetrate 
the muscularis mucosae.
Gastric and duodenal ulcer
The prevalence of peptic ulcer (0.1–0.2%) is decreasing 
in many Western communities as a result of widespread 
use of Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy but it 
remains high in developing countries. The male-to-
female ratio for duodenal ulcer varies from 5 : 1 to 2 : 1, 
whilst that for gastric ulcer is 2 : 1 or less. Chronic gastric 
ulcer is usually single; 90% are situated on the lesser 
curve within the antrum or at the junction between body 
and antral mucosa. Chronic duodenal ulcer usually 
occurs in the first part of the duodenum and 50% are on 
the anterior wall. Gastric and duodenal ulcers coexist in 
10% of patients and more than one peptic ulcer is found 
in 10–15% of patients.
Pathophysiology
H. pylori
Peptic ulceration is strongly associated with H. pylori 
infection. The prevalence in developed nations rises 
with age, and in the UK approximately 50% of people 
over the age of 50 years are infected. In the developing 
world, infection is more common, affecting up to 90% of 
Fig. 22.33  Factors that influence the virulence of H. pylori. 
Flagella
Urease
Urea
H2O
2CO2
NH3
Ammonia
'cloud'
Other factors
• Vacuolating cytotoxin (vacA)
• Cytotoxin-associated gene (cagA)
• Adhesins (BabA)
• Outer inflammatory protein A (oipA)
Type IV secretion
system
Diseases of the stomach and duodenum
22
873
Smoking
Smoking confers an increased risk of gastric ulcer and, 
to a lesser extent, duodenal ulcer. Once the ulcer has 
formed, it is more likely to cause complications and less 
likely to heal if the patient continues to smoke.
Clinical features
Peptic ulcer disease is a chronic condition with sponta-
neous relapses and remissions lasting for decades, if not 
for life. The most common presentation is with recurrent 
abdominal pain which has three notable characteristics: 
localisation to the epigastrium, relationship to food and 
episodic occurrence. Occasional vomiting occurs in 
about 40% of ulcer subjects; persistent daily vomiting 
suggests gastric outlet obstruction. In one-third, the 
history is less characteristic, especially in elderly people 
or those taking NSAIDs. In them, pain may be absent or 
so slight that it is experienced only as a vague sense of 
epigastric unease. Occasionally, the only symptoms are 
anorexia and nausea, or early satiety after meals. In 
some patients, the ulcer is completely ‘silent’, presenting 
for the first time with anaemia from chronic undetected 
blood loss, as an abrupt haematemesis or as acute per-
foration; in others, there is recurrent acute bleeding 
without ulcer pain. The diagnostic value of individual 
symptoms for peptic ulcer disease is poor; the history is 
therefore a poor predictor of the presence of an ulcer.
Investigations
Endoscopy is the preferred investigation. Gastric ulcers 
may occasionally be malignant and therefore must 
always be biopsied and followed up to ensure healing. 
Patients should be tested for H. pylori infection. The 
current options available are listed in Box 22.39. Some 
are invasive and require endoscopy; others are non-
invasive. They vary in sensitivity and specificity. Breath 
tests or faecal antigen tests are best because of accuracy, 
simplicity and non-invasiveness.
production by parietal cells but, in the majority of cases, 
this has no clinical consequences. In a minority of 
patients, this effect is exaggerated, leading to duodenal 
ulceration (Fig. 22.34). In 1% of infected people, H. pylori 
causes a pangastritis, leading to gastric atrophy and 
hypochlorhydria. This allows other bacteria to prolifer-
ate within the stomach; these produce mutagenic nitrites 
from dietary nitrates, predisposing to the development 
of gastric cancer (Fig. 22.35). The effects of H. pylori are 
more complex in gastric ulcer patients compared to 
those with duodenal ulcers. The ulcer probably arises 
because of impaired mucosal defence resulting from a 
combination of H. pylori infection, NSAIDs and smoking, 
rather than excess acid.
NSAIDs
Treatment with NSAIDs is associated with peptic ulcers 
due to impairment of mucosal defences, as discussed on 
page 1078.
Fig. 22.34  Sequence of events in the pathophysiology of 
duodenal ulceration. 
G
D
3
2
1
4
5
HCl
Further
inflammation
and eventual
ulceration
Depletion of
antral D-cell
somatostatin
Increased
gastrin release
from G cells
Increased acid
load in duodenum
leads to gastric
metaplasia
Increased
acid
secretion
Fig. 22.35  Consequences of H. pylori infection. 
Host factors
(IL-1β
and TNF-α
polymorphisms)
Other
environmental
factors
(NSAIDs, smoking)
H. pylori
factors
(vacA, cagA)
Gastric
ulcer
Duodenal
ulcer
Gastric
cancer
Antral gastritis
Pangastritis
Test
Advantages
Disadvantages
Non-invasive
Serology
Rapid office kits 
available
Good for 
population studies
Lacks specificity
Cannot 
differentiate 
current from past 
infection
13C-urea breath 
tests
High sensitivity and 
specificity
Requires expensive 
mass spectrometer
Faecal antigen test
Cheap, specific  
(> 95%)
Acceptability
Invasive (antral biopsy)
Histology
Specificity
False negatives
Takes several days 
to process
Rapid urease tests
Cheap, quick, 
specific (> 95%)
Sensitivity 85%
Microbiological 
culture
‘Gold standard’
Defines antibiotic 
sensitivity
Slow and laborious
Lacks sensitivity
22.39  Methods for the diagnosis of 
Helicobacter pylori infection
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
874
‘Compared to ulcer-healing drugs, H. pylori eradication therapy 
is superior for healing duodenal ulcers (RR 0.66) and affords 
equivalent protection against recurrence of both duodenal and 
gastric ulcers.’
•	 Ford AC, et al. Eradication therapy for peptic ulcer disease in Helicobacter pylori 
positive patients. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2006, issue 2. Art. 
no. CD003840.
For further information: 
  www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
22.40  H. pylori eradication and peptic ulcer 
healing
Other indications for H. pylori eradication are shown 
in Box 22.42. Eradication of the infection has proven 
benefits in several extragastric disorders, including 
unexplained B12 deficiency and iron deficiency anaemia, 
once sources of gastrointestinal bleeding have been 
looked for and excluded. Platelet counts improve and 
may normalise after eradication therapy in patients with 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP, p. 1050); the 
mechanism for this is unclear.
General measures
Cigarette smoking, aspirin and NSAIDs should be 
avoided. Alcohol in moderation is not harmful and no 
special dietary advice is required.
Maintenance treatment
Continuous maintenance treatment should not be neces-
sary after successful H. pylori eradication. For the minor-
ity who do require it, the lowest effective dose of PPI 
should be used.
Surgical treatment
Surgery is now rarely required for peptic ulcer disease 
but it is needed in some cases (Box 22.43).
The operation of choice for a chronic non-healing 
gastric ulcer is partial gastrectomy, preferably with a 
Billroth I anastomosis, in which the ulcer itself and the 
ulcer-bearing area of the stomach are resected. The 
reason for this is to exclude an underlying cancer. In 
an emergency, ‘under-running’ the ulcer for bleeding 
or ‘oversewing’ (patch repair) for perforation is all that 
is required, in addition to taking a biopsy. For giant 
Management
The aims of management are to relieve symptoms, 
induce healing and prevent recurrence. H. pylori eradica-
tion is the cornerstone of therapy for peptic ulcers, as 
this will successfully prevent relapse and eliminate the 
need for long-term therapy in the majority of patients.
H. pylori eradication
All patients with proven ulcers who are H. pylori-positive 
should be offered eradication as primary therapy. Treat-
ment is based upon a PPI taken simultaneously with two 
antibiotics (from amoxicillin, clarithromycin and metro-
nidazole) for 7 days (Box 22.40). High-dose, twice-daily 
PPI therapy increases efficacy of treatment, as does 
extending treatment to 10–14 days. Success is achieved 
in 80–90% of patients, although compliance, side-effects 
(Box 22.41) and antibiotic resistance influence this. 
Resistance to amoxicillin is rare but rates of metronida-
zole resistance reach 40% in some countries and, recently, 
rates of clarithromycin resistance of 20–40% have 
appeared. Where the latter exceed 15–20%, a quadruple 
therapy regimen, consisting of omeprazole (or another 
PPI), bismuth subcitrate, metronidazole and tetracycline 
(OBMT) for 10–14 days, is recommended. In areas of low 
clarithromycin resistance, this regimen should also be 
offered as second-line therapy to those who remain 
infected after initial therapy, once compliance has been 
checked. For those who are still colonised after two treat-
ments, the choice lies between a third attempt guided by 
antimicrobial sensitivity testing, rescue therapy (levo-
floxacin, PPI and clarithromycin) or long-term acid 
suppression.
H. pylori and NSAIDs are independent risk factors for 
ulcer disease and patients requiring long-term NSAID 
therapy should first undergo eradication therapy to 
reduce ulcer risk. Subsequent co-prescription of a PPI 
along with the NSAID is advised but is not always nec-
essary for patients being given low-dose aspirin, in 
whom the risk of ulcer complications is lower.
•	 Diarrhoea: 30–50% of patients; usually mild but Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhoea can occur
•	 Flushing and vomiting when taken with alcohol 
(metronidazole)
•	 Nausea, vomiting
•	 Abdominal cramps
•	 Headache
•	 Rash
22.41  Common side-effects of H. pylori 
eradication therapy
Emergency
•	 Perforation
•	 Haemorrhage
Elective
•	 Gastric outflow obstruction
•	 Persistent ulceration despite adequate medical therapy
•	 Recurrent ulcer following gastric surgery
22.43  Indications for surgery in peptic ulcer
Definite
•	 Peptic ulcer
•	 Extranodal marginal-zone lymphomas of MALT type
•	 Family history of gastric cancer
•	 Previous resection for gastric cancer
•	 H. pylori-positive dyspepsia
•	 Long-term NSAID or low-dose aspirin users
•	 Chronic (> 1 yr) PPI users
•	 Extragastric disorders:
Unexplained vitamin B12 deficiency*
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura*
Iron deficiency anaemia* (see text)
Not indicated
•	 Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
•	 Asymptomatic people without gastric cancer risk factors
22.42  Indications for H. pylori eradication
*If H. pylori-positive on testing.
Diseases of the stomach and duodenum
22
875
can be the first sign of ulcer, and a history of recurrent 
epigastric pain is uncommon. The most striking 
symptom is sudden, severe pain; its distribution follows 
the spread of the gastric contents over the peritoneum. 
The pain initially develops in the upper abdomen and 
rapidly becomes generalised; shoulder tip pain is 
caused by irritation of the diaphragm. The pain is 
accompanied by shallow respiration due to limitation 
of diaphragmatic movements and by shock. The 
abdomen is held immobile and there is generalised 
‘board-like’ rigidity. Bowel sounds are absent and liver 
dullness to percussion decreases due to the presence of 
gas under the diaphragm. After some hours, symptoms 
may improve, although abdominal rigidity remains. 
Later, the patient’s condition deteriorates as general 
peritonitis develops. In at least 50% of cases, an erect 
chest X-ray shows free air beneath the diaphragm. If 
not, a water-soluble contrast swallow will confirm 
leakage of gastroduodenal contents. After resuscitation, 
the acute perforation should be treated surgically, either 
by simple closure or by converting the perforation into 
a pyloroplasty if it is large. On rare occasions, a ‘Polya’ 
partial gastrectomy is required. Following surgery, 
H. pylori should be treated (if present) and NSAIDs 
avoided. Perforation carries a mortality of 25%, reflect-
ing the advanced age and significant comorbidity of the 
population that are affected.
Gastric outlet obstruction
The causes are shown in Box 22.45. The most common 
is an ulcer in the region of the pylorus. The presentation 
is with nausea, vomiting and abdominal distension. 
Large quantities of gastric content are often vomited, 
and food eaten 24 hours or more previously may be 
recognised. Physical examination may show evidence of 
wasting and dehydration. A succussion splash may be 
elicited 4 hours or more after the last meal or drink. 
duodenal ulcers, partial gastrectomy using a ‘Polya’ or 
Billroth II reconstruction may be required.
Complications of gastric resection or vagotomy
Up to 50% of patients who undergo gastric surgery for 
peptic ulcer surgery experience long-term adverse 
effects. In most cases, these are minor, but in 10% they 
significantly impair quality of life.
Dumping.  Rapid gastric emptying leads to distension 
of the proximal small intestine as the hypertonic con-
tents draw fluid into the lumen. This leads to abdomi-
nal discomfort and diarrhoea after eating. Autonomic 
reflexes release a range of gastrointestinal hormones 
that provoke vasomotor features, such as flushing, 
palpitations, sweating, tachycardia and hypotension. 
Patients should therefore avoid large meals with high 
carbohydrate content.
Chemical (bile reflux) gastropathy.  Duodenogastric bile 
reflux leads to chronic gastropathy. Treatment with 
aluminium-containing antacids or sucralfate may be 
effective. A few patients require revisional surgery with 
creation of a Roux en Y loop to prevent bile reflux.
Diarrhoea and maldigestion.  Diarrhoea may develop 
after any peptic ulcer operation and usually occurs 
1–2 hours after eating. Poor mixing of food in the 
stomach, with rapid emptying, inadequate mixing with 
pancreaticobiliary secretions, rapid transit and bacterial 
overgrowth, may lead to malabsorption. Diarrhoea often 
responds to small, dry meals with a reduced intake of 
refined carbohydrates. Antidiarrhoeal drugs, such as 
codeine phosphate (15–30 mg 4–6 times daily) or lopera-
mide (2 mg after each loose stool), are helpful.
Weight loss.  Most patients lose weight shortly after 
surgery and 30–40% are unable to regain all the weight 
that is lost. The usual cause is reduced intake because of 
a small gastric remnant, but diarrhoea and mild steator-
rhoea also contribute.
Anaemia.  Anaemia is common many years after sub­
total gastrectomy. Iron deficiency is the most common 
cause; folic acid and B12 deficiency are much less fre-
quent. Inadequate dietary intake of iron and folate, lack 
of acid and intrinsic factor secretion, mild chronic low-
grade blood loss from the gastric remnant and recurrent 
ulceration are responsible.
Metabolic bone disease.  Both osteoporosis and osteo-
malacia can occur as a consequence of calcium and 
vitamin D malabsorption.
Gastric cancer.  An increased risk of gastric cancer has 
been reported from several epidemiological studies. 
Surgery itself is an independent risk factor for late devel-
opment of malignancy in the gastric remnant but the risk 
is higher in those with hypochlorhydria, duodenogastric 
reflux of bile, smoking and H. pylori infection. Although 
the relative risk is increased, the absolute risk of cancer 
remains low and endoscopic surveillance is not indi-
cated following gastric surgery.
Complications of peptic ulcer disease
Perforation
When perforation occurs, the contents of the stomach 
escape into the peritoneal cavity, leading to peritonitis. 
This is more common in duodenal than in gastric ulcers, 
and is usually found with ulcers on the anterior wall. 
About one-quarter of all perforations occur in acute 
ulcers and NSAIDs are often incriminated. Perforation 
•	 Gastroduodenal ulcers: have a greater incidence, admission 
rate and mortality.
•	 Causes: high prevalence of H. pylori, NSAID use and 
impaired defence mechanisms.
•	 Atypical presentations: pain and dyspepsia are frequently 
absent or atypical. Older people often develop complications, 
such as bleeding or perforation, without a dyspeptic history.
•	 Bleeding: older patients require more intensive management 
(including measurement of central venous pressure) than 
younger because they tolerate hypovolaemic shock poorly.
22.44  Peptic ulcer disease in old age
Cause
Management
Fibrotic stricture from duodenal ulcer 
(pyloric stenosis)
Balloon dilatation 
or surgery
Oedema from pyloric channel or 
duodenal ulcer
PPI therapy
Carcinoma of antrum
Surgery
Adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
Surgery
22.45  Differential diagnosis and management of 
gastric outlet obstruction
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
876
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome produces a paradoxical 
and dramatic increase in gastrin. Tumour localisation is 
best achieved by EUS and radio-labelled somatostatin 
receptor scintigraphy.
Management
Some 30% of small and single tumours can be localised 
and resected but many tumours are multifocal. Some 
patients present with metastatic disease and, in these 
circumstances, surgery is inappropriate. In the majority 
of these patients, continuous therapy with omeprazole 
or other PPIs can be successful in healing ulcers and 
alleviating diarrhoea, although double the normal dose 
is required. The synthetic somatostatin analogue, octreo­
tide, given by subcutaneous injection, reduces gastrin 
secretion and is of value. Overall 5-year survival is 
60–75% and all patients should be monitored for the 
later development of other manifestations of MEN 1.
Functional disorders
Functional dyspepsia
This is defined as chronic dyspepsia in the absence of 
organic disease. Other commonly reported symptoms 
include early satiety, fullness, bloating and nausea. 
‘Ulcer-like’ and ‘dysmotility-type’ subgroups are often 
reported, but there is overlap between these and with 
irritable bowel syndrome.
Pathophysiology
The cause is poorly understood but probably covers 
a spectrum of mucosal, motility and psychiatric 
disorders.
Clinical features
Patients are usually young (< 40 years) and women are 
affected twice as commonly as men. Abdominal discom-
fort is associated with a combination of other ‘dyspeptic’ 
symptoms, the most common being nausea, satiety and 
bloating after meals. Morning symptoms are character-
istic and pain or nausea may occur on waking. Direct 
enquiry may elicit symptoms suggestive of irritable 
bowel syndrome. Peptic ulcer disease must be consid-
ered, whilst in older subjects intra-abdominal malig-
nancy is a prime concern. There are no diagnostic signs, 
apart perhaps from inappropriate tenderness on abdom-
inal palpation. Symptoms may appear disproportionate 
to clinical well-being and there is no weight loss. Patients 
often appear anxious. A drug history should be taken 
and the possibility of a depressive illness should be con-
sidered. Pregnancy should be ruled out in young women 
before radiological studies are undertaken. Alcohol 
misuse should be suspected when early morning nausea 
and retching are prominent.
Investigations
The history will often suggest the diagnosis. All patients 
should be checked for H. pylori infection and patients 
over the age of 55 years should undergo endoscopy to 
exclude mucosal disease. While an ultrasound scan may 
detect gallstones, these are rarely responsible for dys-
peptic symptoms.
Visible gastric peristalsis is diagnostic of gastric outlet 
obstruction. Loss of gastric contents leads to dehydra-
tion with low serum chloride and potassium, and raised 
serum bicarbonate and urea concentrations. This results 
in enhanced renal absorption of Na+ in exchange for 
H+ and paradoxical aciduria. Endoscopy should be 
performed after the stomach has been emptied by a 
wide-bore nasogastric tube. Intravenous correction of 
dehydration is undertaken and, in severe cases, at least 
4 L of isotonic saline and 80 mmol of potassium may be 
necessary during the first 24 hours. In some patients, PPI 
drugs heal ulcers, relieve pyloric oedema and overcome 
the need for surgery. Endoscopic balloon dilatation of 
benign stenoses may be possible in some patients, but in 
others partial gastrectomy is necessary, although this is 
best done after a 7-day period of nasogastric aspiration, 
which enables the stomach to return to normal size. A 
gastroenterostomy is an alternative operation but, unless 
this is accompanied by vagotomy, patients will require 
long-term PPI therapy to prevent stomal ulceration.
Bleeding
See page 853.
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome
This is a rare disorder characterised by the triad of 
severe peptic ulceration, gastric acid hypersecretion and 
a non-β cell islet tumour of the pancreas (‘gastrinoma’). 
It probably accounts for about 0.1% of all cases of duo-
denal ulceration. The syndrome occurs in either sex at 
any age, although it is most common between 30 and 
50 years of age.
Pathophysiology
The tumour secretes gastrin, which stimulates acid 
secretion to its maximal capacity and increases the pari-
etal cell mass three- to sixfold. The acid output may be 
so great that it reaches the upper small intestine, reduc-
ing the luminal pH to 2 or less. Pancreatic lipase is inac-
tivated and bile acids are precipitated. Diarrhoea and 
steatorrhoea result. Around 90% of tumours occur in the 
pancreatic head or proximal duodenal wall. At least half 
are multiple, and tumour size can vary from 1 mm to 
20 cm. Approximately one-half to two-thirds are malig-
nant but are often slow-growing. Adenomas of the par-
athyroid and pituitary glands (multiple endocrine 
neoplasia, MEN type 1; p. 795) are present in 20–60% of 
patients.
Clinical features
The presentation is with severe and often multiple 
peptic ulcers in unusual sites, such as the post-bulbar 
duodenum, jejunum or oesophagus. There is a poor 
response to standard ulcer therapy. The history is 
usually short; bleeding and perforations are common. 
Diarrhoea is seen in one-third or more of patients and 
can be the presenting feature.
Investigations
Hypersecretion of acid under basal conditions, with 
little increase following pentagastrin, may be con-
firmed by gastric aspiration. Serum gastrin levels are 
grossly elevated (10- to 1000-fold). Injection of the 
hormone secretin normally causes no change or a slight 
decrease in circulating gastrin concentrations, but in 
Diseases of the stomach and duodenum
22
877
severe cases, nutritional failure can occur and long-term 
jejunostomy feeding or total parenteral nutrition is 
required. Surgical insertion of a gastric neurostimulator 
has been successful in some cases, especially those com-
plicating diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
Tumours of the stomach
Gastric carcinoma
Gastric carcinoma is the fourth leading cause of cancer 
death worldwide, but there is marked geographical vari-
ation in incidence. It is most common in China, Japan, 
Korea (incidence 40/100 000 males), Eastern Europe and 
parts of South America (20/100 000). Rates in the UK are 
12/100 000 for men. In most countries, the incidence is 
50% lower in women. In both sexes, it rises sharply after 
50 years of age. Studies of Japanese migrants to the USA 
have revealed a much lower incidence in second-
generation migrants, confirming the importance of envi-
ronmental factors. The overall prognosis is poor, with 
less than 30% surviving 5 years, and the best hope for 
improved survival lies in more efficient detection of 
tumours at an earlier stage.
Pathophysiology
Infection with H. pylori plays a key pathogenic role. It is 
associated with chronic atrophic gastritis, gastric 
mucosal atrophy and with gastric cancer (Fig. 22.36). It 
has been estimated that H. pylori infection may contrib-
ute to the occurrence of gastric cancer in 60–70% of cases 
and that acquisition of infection at an early age may be 
important. Although H. pylori infection is common in 
Africa, gastric cancer is uncommon and this enigma may 
be explained by lower life expectancy in this part of the 
Management
The most important elements are explanation and reas-
surance. Possible psychological factors should be 
explored and the concept of psychological influences on 
gut function should be explained. Idiosyncratic and 
restrictive diets are of little benefit, but smaller portions 
and fat restriction may help.
Up to 10% of patients benefit from H. pylori eradica-
tion therapy and this should be offered to infected 
patients. Eradication also removes a major risk factor 
for gastric cancer but at the cost of a small risk of side- 
effects and worsening symptoms of underlying gastro-
oesophageal reflux disease. Drug treatment is not 
especially successful but merits trial. Antacids, such as 
hydrotalcite, are sometimes helpful. Prokinetic drugs, 
such as metoclopramide (10 mg 3 times daily) or dom-
peridone (10–20 mg 3 times daily), may be given before 
meals if nausea, vomiting or bloating is prominent. 
Metoclopramide may induce extrapyramidal side-
effects, including tardive dyskinesia in young subjects. 
H2-receptor antagonist drugs may be tried if night pain 
or heartburn is troublesome. Low-dose tricyclic agents, 
such as amitriptyline, are of value in up to two-thirds.
Symptoms that can be associated with an identifiable 
cause of stress resolve with appropriate counselling. 
Some patients have major psychological disorders that 
result in persistent or recurrent symptoms and need 
behavioural or other formal psychotherapy (p. 240).
Functional causes of vomiting
Psychogenic retching or vomiting may arise in anxiety. 
It typically occurs on wakening or immediately after 
breakfast and only rarely later in the day. The disorder 
is probably a reaction to facing up to the worries of 
everyday life; in the young, it can be due to school 
phobia. Early morning vomiting also occurs in preg-
nancy, alcohol misuse and depression. Although func-
tional vomiting may occur regularly over long periods, 
there is little or no weight loss. Children, and less often 
adults, sometimes suffer from acute and recurrent disa-
bling bouts of vomiting for days at a time. The cause of 
this cyclical vomiting syndrome is unknown, but in 
some adults it is associated with cannabis use.
In all patients, it is essential to exclude other common 
causes (p. 853). Tranquillisers and antiemetic drugs 
(metoclopramide 10 mg 3 times daily, domperidone 
10 mg 3 times daily, prochlorperazine 5–10 mg 3 times 
daily) have only a secondary place in management. 
Antidepressants in full dose may be effective (p. 244).
Gastroparesis
Defective gastric emptying without mechanical obstruc-
tion of the stomach or duodenum can occur as a primary 
event, due to inherited or acquired disorders of the 
gastric pacemaker, or can be secondary to disorders of 
autonomic nerves (particularly diabetic neuropathy) or 
the gastroduodenal musculature (systemic sclerosis, 
myotonic dystrophies and amyloidosis). Drugs such as 
opiates, calcium channel antagonists and those with 
anticholinergic activity (tricyclics, phenothiazines) can 
also cause gastroparesis. Early satiety and recurrent 
vomiting are the major symptoms; abdominal fullness 
and a succussion splash may be present on examination. 
Treatment is based upon small, frequent, low-fat meals 
and the use of metoclopramide and domperidone. In 
Fig. 22.36  Gastric carcinogenesis: a possible mechanism. 
H. pylori
Diet
Smoking
Chronic atrophic
gastritis
Intestinal
metaplasia
Dysplasia
Nitrosamines
Dietary
nitrates
Achlorhydria
Bacterial
colonisation
of stomach
H. pylori
cagA
Carcinoma
Normal gastric
epithelium
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
878
(Fig. 22.37B). The majority of patients (> 80%) in the 
West, however, present with advanced gastric cancer.
Clinical features
Early gastric cancer is usually asymptomatic but may be 
discovered during endoscopy for investigation of dys-
pepsia. Two-thirds of patients with advanced cancers 
have weight loss and 50% have ulcer-like pain. Anorexia 
and nausea occur in one-third, while early satiety, hae-
matemesis, melaena and dyspepsia alone are less 
common. Dysphagia occurs in tumours of the gastric 
cardia which obstruct the gastro-oesophageal junction. 
Anaemia from occult bleeding is also common. Exami-
nation may reveal no abnormalities but signs of weight 
loss, anaemia and a palpable epigastric mass are not 
infrequent. Jaundice or ascites signify metastatic spread. 
Occasionally, tumour spread occurs to the supraclavicu-
lar lymph nodes (Troisier’s sign), umbilicus (Sister 
Joseph’s nodule) or ovaries (Krukenberg tumour). Para-
neoplastic phenomena, such as acanthosis nigricans, 
thrombophlebitis (Trousseau’s sign) and dermatomyosi-
tis, occur rarely. Metastases arise most commonly in the 
liver, lungs, peritoneum and bone marrow.
Investigations
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is the investigation 
of choice and should be performed promptly in any 
world. Although the majority of H. pylori-infected indi-
viduals have normal or increased acid secretion, a few 
become hypo- or achlorhydric and these people are 
thought to be at greatest risk. Chronic inflammation 
with generation of reactive oxygen species and deple-
tion of the normally abundant antioxidant ascorbic acid 
are also important. There is strong evidence that H. 
pylori eradication, especially if achieved before irrevers-
ible pre-neoplastic changes have developed, reduces the 
risk of cancer development in high-risk populations and 
is cost-effective.
Diets rich in salted, smoked or pickled foods and the 
consumption of nitrites and nitrates may increase cancer 
risk. Carcinogenic N-nitroso-compounds are formed 
from nitrates by the action of nitrite-reducing bacteria 
which colonise the achlorhydric stomach. Diets lacking 
fresh fruit and vegetables, as well as vitamins C and A, 
may also contribute. Other risk factors are listed in Box 
22.46. No predominant genetic abnormality has been 
identified, although cancer risk is increased two- to 
threefold in first-degree relatives of patients, and links 
with blood group A have been reported. Rarely, gastric 
cancer may be inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner in association with mutations of the E-cadherin 
(CDH1) gene.
Virtually all tumours are adenocarcinomas arising 
from mucus-secreting cells in the base of the gastric 
crypts. Most develop upon a background of chronic 
atrophic gastritis with intestinal metaplasia and dyspla-
sia. Cancers are either ‘intestinal’, arising from areas of 
intestinal metaplasia with histological features reminis-
cent of intestinal epithelium, or ‘diffuse’, arising from 
normal gastric mucosa. Intestinal carcinomas are more 
common and arise against a background of chronic 
mucosal injury. Diffuse cancers tend to be poorly dif-
ferentiated and occur in younger patients. In the devel-
oping world, 50% of gastric cancers develop in the 
antrum; 20–30% occur in the gastric body, often on 
the greater curve; and 20% are found in the cardia. 
In Western populations, however, proximal gastric 
tumours are becoming more common than those arising 
in the body and distal stomach. This change in disease 
pattern may be a reflection of changes in lifestyle or the 
decreasing prevalence of H. pylori in the West. Diffuse 
submucosal infiltration by a scirrhous cancer (linitis 
plastica) is uncommon. Early gastric cancer is defined as 
cancer confined to the mucosa or submucosa (Fig. 
22.37A). It is more often recognised in Japan, where 
widespread screening is practised. Some cases can be 
cured by endoscopic mucosal or submucosal resection 
•	 H. pylori
•	 Smoking
•	 Alcohol
•	 Dietary associations (see text)
•	 Autoimmune gastritis (pernicious anaemia)
•	 Adenomatous gastric polyps
•	 Previous partial gastrectomy (> 20 yrs)
•	 Ménétrier’s disease
•	 Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer families (HDC-1 mutations)
•	 Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP, p. 911)
22.46  Risk factors for gastric cancer
Fig. 22.37  Gastric carcinoma. A  Endoscopic image of a small 
superficial pre-pyloric cancer (arrows). B  Appearance after endoscopic 
mucosal resection (EMR). The tumour has been completely removed. 
A
B
Diseases of the stomach and duodenum
22
879
temporary relief of vomiting due to gastric outlet 
obstruction (Box 22.48).
Gastric lymphoma
This is a rare tumour accounting for less than 5% of all 
gastric malignancies. The stomach is, however, the most 
common site for extranodal non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
and 60% of all primary gastrointestinal lymphomas 
occur at this site. Lymphoid tissue is not found in the 
normal stomach but lymphoid aggregates develop in the 
presence of H. pylori infection. Indeed, H. pylori infection 
is closely associated with the development of a low-
grade lymphoma (classified as extranodal marginal-
zone lymphomas of MALT type). EUS plays an important 
role in staging these lesions by accurately defining the 
depth of invasion into the gastric wall.
The clinical presentation is similar to that of gastric 
cancer, and endoscopically the tumour appears as a 
polypoid or ulcerating mass. While initial treatment of 
low-grade lesions confined to the superficial layers of 
the gastric wall consists of H. pylori eradication and close 
observation, 25% contain t(11 : 18) chromosomal trans­
locations. In these cases, additional radiotherapy or 
chemotherapy is usually necessary. High-grade B-cell 
lymphomas should be treated by a combination of 
dyspeptic patient with ‘alarm features’ (see Box 22.15, 
p. 852). Multiple biopsies from the edge and base of a 
gastric ulcer are required. Barium meal is a poor alterna-
tive since any abnormalities must be followed by endos-
copy and biopsy. Once the diagnosis is made, further 
imaging is necessary for staging and assessment of 
resectability. CT will provide evidence of intra-
abdominal spread or liver metastases. Even with these 
techniques, laparoscopy with peritoneal washings is 
required to determine whether the tumour is resectable, 
as it is the only modality that will reliably detect perito-
neal spread.
Management
Surgery
Resection offers the only hope of cure, and this can be 
achieved in about 90% of patients with early gastric 
cancer. For the majority of patients with locally advanced 
disease, total gastrectomy with lymphadenectomy is the 
operation of choice, preserving the spleen if possible. 
Proximal tumours involving the oesophago-gastric 
junction also require a distal oesophagectomy. Small, 
distally sited tumours can be managed by a partial gas-
trectomy with lymphadenectomy and either a Billroth I 
or a Roux en Y reconstruction. More extensive lymph 
node resection may increase survival rates but carries 
greater morbidity. Even for those who cannot be cured, 
palliative resection may be necessary when patients 
present with bleeding or gastric outflow obstruction. 
Following surgery, recurrence is much more likely if 
serosal penetration has occurred, although complete 
removal of all macroscopic tumour combined with 
lymphadenectomy will achieve a 50–60% 5-year sur-
vival. Recent evidence suggests that perioperative 
chemotherapy with epirubicin, cisplatin and fluoro­
uracil (ECF) improves survival rates.
Palliative treatment
In patients with inoperable tumours, survival can be 
improved and palliation of symptoms achieved with 
chemotherapy using 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin, ECF or 
other platinum and taxane-based regimens. The biologi-
cal agent trastuzumab may benefit some patients whose 
tumours over-express HER2 (see p. 268 and Box 22.47). 
Endoscopic laser ablation for control of dysphagia or 
recurrent bleeding benefits some patients. Carcinomas 
at the cardia or pylorus may require endoscopic dilata-
tion or insertion of expandable metallic stents for relief 
of dysphagia or vomiting. A nasogastric tube may offer 
‘Chemotherapy significantly improves survival in comparison to 
best supportive care. In addition, combination chemotherapy 
improves survival compared to single-agent 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). 
All patients should be tested for their HER2 status and 
trastuzumab should be added to a standard 5-FU/cisplatin 
regimen in patients with HER2-positive tumours.’
•	 Wagner AD, et al. Chemotherapy for advanced gastric cancer. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010, issue 3. Art. no. CD004064.
For further information: 
  www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
22.47  Chemotherapy for advanced gastric cancer
Equipment
•	 8–9F ‘fine-bore’ tube for feeding or 16–18F ‘wide-bore’ tube 
for drainage
•	 Lubricant jelly
•	 Cup of water and straw for sipping
•	 Adhesive tape
•	 pH (not litmus) paper
•	 Sickness bowl and tissues
•	 Catheter drainage bag and clamp (for drainage)
Technique
•	 A clear explanation and a calm patient are essential
•	 Establish a ‘stop signal’ for the patient to use, if needed
•	 Ask the patient to sit semi-upright
•	 Examine the nose for deformity or blockage to determine 
which side to use
•	 Measure the distance from ear to xiphoid process via the 
nose and mark the position on the tube
•	 Advance the lubricated tube tip slowly along the floor of the 
nasal passage to the oropharynx
•	 Ask the patient to sip water and advance the tube 2–3 cm 
with each swallow
•	 Stop, withdraw and retry if the patient is distressed or 
coughing, as the tube may have entered the larynx
•	 Advance until the mark on the tube reaches the tip of the 
nose and secure with tape
•	 Aspirate the contents and check pH (gastric acid confirmed if 
pH < 5). If in doubt, perform a chest X-ray to confirm tube 
position (usually necessary with feeding tubes)
•	 Attach the catheter drainage bag, if necessary, and clamp
Aftercare
•	 Flush the tube daily after feeding or drug dosing
•	 Check position regularly and look for signs of displacement
•	 Check with the pharmacist what drugs, if any, can be safely 
given via the tube
22.48  How to insert a nasogastric tube
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
880
Rarely, small nodules of ectopic pancreatic exocrine 
tissue are found. These ‘pancreatic rests’ may be mis-
taken for gastric neoplasms and usually cause no symp-
toms. EUS is the most useful investigation.
DISEASES OF THE SMALL INTESTINE
Disorders causing malabsorption
Coeliac disease
Coeliac disease is an inflammatory disorder of the small 
bowel occurring in genetically susceptible individuals, 
which results from intolerance to wheat gluten and 
similar proteins found in rye, barley and, to a lesser 
extent, oats. It can result in malabsorption and responds 
to a gluten-free diet. The condition occurs worldwide 
but is more common in northern Europe. The prevalence 
in the UK is approximately 1%, although 50% of these 
people are asymptomatic. These include both undiag-
nosed ‘silent’ cases of the disease and cases of ‘latent’ 
coeliac disease – genetically susceptible people who may 
later develop clinical coeliac disease.
Pathophysiology
The precise mechanism of mucosal damage is unclear 
but immunological responses to gluten play a key role 
(Fig. 22.38). Tissue transglutaminase (tTG) is now recog-
nised as the autoantigen for anti-endomysial antibodies, 
which are often used in serological diagnosis.
Clinical features
Coeliac disease can present at any age. In infancy, it 
occurs after weaning on to cereals and typically presents 
with diarrhoea, malabsorption and failure to thrive. In 
rituximab, chemotherapy, surgery and radiotherapy. 
The choice depends on the site and extent of tumour, the 
presence of comorbid illnesses, and other factors, such 
as symptoms of bleeding and gastric outflow obstruc-
tion. The prognosis depends on the stage at diagnosis. 
Features predicting a favourable prognosis are stage I or 
II disease, small resectable tumours, tumours with low-
grade histology, and age below 60 years.
Other tumours of the stomach
Gastrointestinal stromal cell tumours (GIST), arising 
from the interstitial cells of Cajal, are occasionally found 
at upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. They are differenti-
ated from other mesenchymal tumours by expression of 
the c-kit proto-oncogene, which encodes a tyrosine 
kinase receptor. These tumours are usually benign and 
asymptomatic, but may occasionally be responsible for 
dyspepsia, ulceration and gastrointestinal bleeding. 
Small lesions (< 2 cm) are usually followed by endos-
copy, while larger ones require surgical resection. Very 
large lesions should be treated pre-operatively with 
imatinib (a tyrosine kinase inhibitor) to reduce their size 
and make surgery easier. Imatinib can also be used for 
palliation of metastatic GISTs.
A variety of polyps occur. Hyperplastic polyps and 
fundic cystic gland polyps are common and of no con-
sequence. Adenomatous polyps are rare but have malig-
nant potential and should be removed endoscopically.
Occasionally, gastric carcinoid tumours are seen in 
the fundus and body in patients with long-standing per-
nicious anaemia. These benign tumours arise from ECL 
or other endocrine cells, and are often multiple but 
rarely invasive. Unlike carcinoid tumours arising else-
where in the gastrointestinal tract, they usually run a 
benign and favourable course. However, large (> 2 cm) 
carcinoids may metastasise and should be removed. 
Fig. 22.38  Pathophysiology of coeliac disease. After being taken up by epithelial cells, gluten peptides are deamidated by the enzyme tissue 
transglutaminase in the subepithelial layer. They are then able to fit the antigen-binding motif on human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-DQ2-positive antigen-
presenting cells. Recognition by CD4+ T cells triggers a Th1 immune response with generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines – interleukin-1 (IL-1), 
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). Lymphocytes infiltrate the lamina propria, and increased intra-epithelial lymphocytes 
(IEL), crypt hyperplasia and villous atrophy ensue. 
Antigen-
presenting
cell
CD4+
T cell
HLA-DQ2
Deamidation
Th1 response
• IL-1
• IFN-γ
• TNF-α
Lumen
Brush border
Epithelium
Tissue
transglutaminase
Gluten peptides
IEL
IEL
Diseases of the small intestine
22
881
easier to perform, semi-quantitative and more accurate 
in patients with IgA deficiency. These antibody tests 
constitute a valuable screening tool in patients with 
diarrhoea but are not a substitute for small bowel 
biopsy; they usually become negative with successful 
treatment.
Haematology and biochemistry
A full blood count may show microcytic or macrocytic 
anaemia from iron or folate deficiency and features of 
hyposplenism (target cells, spherocytes and Howell–
Jolly bodies). Biochemical tests may reveal reduced 
concentrations of calcium, magnesium, total protein, 
albumin or vitamin D.
Other investigations
Measurement of bone density should be considered to 
look for evidence of osteoporosis, especially in older 
patients and post-menopausal women.
Management
The aims are to correct existing deficiencies of iron, 
folate, calcium and/or vitamin D, and to commence a 
life-long gluten-free diet. This requires the exclusion 
of wheat, rye, barley and initially oats, although oats 
may be re-introduced safely in most patients after 
6–12 months. Initially, frequent dietary counselling is 
older children, it may present with non-specific features, 
such as delayed growth. Features of malnutrition are 
found on examination and mild abdominal distension 
may be present. Affected children have growth and 
pubertal delay, leading to short stature in adulthood.
In adults, the disease usually presents during the 
third or fourth decade and females are affected twice as 
often as males. The presentation is highly variable, 
depending on the severity and extent of small bowel 
involvement. Some have florid malabsorption, while 
others develop non-specific symptoms, such as tired-
ness, weight loss, folate deficiency or iron deficiency 
anaemia. Other presentations include oral ulceration, 
dyspepsia and bloating. Unrecognised coeliac disease is 
associated with mild under-nutrition and osteoporosis.
Coeliac disease is associated with other human leu-
cocyte antigen (HLA)-linked autoimmune disorders and 
with certain other diseases (Box 22.49).
Investigations
These are performed to confirm the diagnosis and to 
look for consequences of malabsorption.
Duodenal biopsy
Endoscopic small bowel biopsy is the gold standard. The 
histological features are usually characteristic but other 
causes of villous atrophy should be considered (Box 22.50 
and Fig. 22.39). Sometimes the villi appear normal but 
there are excess numbers of intra-epithelial lymphocytes.
Antibodies
Anti-endomysial antibodies of the IgA class are detect-
able by immunofluorescence in most untreated cases. 
They are sensitive (85–95%) and specific (approximately 
99%) for the diagnosis, except in very young infants. 
IgG antibodies, however, must be analysed in patients 
with coexisting IgA deficiency. The tTG assay has 
replaced other blood tests in many countries, as it is 
•	 Insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus (2–8%)
•	 Thyroid disease (5%)
•	 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
(3%)
•	 Sjögren’s syndrome (3%)
•	 IgA deficiency (2%)
•	 Pernicious anaemia
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Neurological complications: 
encephalopathy, cerebellar 
atrophy, peripheral 
neuropathy, epilepsy
•	 Myasthenia gravis
•	 Dermatitis herpetiformis
•	 Down’s syndrome
•	 Enteropathy-associated 
T-cell lymphoma
•	 Small bowel carcinoma
•	 Squamous carcinoma of 
oesophagus
•	 Ulcerative jejunitis
•	 Pancreatic insufficiency
•	 Microscopic colitis
•	 Splenic atrophy
22.49  Disease associations of coeliac disease
•	 Coeliac disease
•	 Tropical sprue
•	 Dermatitis herpetiformis
•	 Lymphoma
•	 HIV-related enteropathy
•	 Giardiasis
•	 Hypogammaglobulinaemia
•	 Radiation
•	 Whipple’s disease
•	 Zollinger–Ellison syndrome
22.50  Important causes of subtotal villous 
atrophy
Fig. 22.39  Jejunal mucosa. A  Normal. B  Subtotal villous atrophy in 
coeliac disease. There is blunting of villi (B), crypt hyperplasia (H) and 
inflammatory infiltration of the lamina propria (I). From Hayes and Simpson 
1995 – see p. 920.
A
B
H
I
B
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
882
Pathophysiology
The epidemiological pattern and occasional epidemics 
suggest that an infective agent may be involved. 
Although no single bacterium has been isolated, the con-
dition often begins after an acute diarrhoeal illness. 
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth with Escherichia coli, 
Enterobacter and Klebsiella is frequently seen. The changes 
closely resemble those of coeliac disease.
Clinical features
There is diarrhoea, abdominal distension, anorexia, 
fatigue and weight loss. In visitors to the tropics, the 
onset of severe diarrhoea may be sudden and accompa-
nied by fever. When the disorder becomes chronic, the 
features of megaloblastic anaemia (folic acid malabsorp-
tion) and other deficiencies, including ankle oedema, 
glossitis and stomatitis, are common. Remissions and 
relapses may occur. The differential diagnosis in the 
indigenous tropical population is an infective cause of 
diarrhoea. The important differential diagnosis in visi-
tors to the tropics is giardiasis (p. 368).
Management
Tetracycline (250 mg 4 times daily for 28 days) is the 
treatment of choice and brings about long-term remis-
sion or cure. In most patients, pharmacological doses of 
folic acid (5 mg daily) improve symptoms and jejunal 
morphology. In some cases, treatment must be pro-
longed before improvement occurs, and occasionally 
patients must leave the tropics.
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth 
(‘blind loop syndrome’)
The normal duodenum and jejunum contain fewer than 
104/mL organisms, which are usually derived from saliva. 
The count of coliform organisms never exceeds 103/mL. 
In bacterial overgrowth, there may be 108–1010/mL organ-
isms, most of which are normally found only in the 
colon. Disorders which impair the normal physiological 
mechanisms controlling bacterial proliferation in the 
intestine predispose to bacterial overgrowth (Box 22.51). 
required to make sure the diet is being observed, as the 
most common reason for failure to improve with dietary 
treatment is accidental or unrecognised gluten ingestion. 
Mineral and vitamin supplements are also given when 
indicated but are seldom necessary when a strict gluten-
free diet is adhered to. Booklets produced by coeliac 
societies in many countries, containing diet sheets and 
recipes for the use of gluten-free flour, are of great value. 
Patients should be followed up after initiation of a 
gluten-free diet, with assessment of symptoms, weight 
and nutritional status, and blood taken for measurement 
of tTG or anti-endomysial antibodies. Repeat small 
bowel biopsies are not required routinely but should be 
considered in patients whose symptoms fail to improve 
and those in whom antibody levels remain high. Dietary 
compliance should be carefully assessed in these circum-
stances. If the diet is satisfactory, then other conditions, 
such as pancreatic insufficiency or microscopic colitis, 
should be sought, as should complications of coeliac 
disease, such as ulcerative jejunitis or enteropathy-
associated T-cell lymphoma. There remain a small 
number of patients who fail to respond adequately 
to a gluten-free diet, and these require therapy with 
corticosteroids or immunosuppressive drugs.
Complications
A twofold-increased risk of malignancy, particularly of 
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma, small bowel 
carcinoma and squamous carcinoma of the oesophagus, 
has been reported.
A few patients develop ulcerative jejuno-ileitis. This 
may present with fever, pain, obstruction or perforation. 
This diagnosis can be made by barium studies or entero­
scopy, but laparotomy and full-thickness biopsy may be 
required. Treatment is difficult. Corticosteroids are used 
with mixed success and some patients require surgical 
resection and parenteral nutrition. The course is often 
progressive and relentless.
Osteoporosis and osteomalacia may occur in patients 
with long-standing, poorly controlled coeliac disease. 
These complications are less common in patients who 
adhere strictly to a gluten-free diet.
Dermatitis herpetiformis
This is characterised by crops of intensely itchy blisters 
over the elbows, knees, back and buttocks (p. 1294). 
Immunofluorescence shows granular or linear IgA 
deposition at the dermo-epidermal junction. Almost all 
patients have partial villous atrophy on duodenal 
biopsy, identical to that seen in coeliac disease, even 
though they usually have no gastrointestinal symptoms. 
In contrast, fewer than 10% of coeliac patients have evi-
dence of dermatitis herpetiformis, although both disor-
ders are associated with the same histocompatibility 
antigen groups. The rash usually responds to a gluten-
free diet but some patients require additional treatment 
with dapsone (100–150 mg daily).
Tropical sprue
Tropical sprue is defined as chronic, progressive malab-
sorption in a patient in or from the tropics, associated 
with abnormalities of small intestinal structure and 
function. The disease occurs mainly in the West Indies 
and in southern India, Malaysia and Indonesia.
Mechanism
Examples
Hypo- or achlorhydria
Pernicious anaemia
Partial gastrectomy
Long-term PPI therapy
Impaired intestinal motility
Scleroderma
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
Chronic intestinal pseudo-
obstruction
Structural abnormalities
Gastric surgery (blind loop 
after Billroth II operation)
Jejunal diverticulosis
Enterocolic fistulae*
Extensive small bowel 
resection
Strictures*
Impaired immune function
Hypogammaglobulinaemia
*Most commonly caused by Crohn’s disease.
22.51  Causes of small bowel bacterial 
overgrowth
Diseases of the small intestine
22
883
Management
The underlying cause of small bowel bacterial over-
growth should be addressed, where possible. Tetra­
cycline (250 mg 4 times daily for 7 days) is then the 
treatment of choice, although up to 50% of patients do 
not respond adequately. Metronidazole (400 mg 3 times 
daily) or ciprofloxacin (250 mg twice daily) is an alterna-
tive. Some patients require up to 4 weeks of treatment 
and, in a few, continuous rotating courses of antibiotics 
are necessary. Intramuscular vitamin B12 supplementa-
tion may be needed in chronic cases. Patients with motil-
ity disorders, such as diabetes and scleroderma, can 
sometimes benefit from antidiarrhoeal drugs (diphen­
oxylate (5 mg 3 times daily orally) or loperamide (2 mg 
4–6 times daily) orally). Giardiasis should be controlled 
in patients with hypogammaglobulinaemia using met-
ronidazole or tinidazole, but if symptoms fail to respond 
adequately, immunoglobulin infusions may be required.
Whipple’s disease
This rare condition is characterised by infiltration of 
small intestinal mucosa by ‘foamy’ macrophages, which 
stain positive with periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) reagent. 
The disease is a multisystem one and almost any organ 
can be affected, sometimes long before gastrointestinal 
involvement becomes apparent (Box 22.53).
Pathophysiology
Whipple’s disease is caused by infection with the Gram-
positive bacillus Tropheryma whipplei, which becomes 
resident within macrophages in the bowel mucosa. Villi 
are widened and flattened, containing densely packed 
macrophages in the lamina propria, which obstruct lym-
phatic drainage and cause fat malabsorption.
The most important are loss of gastric acidity, impaired 
intestinal motility and structural abnormalities which 
allow colonic bacteria to gain access to the small intes-
tine or provide a secluded haven from the peristaltic 
stream.
Pathophysiology
Bacterial overgrowth can occur in patients with small 
bowel diverticuli. Another cause is diabetic autonomic 
neuropathy (p. 831), which reduces small bowel motility 
and affects enterocyte secretion. In scleroderma, bacte-
rial overgrowth arises because the circular and longitu-
dinal layers of the intestinal muscle are fibrosed and 
motility is abnormal. In idiopathic hypogammaglobuli-
naemia, bacterial overgrowth occurs because the IgA 
and IgM levels in serum and jejunal secretions are 
reduced. Chronic diarrhoea and malabsorption occur 
because of bacterial overgrowth and recurrent gastro­
intestinal infections (particularly giardiasis, p. 368).
Clinical features
The patient presents with watery diarrhoea and/or stea-
torrhoea, with anaemia due to B12 deficiency. These arise 
because of deconjugation of bile acids, which impairs 
micelle formation, and because of bacterial utilisation of 
vitamin B12. There may also be symptoms from the 
underlying intestinal cause.
Investigations
The diagnosis of blind loops or fistulae can often be 
made by barium follow-through or small bowel enema. 
Endoscopic duodenal biopsies are useful in excluding 
coeliac disease. Jejunal contents for bacteriological 
examination can also be aspirated at endoscopy but the 
laboratory analysis requires anaerobic and aerobic 
culture techniques. Bacterial overgrowth can also be 
diagnosed non-invasively using hydrogen breath tests. 
This simple, non-radioactive test involves serial meas-
urement of breath samples for hydrogen after oral inges-
tion of 50 g glucose or lactulose; if bacteria are present 
within the small bowel, they rapidly metabolise the 
glucose, causing an early rise in exhaled hydrogen, in 
advance of that normally resulting from metabolism by 
colonic flora. Biochemical analysis may reveal low 
serum levels of vitamin B12, with normal or elevated 
folate levels because the bacteria produce folic acid. 
Hypogammaglobulinaemia can be diagnosed by meas-
urement of serum immunoglobulins and by intestinal 
biopsy, which shows reduced or absent plasma cells 
and nodular lymphoid hyperplasia.
•	 Coeliac disease: symptoms such as dyspepsia tend to 
be vague; only 25% present classically with diarrhoea  
and weight loss. Metabolic bone disease, folate or iron 
deficiency, coagulopathy and small bowel lymphoma are 
more common.
•	 Small bowel bacterial overgrowth: more common due 
to atrophic gastritis, resulting in hypo- or achlorhydria; 
increased prevalence of jejunal diverticulosis; and long-term 
adverse effects of gastric surgery for ulcer disease.
22.52  Malabsorption in old age
Gastrointestinal (> 70%)
•	 Diarrhoea (75%)
•	 Steatorrhoea
•	 Weight loss (90%)
•	 Protein-losing enteropathy
•	 Ascites
•	 Hepatosplenomegaly (< 5%)
Musculoskeletal (65%)
•	 Seronegative large joint 
arthropathy
•	 Sacroiliitis
Cardiac (10%)
•	 Pericarditis
•	 Myocarditis
•	 Endocarditis
•	 Coronary arteritis
Neurological (10–40%)
•	 Apathy
•	 Fits
•	 Dementia
•	 Myoclonus
•	 Meningitis
•	 Cranial nerve lesions
Pulmonary (10–20%)
•	 Chronic cough
•	 Pleurisy
•	 Pulmonary infiltrates
Haematological (60%)
•	 Anaemia
•	 Lymphadenopathy
Other (40%)
•	 Fever
•	 Pigmentation
22.53  Clinical features of Whipple’s disease
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
884
Patients have urgent watery diarrhoea or mild steato­
rrhoea. Contrast studies and tests of B12 and bile acid 
absorption (p. 850) are useful investigations. Parenteral 
vitamin B12 supplementation is necessary. Diarrhoea 
usually responds well to colestyramine, a resin which 
binds bile salts in the intestinal lumen. Aluminium 
hydroxide can be used as an alternative.
Short bowel syndrome
Short bowel syndrome is defined as malabsorption 
resulting from extensive small intestinal resection or 
disease. The syndrome has many causes (Box 22.54) but, 
in adults, it usually results from extensive surgery 
undertaken for Crohn’s disease or mesenteric infarction. 
Irrespective of the underlying cause, three main types of 
patient are seen:
•	 jejunal resection with an intact ileum and colon
•	 jejunal and ileal resection with an intact colon 
(jejunum–colon)
•	 jejunal and ileal resection and colectomy 
(jejunostomy).
Pathophysiology
Patients who undergo a jejunal resection but who have 
an intact ileum and colon are rarely encountered and 
seldom require nutritional support. Those who have 
undergone both jejunal and ileal resection have in 
Clinical features
Middle-aged men are most frequently affected and the 
presentation depends on the pattern of organ involve-
ment. Low-grade fever is common and most patients 
have joint symptoms to some degree, often as the first 
manifestation. Occasionally, neurological manifesta-
tions may predominate.
Diagnosis
This is made by the characteristic features on small 
bowel biopsy, with characterisation of the bacillus by 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Management
Whipple’s disease is often fatal if untreated but responds 
well, at least initially, to intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g 
daily for 2 weeks), followed by oral co-trimoxazole for 
at least 1 year. Symptoms usually resolve quickly and 
biopsy changes revert to normal in a few weeks. Long-
term follow-up is essential, as clinical relapse occurs in 
up to one-third of patients, often within the CNS; in this 
case, the same therapy is repeated or else treatment with 
doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine is necessary.
Ileal resection
Malabsorption can occur as a complication of small 
bowel resection. The most common scenario is in patients 
with Crohn’s disease who have undergone ileal resec-
tion, leading to malabsorption of vitamin B12 and bile 
salts (Fig. 22.40). Unabsorbed bile salts pass into the 
colon, stimulating water and electrolyte secretion and 
causing diarrhoea. If hepatic synthesis of new bile salts 
cannot keep pace with faecal losses, fat malabsorption 
occurs. Another consequence is the formation of litho-
genic bile, leading to gallstones. Renal calculi, rich in 
oxalate, develop. Normally, oxalate in the colon is bound 
to and precipitated by calcium. Unabsorbed bile salts 
preferentially bind calcium, leaving oxalate to be 
absorbed, with development of urinary oxalate calculi.
Fig. 22.40  Consequences of ileal resection. 
Decreased bile salt
pool, lithogenic bile
leading to gallstones
Impaired bile salt
absorption leading
to watery diarrhoea
B12 malabsorption
Increased
absorption
of oxalate
Oxalate calculi
Impaired micelle
formation and fat
malabsorption
Children
•	 Congenital anomalies 
(mid-gut volvulus, atresia)
•	 Necrotising enterocolitis
Adults
•	 Crohn’s disease
•	 Mesenteric infarction
•	 Radiation enteritis
•	 Volvulus
22.54  Aetiology of short bowel syndrome
Diseases of the small intestine
22
885
A readily available supply of oral rehydration 
solution is useful for intercurrent illness.
•	 Adequate calorie and protein intake. Fats are a 
good energy source and should be taken as 
tolerated. Medium-chain triglyceride supplements 
are given because they are more easily absorbed.
•	 Use of oral/enteral rather than parenteral nutrition 
whenever possible.
•	 Replacement of vitamin B12, calcium, vitamin D, 
magnesium, zinc and folic acid.
•	 Loperamide (2–4 mg 4 times daily) or codeine 
phosphate (30 mg 4–6 times daily) for diarrhoea.
Octreotide (50–200 µg 2–3 times daily by subcutane-
ous injection) reduces gastrointestinal secretions and is 
useful in patients who are unable to maintain positive 
fluid balance. Despite these measures, some require 
long-term home TPN for survival and this is best 
managed in specialist centres. Small bowel transplanta-
tion is an option but rejection and graft-versus-host 
disease (p. 1017) remain significant hurdles.
Radiation enteritis and 
proctocolitis
Intestinal damage occurs in 10–15% of patients undergo-
ing radiotherapy for abdominal or pelvic malignancy. 
The risk varies with total dose, dosing schedule and the 
use of concomitant chemotherapy.
Pathophysiology
The rectum, sigmoid colon and terminal ileum are most 
frequently involved. Radiation causes acute inflamma-
tion, shortening of villi, oedema and crypt abscess for-
mation. These usually resolve completely but some 
patients develop an obliterative endarteritis affecting the 
endothelium of submucosal arterioles over 2–12 months. 
In the longer term, this can provoke a fibrotic reaction, 
leading to adhesions, ulceration, strictures, obstruction 
or fistula to adjacent organs.
Clinical features
In the acute phase, there is nausea, vomiting, cramping 
abdominal pain and diarrhoea. When the rectum and 
colon are involved, rectal mucus, bleeding and tenesmus 
occur. The chronic phase develops after 5–10 years in 
some patients and produces one or more of the problems 
listed in Box 22.56.
Investigations
In the acute phase, the rectal changes at sigmoidoscopy 
resemble ulcerative proctitis (see Fig. 22.56, p. 902). The 
extent of the lesion can be assessed by colonoscopy. 
Barium follow-through can be of diagnostic value in 
showing small bowel strictures, ulcers and fistulae.
common the fact that they have lost a large amount of 
surface area for digestion and absorption, but there are 
important differences between jejunum–colon and jeju-
nostomy patients (Box 22.55). Digestion and absorption 
are normally completed within the first 100 cm of 
jejunum, and enteral feeding is usually still possible if 
this amount of small intestine remains. The proximal 
small bowel normally reabsorbs most of the 8 L of fluid 
it receives daily (see Fig. 22.7, p. 843), and patients with 
a high jejunostomy are at great risk of hypovolaemia, 
dehydration and electrolyte losses. The presence of 
some or all of the colon can markedly improve these 
losses by increased water reabsorption. The presence of 
an intact ileocaecal valve ameliorates the clinical picture 
by slowing small intestinal transit and reducing bacte-
rial overgrowth.
Clinical features
Severely affected patients have large volumes of jejunos-
tomy fluid losses or, if the colon is preserved, diarrhoea 
and steatorrhoea. Dehydration and signs of hypovolae-
mia are common, as are weight loss, loss of muscle bulk 
and malnutrition. Some patients remain in satisfactory 
but precarious fluid balance until a minor intercurrent 
illness or intestinal upset occurs, when they can become 
rapidly dehydrated.
Management
In the immediate post-operative period, total parenteral 
nutrition (TPN) should be started and PPI therapy given 
to reduce gastric secretions. Enteral feeding should be 
cautiously introduced after 1–2 weeks under careful 
supervision and slowly increased as tolerated. For 
patients with a jejunostomy, parenteral saline is likely to 
be necessary if less than 100 cm of jejunum remains. If 
less than 75 cm of small bowel remains, TPN is also 
needed.
The principles of long-term management are:
•	 Detailed nutritional assessments at regular intervals.
•	 Monitoring of fluid and electrolyte balance. Patients 
can usually be taught how to do this for themselves. 
Jejunum–colon
Jejunostomy
Clinical
Gradual diarrhoea, 
weight loss
Rapid fluid losses
Water/electrolyte 
depletion
+/–
++
Malabsorption of 
nutrients
+
++
D-lactic acidosis
+/–
–
Oxalate renal 
calculi
++
–
Pigment gallstones
++
++
Gut adaptation
+
–
Impact on quality 
of life
Diarrhoea
High output, 
dehydration, 
parenteral nutrition
– absent; +/– can occur; + common; ++ major problem.
22.55  Effects of a short bowel
•	 Proctocolitis
•	 Bleeding from telangiectasia
•	 Small bowel strictures
•	 Fistulae: rectovaginal, colovesical, enterocolic
•	 Adhesions
•	 Malabsorption: bacterial overgrowth, bile salt malabsorption 
(ileal damage)
22.56  Chronic complications of 
intestinal irradiation
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
886
gastro­intestinal tract, such as dysphagia, and, in primary 
cases, features of bladder dysfunction. Some patients 
develop severe abdominal pain for reasons that are 
poorly understood and this can be difficult to manage.
Investigations
The diagnosis is often delayed and a high index of sus-
picion is needed. Plain X-rays show distended loops of 
bowel and air–fluid levels, but barium studies demon-
strate no mechanical obstruction. Laparotomy is some-
times required to exclude obstruction and to obtain 
full-thickness biopsies of the intestine. Examination of 
biopsy material using specialised techniques, such as 
electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry can 
diagnose the many rare diseases of enteric smooth 
muscle and nerves that can cause this syndrome.
Management
This is often difficult. Underlying causes should be 
addressed and further surgery avoided. Metoclopra-
mide or domperidone may enhance motility, and anti-
biotics are given for bacterial overgrowth. Nutritional 
and psychological support is also necessary.
Miscellaneous disorders of  
the small intestine
Protein-losing enteropathy
This term is used when there is excessive loss of protein 
into the gut lumen, sufficient to cause hypoprotein­
aemia. Protein-losing enteropathy occurs in many gut 
disorders but is most common in those in which ulcera-
tion occurs (Box 22.58). In other disorders, protein loss 
can result from increased mucosal permeability or 
obstruction of intestinal lymphatic vessels. Patients 
present with peripheral oedema and hypoproteinaemia 
in the presence of normal liver function and without 
proteinuria. The diagnosis can be confirmed by meas-
urement of faecal clearance of α1-antitrypsin or 
51Cr-labelled albumin after intravenous injection. Other 
investigations should be performed to determine the 
underlying cause. Treatment is that of the underlying 
disorder, with nutritional support and measures to 
control peripheral oedema.
Management
Diarrhoea in the acute phase should be treated with 
codeine phosphate, diphenoxylate or loperamide. Local 
corticosteroid enemas can help proctitis, and antibiotics 
may be required for bacterial overgrowth. Nutritional 
supplements are necessary when malabsorption is 
present. Colestyramine (4 g as a single sachet) is useful 
for bile salt malabsorption. Endoscopic argon plasma 
coagulation therapy may reduce bleeding from proctitis. 
Surgery should be avoided, if possible, because the 
injured intestine is difficult to resect and anastomose, 
but may be necessary for obstruction, perforation or 
fistula.
Abetalipoproteinaemia
This rare autosomal recessive disorder is caused by defi-
ciency of apolipoprotein B, which results in failure of 
chylomicron formation. It leads to fat malabsorption and 
deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins. Jejunal biopsy reveals 
enterocytes distended with resynthesised triglyceride 
and normal villous morphology. Serum cholesterol and 
triglyceride levels are low. A number of other abnor-
malities occur in this syndrome, including acanthocyto-
sis, retinitis pigmentosa and a progressive neurological 
disorder with cerebellar and dorsal column signs. Symp-
toms may be improved by a low-fat diet supplemented 
with medium-chain triglycerides and vitamins A, D, E 
and K.
Motility disorders
Chronic intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction
Small intestinal motility is disordered in conditions 
which affect the smooth muscle or nerves of the 
intestine. Many cases are ‘primary’ (idiopathic), while 
others are ‘secondary’ to a variety of disorders or drugs 
(Box 22.57).
Clinical features
There are recurrent episodes of nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal discomfort and distension, often worse after 
food. Alternating constipation and diarrhoea occur 
and weight loss results from malabsorption (due to bac-
terial overgrowth) and fear of eating. There may also be 
symptoms of dysmotility affecting other parts of the 
Primary or idiopathic
•	 Rare familial visceral myopathies or neuropathies
•	 Congenital aganglionosis
Secondary
•	 Drugs (opiates, tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines)
•	 Smooth muscle disorders (scleroderma, amyloidosis, 
mitochondrial myopathies)
•	 Myenteric plexus disorders, e.g. paraneoplastic syndrome in 
small-cell lung cancer
•	 CNS disorders (Parkinson’s disease autonomic neuropathy)
•	 Endocrine and metabolic disorders, (hypothyroidism, 
phaeochromocytoma, acute intermittent porphyria)
22.57  Causes of chronic intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction
With mucosal erosions or ulceration
•	 Crohn’s disease
•	 Ulcerative colitis
•	 Radiation damage
•	 Oesophageal, gastric or 
colonic cancer
•	 Lymphoma
Without mucosal erosions or ulceration
•	 Ménétrier’s disease
•	 Bacterial overgrowth
•	 Coeliac disease
•	 Tropical sprue
•	 Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
•	 Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
With lymphatic obstruction
•	 Intestinal lymphangiectasia
•	 Constrictive pericarditis
•	 Lymphoma
•	 Whipple’s disease
22.58  Causes of protein-losing enteropathy
Diseases of the small intestine
22
887
should be performed to exclude parasitic infection and 
other causes of eosinophilia. The serum IgE concentra-
tion is often raised. Dietary manipulations are rarely 
effective, although elimination diets, especially of milk, 
may benefit a few patients. Severe symptoms are treated 
with prednisolone (20–40 mg daily) and/or sodium 
cromoglicate, which stabilises mast cell membranes. 
The prognosis is good in the majority of patients.
Meckel’s diverticulum
This is the most common congenital anomaly of the 
gastrointestinal tract and occurs in 0.3–3% of people, 
but the vast majority of affected individuals are asymp-
tomatic throughout life. The diverticulum results from 
failure of closure of the vitelline duct, with persistence 
of a blind-ending sac arising from the anti-mesenteric 
border of the ileum; it usually occurs within 100 cm of 
the ileocaecal valve and is up to 5 cm long. Approxi-
mately 50% contain ectopic gastric mucosa; rarely, 
colonic, pancreatic or endometrial tissue is present. 
Complications most commonly occur in the first 2 years 
of life but are occasionally seen in young adults. 
Bleeding can result from ulceration of ileal mucosa 
adjacent to the ectopic parietal cells and presents as 
recurrent melaena or altered blood per rectum. The 
diagnosis can be made by scanning the abdomen using 
a gamma counter following an intravenous injection of 
99mTc-pertechnate, which is concentrated by ectopic 
parietal cells. Other complications include intestinal 
obstruction, diverticulitis, intussusception and perfora-
tion. Intervention is unnecessary unless complications 
occur.
Adverse food reactions
Adverse food reactions are common and are subdivided 
into food intolerance and food allergy, the former being 
much more common. In food intolerance, there is an 
adverse reaction to food which is not immune-mediated 
and results from pharmacological (histamine, tyramine 
or monosodium glutamate), metabolic (lactase defi-
ciency) or other mechanisms (toxins or chemical con-
taminants in food).
Lactose intolerance
Human milk contains around 200 mmol/L (68 g/L) of 
lactose, which is normally digested to glucose and galac-
tose by the brush border enzyme lactase prior to absorp-
tion. In most populations, enterocyte lactase activity 
declines throughout childhood. The enzyme is deficient 
in up to 90% of adult Africans, Asians and South Ameri-
cans, but only 5% of northern Europeans.
In cases of genetically determined (primary) lactase 
deficiency, jejunal morphology is normal. ‘Secondary’ 
lactase deficiency occurs as a consequence of disorders 
which damage the jejunal mucosa, such as coeliac 
disease and viral gastroenteritis. Unhydrolysed lactose 
enters the colon, where bacterial fermentation produces 
volatile short-chain fatty acids, hydrogen and carbon 
dioxide.
Clinical features
In most people, lactase deficiency is completely asymp-
tomatic. However, some complain of colicky pain, 
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
This may be primary, resulting from congenital mal­
union of lymphatics, or secondary to lymphatic obstruc-
tion due to lymphoma, filariasis or constrictive 
pericarditis. Impaired drainage of intestinal lymphatic 
vessels leads to discharge of protein and fat-rich lymph 
into the gastrointestinal lumen. The condition presents 
with peripheral lymphoedema, pleural effusions or 
chylous ascites, and steatorrhoea. Investigations reveal 
hypoalbuminaemia, lymphocytopenia and reduced 
serum immunoglobulin concentrations. The diagnosis 
can be made by CT scanning and by enteroscopy and 
jejunal biopsy, which shows greatly dilated lacteals. 
Treatment consists of a low-fat diet with medium-chain 
triglyceride supplements.
Ulceration of the small intestine
Small bowel ulcers are uncommon and are either idio-
pathic or secondary to underlying intestinal disorders 
(Box 22.59). Ulcers are more common in the ileum, and 
cause bleeding, perforation, stricture formation or 
obstruction. Barium studies and enteroscopy confirm 
the diagnosis.
•	 Idiopathic
•	 Inflammatory bowel 
disease
•	 NSAIDs
•	 Ulcerative jejuno-ileitis
•	 Lymphoma and carcinoma
•	 Infections, (tuberculosis, 
typhoid, Yersinia 
enterocolitica)
•	 Others (radiation, vasculitis)
22.59  Causes of small intestinal ulcers
NSAID-associated small  
intestinal toxicity
These drugs cause a spectrum of small intestinal lesions 
ranging from erosions and ulcers to mucosal webs, stric-
tures and, rarely, a condition known as ‘diaphragm 
disease’, in which intense submucosal fibrosis results in 
circumferential stricturing. The condition can present 
with pain, obstruction, bleeding or anaemia, and may 
mimic Crohn’s disease, carcinoma or lymphoma. Enter-
oscopy or capsule endoscopy can reveal the diagnosis 
but sometimes this is only discovered at laparotomy.
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
This disorder of unknown aetiology can affect any part 
of the gastrointestinal tract; it is characterised by eosi-
nophil infiltration involving the gut wall, in the absence 
of parasitic infection or eosinophilia of other tissues. 
Peripheral blood eosinophilia is present in 80% of cases.
Clinical features
There are features of obstruction and inflammation, such 
as colicky pain, nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea and 
weight loss. Protein-losing enteropathy occurs and up to 
50% of patients have a history of other allergic disorders. 
Serosal involvement may produce eosinophilic ascites.
Investigations and management
The diagnosis is made by histological assessment of 
multiple endoscopic biopsies, although full-thickness 
biopsies are occasionally required. Other investigations 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
888
Abdominal tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a rare cause of abdominal 
disease in Caucasians but must be considered in people 
in and from the developing world and in AIDS patients. 
Gut infection usually results from human M. tuberculo­
sis, which is swallowed after coughing. Many patients 
have no pulmonary symptoms and a normal chest 
X-ray.
The area most commonly affected is the ileocaecal 
region. The presentation and radiological findings may 
be very similar to those of Crohn’s disease. Abdominal 
pain can be acute or of several months’ duration, but 
diarrhoea is less common in tuberculosis than in Crohn’s 
disease. Low-grade fever is common but not invariable. 
Like Crohn’s disease, tuberculosis can affect any part of 
the gastrointestinal tract, and perianal disease with 
fistula is recognised. Peritoneal tuberculosis may result 
in peritonitis with exudative ascites, associated with 
abdominal pain and fever. Granulomatous hepatitis 
occurs.
Diagnosis
Abdominal tuberculosis causes an elevated ESR; a raised 
serum alkaline phosphatase concentration suggests 
hepatic involvement. Histological confirmation should 
be sought by endoscopy, laparoscopy or liver biopsy. 
Caseation of granulomas is not always seen and acid- 
and alcohol-fast bacteria are often scanty. Culture may 
be helpful but identification of the organism may take 
6 weeks and diagnosis is now possible on biopsy speci-
mens using PCR-based techniques.
Management
When the presentation is very suggestive of abdominal 
tuberculosis, chemotherapy with four drugs – isoniazid, 
rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol (p. 691) – 
should be commenced, even if bacteriological or histo-
logical proof is lacking.
Cryptosporidiosis
Cryptosporidiosis and other protozoal infections, 
including isosporiasis (Isospora belli) and microsporidi-
osis, are dealt with on pages 369 and 399.
Tumours of the small intestine
The small intestine is rarely affected by neoplasia, and 
fewer than 5% of all gastrointestinal tumours occur at 
this site.
Benign tumours
The most common are adenomas, GIST, lipomas and 
hamartomas. Adenomas are most often found in the 
periampullary region and are usually asymptomatic, 
although occult bleeding or obstruction due to intus-
susception may occur. Transformation to adenocarci-
noma is rare. Multiple adenomas are common in the 
duodenum of patients with familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP), who merit regular endoscopic sur-
veillance. Hamartomatous polyps with almost no 
malignant potential occur in Peutz–Jeghers syndrome 
(p. 912).
abdominal distension, increased flatus, borborygmi and 
diarrhoea after ingesting milk or milk products. Irritable 
bowel syndrome may be suspected but the correct diag-
nosis is suggested by clinical improvement on lactose 
withdrawal. The lactose hydrogen breath test is a useful 
non-invasive confirmatory investigation.
Dietary exclusion of lactose is recommended, 
although most sufferers are able to tolerate small 
amounts of milk without symptoms. Addition of com-
mercial lactase preparations to milk has been effective 
in some studies but is costly.
Intolerance of other sugars
‘Osmotic’ diarrhoea can be caused by sorbitol, an unab-
sorbable carbohydrate which is used as an artificial 
sweetener. Fructose contained within fruit juices may 
also cause diarrhoea if it is consumed in greater quanti-
ties than can be absorbed.
Food allergy
Food allergies are immune-mediated disorders, most 
commonly due to type I hypersensitivity reactions with 
production of IgE antibodies, although type IV delayed 
hypersensitivity reactions are also seen. Up to 20% of the 
population perceive themselves as suffering from food 
allergy but only 1–2% of adults and 5–7% of children 
have genuine food allergies. The most common culprits 
are peanuts, milk, eggs, soya and shellfish.
Clinical manifestations occur immediately on expo-
sure and range from trivial to life-threatening or even 
fatal anaphylaxis. The common oral allergy syndrome 
results from contact with benzoic acid in certain fresh 
fruit juices, leading to urticaria and angioedema of the 
lips and oropharynx. This is not, however, an immune-
mediated reaction. ‘Allergic gastroenteropathy’ has 
features similar to eosinophilic gastroenteritis, while 
‘gastrointestinal anaphylaxis’ consists of nausea, vomit-
ing, diarrhoea and sometimes cardiovascular and respi-
ratory collapse. Fatal reactions to trace amounts of 
peanuts are well documented.
The diagnosis of food allergy is difficult to prove or 
refute. Skin prick tests and measurements of antigen-
specific IgE antibodies in serum have limited predictive 
value. Double-blind placebo-controlled food challenges 
are the gold standard, but are laborious and are not 
readily available. In many cases, clinical suspicion and 
trials of elimination diets are used.
Treatment of proven food allergy consists of detailed 
patient education and awareness, strict elimination of 
the offending antigen, and, in some cases, antihista-
mines or sodium cromoglicate. Anaphylaxis should be 
treated as a medical emergency with resuscitation, 
airway support and intravenous adrenaline (epi­
nephrine). Teachers and other carers of affected children 
should be trained to deal with this. Patients should wear 
an information bracelet and be taught to carry and use 
a preloaded adrenaline syringe.
Infections of the small intestine
Travellers’ diarrhoea, giardiasis 
and amoebiasis
See pages 310, 368 and 367.
Diseases of the pancreas
22
889
used to reduce release of 5-HT, bradykinin and peptide 
hormones by the tumour. Cytotoxic chemotherapy with 
streptozotocin and 5-fluorouracil has limited benefits 
and is reserved as second-line therapy after other thera-
pies have failed.
Lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (p. 1043) may involve the gas-
trointestinal tract as part of more generalised disease or 
may rarely arise in the gut, the small intestine being 
most commonly affected. Lymphomas occur with 
increased frequency in patients with coeliac disease, 
HIV-AIDS and other immunodeficiency states. Most are 
of B-cell origin, although lymphoma associated with 
coeliac disease is derived from T cells (enteropathy-
associated T-cell lymphoma).
Colicky abdominal pain, obstruction and weight loss 
are the presenting features, and perforation is also occa-
sionally seen. Malabsorption is a feature of diffuse bowel 
involvement and hepatosplenomegaly is rare.
The diagnosis is made by small bowel biopsy, radio-
logical contrast studies and CT. Staging investigations 
should be performed as for lymphomas occurring else-
where (p. 1042). Surgical resection, where possible, is the 
treatment of choice, with radiotherapy and combination 
chemotherapy reserved for those with advanced disease. 
The prognosis depends largely on the stage at diagnosis, 
cell type, patient age and the presence of ‘B’ symptoms 
(fever, weight loss, night sweats).
Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease
Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease (IPSID), 
also known as alpha heavy chain disease, is a rare condi-
tion occurring mainly in Mediterranean countries, the 
Middle East, India, Pakistan and North America. It is a 
variant of B-cell lymphoma of MALT type and often 
associated with Campylobacter jejuni infection. The condi-
tion varies in severity from relatively benign to frankly 
malignant.
The small intestinal mucosa is diffusely affected, 
especially proximally, by a dense lymphoplasmacytic 
infiltrate. Enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes are also 
common. Most patients are young adults, who present 
with malabsorption, anorexia and fever. Serum electro-
phoresis confirms the presence of alpha heavy chains 
(from the Fc portion of IgA). Prolonged remissions can 
be obtained with long-term antibiotic therapy, but 
chemotherapy is required for those who fail to respond 
or who have aggressive disease.
DISEASES OF THE PANCREAS
Acute pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis accounts for 3% of all cases of 
abdominal pain admitted to hospital. It affects 2–28 per 
100 000 of the population and is increasing in incidence. 
It is a potentially serious condition with an overall mor-
tality of 10%. About 80% of all cases are mild and have 
a favourable outcome. About 98% of deaths from pan-
creatitis occur in the 20% of patients with severe disease 
and about one-third of these occur within the first week, 
usually from multi-organ failure. After this time, the 
majority of deaths result from sepsis, especially that 
Malignant tumours
These are rare and include, in decreasing order of fre-
quency, adenocarcinoma, carcinoid tumour, malignant 
GIST and lymphoma. The majority occur in middle age 
or later. Kaposi’s sarcoma of the small bowel may arise 
in patients with AIDS.
Adenocarcinomas
Adenocarcinomas occur with increased frequency in 
patients with FAP, coeliac disease and Peutz–Jeghers 
syndrome. The non-specific presentation and rarity of 
these lesions often lead to delay in diagnosis. Barium 
follow-through examination or small bowel enema 
studies demonstrate most lesions of this type. Enteros-
copy, capsule endoscopy, mesenteric angiography and 
CT also play a role in investigation. Treatment is by 
surgical resection.
Neuro-endocrine tumours
Also known as carcinoid tumours, these are derived 
from enterochromaffin cells and are most common in the 
appendix. Localised spread and the potential for metas-
tasis to the liver increase with primary lesions over 2 cm 
in diameter. They also occur in the rectum and in the 
appendix; those in the appendix are usually benign. 
Overall, these tumours are less aggressive than carcino-
mas and their growth is usually slow.
Symptoms depend on the location of the tumour and 
whether or not it is producing hormones or vasoactive 
peptides. The term ‘carcinoid syndrome’ refers to the 
systemic symptoms that result when secretory products 
of the neoplastic enterochromaffin cells reach the sys-
temic circulation (Box 22.60). When produced by the 
primary tumour, they are usually metabolised in the 
liver and do not reach the systemic circulation. The syn-
drome is therefore only seen with hepatic metastases.
Management
The treatment is surgical resection. The treatment of car-
cinoid syndrome is palliative because hepatic metastases 
have already occurred, although prolonged survival is 
common. Surgical removal of the primary tumour and 
hepatic metastases may be of value, as reduction of 
tumour mass (cytoreductive surgery) improves symp-
toms. Hepatic artery embolisation is another option, 
since it can retard growth of hepatic deposits. Octreotide 
(200 µg 3 times daily by subcutaneous injection) can be 
•	 Small-bowel obstruction due to the tumour mass
•	 Intestinal ischaemia (due to mesenteric infiltration or 
vasospasm)
•	 Hepatic metastases causing pain, hepatomegaly and jaundice
•	 Flushing and wheezing
•	 Diarrhoea
•	 Cardiac involvement (tricuspid regurgitation, pulmonary 
stenosis, right ventricular endocardial plaques) leading to 
heart failure
•	 Facial telangiectasia
22.60  Clinical features of 
neuro-endocrine tumours*
*The diagnosis is made by detecting excess levels of the 5-HT metabolite, 
5-HIAA, in a 24-hr urine collection and by raised serum chromogranin  
A levels.
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
890
β2-macroglobulin, α1-antitrypsin and Cl-esterase inhibi-
tors. The causes of acute pancreatitis are listed in Box 
22.63. Acute pancreatitis is often self-limiting, but in 
some patients with severe disease, local complications, 
such as necrosis, pseudocyst or abscess, occur, as well as 
systemic complications that lead to multi-organ failure.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with severe, constant 
upper abdominal pain, of increasing intensity over 
15–60 minutes, which radiates to the back. Nausea and 
vomiting are common. There is marked epigastric ten-
derness, but in the early stages (and in contrast to 
a perforated peptic ulcer), guarding and rebound 
complicating infected necrosis. At admission, it is pos-
sible to predict patients at risk of these complications 
(Box 22.61). Patients who are predicted to have severe 
pancreatitis (Box 22.62) and those with necrosis or other 
complications should be managed in a specialist centre 
with an intensive therapy unit and multidisciplinary 
hepatobiliary specialists.
Pathophysiology
Acute pancreatitis occurs as a consequence of premature 
intracellular trypsinogen activation, releasing proteases 
which digest the pancreas and surrounding tissue. Trig-
gers for this are many, including alcohol, gallstones and 
pancreatic duct obstruction (Fig. 22.41). There is simul-
taneous activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB), 
leading to mitochondrial dysfunction, autophagy and a 
vigorous inflammatory response. The normal pancreas 
has only a poorly developed capsule, and adjacent struc-
tures, including the common bile duct, duodenum, 
splenic vein and transverse colon, are commonly 
involved in the inflammatory process. The severity of 
acute pancreatitis is dependent upon the balance 
between the activity of released proteolytic enzymes and 
antiproteolytic factors. The latter comprise an intracel-
lular pancreatic trypsin inhibitor protein and circulating 
*Severity and prognosis worsen as the number of these factors increases. 
More than three implies severe disease.
•	 Age > 55 yrs
•	 PO2 < 8 kPa (60 mmHg)
•	 White blood cell count (WBC) > 15 × 109/L
•	 Albumin < 32 g/L (3.2 g/dL)
•	 Serum calcium < 2 mmol/L (8 mg/dL) (corrected)
•	 Glucose > 10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL)
•	 Urea > 16 mmol/L (45 mg/dL) (after rehydration)
•	 Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) > 200 U/L
•	 Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) > 600 U/L
22.61  Glasgow criteria for prognosis in 
acute pancreatitis*
Initial assessment
•	 Clinical impression of severity
•	 Body mass index > 30
•	 Pleural effusion on chest X-ray
•	 APACHE II score > 8
24 hrs after admission
•	 Clinical impression of severity
•	 APACHE II score > 8
•	 Glasgow score > 3
•	 Persisting organ failure, especially if multiple
•	 CRP > 150 mg/L
48 hrs after admission
•	 Clinical impression of severity
•	 Glasgow score > 3
•	 CRP > 150 mg/L
•	 Persisting organ failure for 48 hrs
•	 Multiple or progressive organ failure
(CRP = C-reactive protein)
22.62  Features that predict severe pancreatitis
Fig. 22.41  Pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis.  
Proenzymes
Pancreatic duct
obstruction 
(common bile duct
stones, tumours)
Defective intracellular
transport and
secretion of 
pancreatic zymogens
Reflux of infected bile
or duodenal contents
into pancreatic duct
(sphincter of Oddi 
dysfunction)
Hyperstimulation
of pancreas
(alcohol, triglycerides)
Activated
proteolytic
enzymes
Acute
pancreatitis
Pancreatic
secretory
trypsin
inhibitors
+
+
+
+
Common (90% of cases)
•	 Gallstones
•	 Idiopathic
•	 Alcohol
•	 Post-ERCP
Rare
•	 Post-surgical (abdominal, cardiopulmonary bypass)
•	 Trauma
•	 Drugs (azathioprine/mercaptopurine, thiazide diuretics, sodium 
valproate)
•	 Metabolic (hypercalcaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia)
•	 Pancreas divisum (p. 894)
•	 Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
•	 Infection (mumps, Coxsackie virus)
•	 Hereditary
•	 Renal failure
•	 Organ transplantation (kidney, liver)
•	 Severe hypothermia
•	 Petrochemical exposure
22.63  Causes of acute pancreatitis
Diseases of the pancreas
22
891
Pseudocysts greater than 6 cm in diameter seldom dis-
appear spontaneously and can cause constant abdomi-
nal pain and compress or erode surrounding structures, 
including blood vessels, to form pseudoaneurysms. 
Large pseudocysts can be detected clinically as a palpa-
ble abdominal mass.
Pancreatic ascites occurs when fluid leaks from a 
disrupted pancreatic duct into the peritoneal cavity. 
Leakage into the thoracic cavity can result in a pleural 
effusion or a pleuro-pancreatic fistula.
Investigations
The diagnosis is based upon raised serum amylase or 
lipase concentrations and ultrasound or CT evidence of 
pancreatic swelling. Plain X-rays should be taken to 
exclude other diagnoses, such as perforation or obstruc-
tion, and to identify pulmonary complications. Amylase 
is efficiently excreted by the kidneys, and concentrations 
may have returned to normal if measured 24–48 hours 
after the onset of pancreatitis. A persistently elevated 
serum amylase concentration suggests pseudocyst for-
mation. Peritoneal amylase concentrations are massively 
elevated in pancreatic ascites. Serum amylase concentra-
tions are also elevated (but less so) in intestinal ischae-
mia, perforated peptic ulcer and ruptured ovarian cyst, 
whilst the salivary isoenzyme of amylase is elevated in 
parotitis. If available, serum lipase measurements are 
preferable to amylase, as they have greater diagnostic 
accuracy for acute pancreatitis.
Ultrasound scanning can confirm the diagnosis, 
although in the earlier stages the gland may not be 
grossly swollen. The ultrasound scan is also useful 
because it may show gallstones, biliary obstruction or 
pseudocyst formation.
Contrast-enhanced pancreatic CT 6–10 days after 
admission can be useful in assessing viability of the pan-
creas if persisting organ failure, sepsis or clinical deterio-
ration is present, since these features may indicate that 
pancreatic necrosis has occurred. Necrotising pancreati-
tis is associated with decreased pancreatic enhancement 
on CT, following intravenous injection of contrast 
material. The presence of gas within necrotic material 
(Fig. 22.43) suggests infection and impending abscess 
formation, in which case percutaneous aspiration of 
material for bacterial culture should be carried out and 
tenderness are absent because the inflammation is prin-
cipally retroperitoneal. Bowel sounds become quiet or 
absent as paralytic ileus develops. In severe cases, the 
patient becomes hypoxic and develops hypovolaemic 
shock with oliguria. Discoloration of the flanks (Grey 
Turner’s sign) or the periumbilical region (Cullen’s sign) 
is a feature of severe pancreatitis with haemorrhage. The 
differential diagnosis includes a perforated viscus, acute 
cholecystitis and myocardial infarction. Various compli-
cations may occur and these are listed in Box 22.64.
A collection of fluid and debris may develop in the 
lesser sac, following inflammatory rupture of the pan-
creatic duct; this is known as a pancreatic fluid collec-
tion. It is initially contained within a poorly defined, 
fragile wall of granulation tissue, which matures 
over a 6-week period to form a fibrous capsule (Fig. 
22.42). Such ‘pseudocysts’ are common and usually 
asymptomatic, resolving as the pancreatitis recovers. 
Complication
Cause
Systemic
Systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome (SIRS)
Increased vascular 
permeability from cytokine, 
platelet aggregating factor and 
kinin release
Hypoxia
Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS) due to 
microthrombi in pulmonary 
vessels
Hyperglycaemia
Disruption of islets of 
Langerhans with altered 
insulin/glucagon release
Hypocalcaemia
Sequestration of calcium in  
fat necrosis, fall in ionised 
calcium
Reduced serum albumin 
concentration
Increased capillary 
permeability
Pancreatic
Necrosis
Non-viable pancreatic tissue 
and peripancreatic tissue 
death; frequently infected
Abscess
Circumscribed collection of 
pus close to the pancreas  
and containing little or no 
pancreatic necrotic tissue
Pseudocyst
Disruption of pancreatic ducts
Pancreatic ascites or pleural 
effusion
Disruption of pancreatic ducts
Gastrointestinal
Upper gastrointestinal 
bleeding
Gastric or duodenal erosions
Variceal haemorrhage
Splenic or portal vein 
thrombosis
Erosion into colon
Duodenal obstruction
Compression by pancreatic 
mass
Obstructive jaundice
Compression of common bile 
duct
22.64  Complications of acute pancreatitis
Fig. 22.42  CT showing large pancreatic pseudocyst (C) 
compressing the stomach (S). The pancreas is atrophic and calcified 
(arrows). 
S
C
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
892
Patients who present with cholangitis or jaundice 
in association with severe acute pancreatitis should 
undergo urgent ERCP to diagnose and treat choledocho-
lithiasis. In less severe cases of gallstone pancreatitis, 
biliary imaging (using MRCP or EUS) can be carried out 
after the acute phase has resolved. If the liver function 
tests return to normal and ultrasound has not demon-
strated a dilated biliary tree, laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy with an on-table cholangiogram is appropriate 
because any common bile duct stones have probably 
passed. When the operative cholangiogram detects 
residual common bile duct stones, these should be 
removed by laparoscopic exploration of the duct or 
by post-operative ERCP. Cholecystectomy should be 
undertaken within 2 weeks of resolution of pancreatitis 
– and preferably during the same admission – to prevent 
further potentially fatal attacks of pancreatitis. Patients 
with necrotising pancreatitis or pancreatic abscess 
require urgent endoscopic or minimally invasive retro-
peritoneal pancreatic (MIRP) necrosectomy to debride 
all cavities of necrotic material. Pancreatic pseudocysts 
can be treated by drainage into the stomach, duodenum 
or jejunum. This is usually performed after an interval 
of at least 6 weeks, once a pseudocapsule has matured, 
by surgical or endoscopic cystogastrostomy.
Chronic pancreatitis
Chronic pancreatitis is a chronic inflammatory disease 
characterised by fibrosis and destruction of exocrine 
pancreatic tissue. Diabetes mellitus occurs in advanced 
cases because the islets of Langerhans are involved.
Pathophysiology
Around 80% of cases in Western countries result from 
alcohol misuse. In southern India, severe chronic calcific 
pancreatitis occurs in non-alcoholics, possibly as a result 
of malnutrition and cassava consumption. Other causes 
are listed in Box 22.66. The pathophysiology of chronic 
pancreatitis is shown in Figure 22.44.
Clinical features
Chronic pancreatitis predominantly affects middle-aged 
alcoholic men. Almost all present with abdominal pain. 
In 50%, this occurs as episodes of ‘acute pancreatitis’, 
although each attack results in a degree of permanent 
pancreatic damage. Relentless, slowly progressive 
chronic pain without acute exacerbations affects 35% 
of patients, whilst the remainder have no pain but 
present with diarrhoea. Pain is due to a combination of 
increased pressure within the pancreatic ducts and 
appropriate antibiotics prescribed. Involvement of the 
colon, blood vessels and other adjacent structures by the 
inflammatory process is best seen by CT.
Certain investigations stratify the severity of acute 
pancreatitis and have important prognostic value at the 
time of presentation (see Boxes 22.61 and 22.62). In addi-
tion, serial assessment of C-reactive protein (CRP) is a 
useful indicator of progress. A peak CRP > 210 mg/L in 
the first 4 days predicts severe acute pancreatitis with 
80% accuracy. It is worth noting that the serum amylase 
concentration has no prognostic value.
Management
Management comprises several related steps:
•	 establishing the diagnosis and disease severity
•	 early resuscitation, according to whether the disease 
is mild or severe
•	 detection and treatment of complications
•	 treating the underlying cause.
Opiate analgesics should be given to treat pain and 
hypovolaemia should be corrected using normal saline 
or other crystalloids. All severe cases should be managed 
in a high-dependency or intensive care unit. A central 
venous line and urinary catheter should be established 
to monitor patients with shock. Oxygen should be given 
to hypoxic patients, and those who develop systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) may require 
ventilatory support. Hyperglycaemia should be cor-
rected using insulin, but it is not usually necessary to 
correct hypocalcaemia by intravenous calcium injection, 
unless tetany occurs.
Nasogastric aspiration is only required if paralytic 
ileus is present. Enteral feeding, if tolerated, should be 
started at an early stage in patients with severe pancrea-
titis because they are in a severely catabolic state and 
need nutritional support (Box 22.65). Enteral feeding 
decreases endotoxaemia and so may reduce systemic 
complications. Nasogastric feeding is just as effective as 
the nasojejunal route. Prophylaxis of thromboembolism 
with subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin is 
also advisable. The use of prophylactic, broad-spectrum 
intravenous antibiotics, such as imipenem or cefurox-
ime, to prevent infection of pancreatic necrosis is of 
unproven benefit but they are often given empirically.
Fig. 22.43  Pancreatic necrosis. Lack of vascular enhancement of 
the pancreas during contrast-enhanced CT indicates necrosis (arrow).  
The presence of gas suggests that infection has occurred. 
‘Enteral nutrition significantly reduced mortality, multiple organ 
failure, systemic infections and the need for operative 
interventions, compared to TPN. Enteral nutrition should be 
considered the standard of care for patients with acute 
pancreatitis requiring nutritional support.’
•	 Al-Omran M, et al. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010, issue 1. 
Art. no. CD002837.
For further information: 
  www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
22.65  Enteral versus total parenteral nutritional 
(TPN) support in acute pancreatitis
Diseases of the pancreas
22
893
Fig. 22.44  Pathophysiology of chronic pancreatitis. 
Alcohol and other risk factors may trigger acute pancreatitis 
(AP) through multiple mechanisms. The first (or ‘sentinel’) 
episode of acute pancreatitis initiates an inflammatory 
response involving T-helper cells. Ongoing exposure to alcohol 
drives further inflammation but this is modified by regulatory T 
cells with subsequent fibrosis, via activation of pancreatic 
stellate cells. A cycle of inflammation and fibrosis ensues, 
with development of chronic pancreatitis. Alcohol is the most 
relevant risk factor, as it is involved at multiple steps. 
Clinical course
Mechanisms
Aetiology
Normal
T reg
T H
AP
Recurrent AP
Oxidative
stress
Alcohol
Smoking
Idiopathic
Genetic
Autoimmune
Obstructive
Toxic-
metabolic
Necrosis-
fibrosis
Duct
obstruction
Recurrent AP
Chronic
pancreatitis
Acinus
Ductule
•	 Pseudocysts and pancreatic ascites, which occur in both 
acute and chronic pancreatitis
•	 Obstructive jaundice due to benign stricture of the common 
bile duct as it passes through the diseased pancreas
•	 Duodenal stenosis
•	 Portal or splenic vein thrombosis leading to segmental portal 
hypertension and gastric varices
•	 Peptic ulcer
22.67  Complications of chronic pancreatitis
Toxic–metabolic
•	 Alcohol
•	 Tobacco
•	 Hypercalcaemia
•	 Chronic renal failure
Idiopathic
•	 Tropical
•	 Early-/late-onset types
Genetic
•	 Hereditary pancreatitis 
(cationic trypsinogen 
mutation)
•	 SPINK-1 mutation
•	 Cystic fibrosis
Autoimmune
•	 Isolated or as part of multi-organ problem
Recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis
•	 Recurrent acute 
pancreatitis
•	 Post-necrotic
Obstructive
•	 Ductal adenocarcinoma
•	 Intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasia
•	 Pancreas divisum
•	 Sphincter of Oddi stenosis
22.66  Causes of chronic pancreatitis*
*These can be memorised by the mnemonic ‘TIGARO’. Gallstones do not 
cause chronic pancreatitis but may be observed as an incidental finding.
direct involvement of peripancreatic nerves by the 
inflammatory process. Pain may be relieved by leaning 
forwards or by drinking alcohol. Approximately one-
fifth of patients chronically consume opiate analgesics. 
Weight loss is common and results from a combination 
of anorexia, avoidance of food because of post-prandial 
pain, malabsorption and/or diabetes. Steatorrhoea 
occurs when more than 90% of the exocrine tissue has 
been destroyed; protein malabsorption only develops in 
the most advanced cases. Overall, 30% of patients are 
diabetic, but this figure rises to 70% in those with chronic 
calcific pancreatitis. Physical examination reveals a thin, 
malnourished patient with epigastric tenderness. Skin 
pigmentation over the abdomen and back is common 
and results from chronic use of a hot water bottle (ery­
thema ab igne). Many patients have features of other 
alcohol- and smoking-related diseases. Complications 
are listed in Box 22.67.
Investigations
Investigations (Box 22.68 and Fig. 22.45) are carried 
out to:
•	 make a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis
•	 define pancreatic function
•	 demonstrate anatomical abnormalities prior to 
surgical intervention.
Tests to establish the diagnosis
•	 Ultrasound
•	 CT (may show atrophy, calcification or ductal dilatation)
•	 Abdominal X-ray (may show calcification)
•	 MRCP
•	 Endoscopic ultrasound
Tests of pancreatic function
•	 Collection of pure pancreatic juice after secretin injection 
(gold standard but invasive and seldom used)
•	 Pancreolauryl test (see Box 22.12, p. 851)
•	 Faecal pancreatic elastase
Tests of anatomy prior to surgery
•	 MRCP
22.68  Investigations in chronic pancreatitis
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
894
Malabsorption
This is treated by dietary fat restriction (with supple-
mentary medium-chain triglyceride therapy in malnour-
ished patients) and oral pancreatic enzyme supplements. 
A PPI is added to optimise duodenal pH for pancreatic 
enzyme activity.
Management of complications
Surgical or endoscopic therapy may be necessary for the 
management of pseudocysts, pancreatic ascites, common 
bile duct or duodenal stricture and the consequences of 
portal hypertension. Many patients with chronic pan-
creatitis also require treatment for other alcohol- and 
smoking-related diseases and for the consequences of 
self-neglect and malnutrition.
Autoimmune pancreatitis
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is a form of chronic pan-
creatitis that can mimic cancer but which responds to 
corticosteroids. It is characterised by abdominal pain, 
weight loss or obstructive jaundice, without acute 
attacks of pancreatitis. Blood tests reveal increased 
serum IgG or IgG4, and the presence of other autoanti-
bodies. Imaging shows a diffusely enlarged pancreas, 
narrowing of the pancreatic duct and stricturing of the 
lower bile duct. AIP may occur alone or with other 
autoimmune disorders, such as Sjögren’s syndrome, 
primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) or inflammatory 
bowel disease. The response to steroids is usually excel-
lent but some patients require azathioprine.
Congenital abnormalities affecting  
the pancreas
Pancreas divisum
This is due to failure of the primitive dorsal and ventral 
ducts to fuse during embryonic development of the pan-
creas. As a consequence, most of the pancreatic drainage 
occurs through the smaller accessory ampulla rather 
than through the major ampulla. The condition occurs 
in 7–10% of the normal population and is usually asymp-
tomatic, but some patients develop acute pancreatitis, 
chronic pancreatitis or atypical abdominal pain.
Annular pancreas
In this congenital anomaly, the pancreas encircles the 
second/third part of the duodenum, leading to gastric 
outlet obstruction. Annular pancreas is associated 
with malrotation of the intestine, atresias and cardiac 
anomalies.
Management
Alcohol misuse
Alcohol avoidance is crucial in halting progression of 
the disease and reducing pain.
Pain relief
A range of analgesic drugs, particularly NSAIDs, are 
valuable, but the severe and unremitting nature of the 
pain often leads to opiate use with the risk of addiction. 
Oral pancreatic enzyme supplements suppress pancre-
atic secretion and their regular use reduces analgesic 
consumption in some patients. Patients who are absti-
nent from alcohol and who have severe chronic pain 
which is resistant to conservative measures should be 
considered for surgical or endoscopic pancreatic therapy 
(Box 22.69). Coeliac plexus neurolysis sometimes pro-
duces long-lasting pain relief, although relapse occurs in 
the majority of cases. In some patients, MRCP does not 
show a surgically or endoscopically correctable abnor-
mality and, in these patients, the only surgical approach 
is total pancreatectomy. Unfortunately, even after this 
operation, some patients continue to experience pain. 
Moreover, the procedure causes diabetes, which may be 
difficult to control, with a high risk of hypoglycaemia 
(since both insulin and glucagon release are absent), and 
significant morbidity and mortality.
Fig. 22.45  Imaging in chronic pancreatitis. A  CT scan showing a 
grossly dilated and irregular duct with a calcified stone (arrow A). Note the 
calcification in the head of the gland (arrow B). B  MRCP of the same 
patient showing marked ductal dilatation with abnormal dilated side 
branches (arrows A). A small cyst is also present (arrow B). 
A
B
A
B
A
B
Endoscopic therapy
•	 Dilatation or stenting of pancreatic duct strictures
•	 Removal of calculi (mechanical or shock-wave lithotripsy)
•	 Drainage of pseudocysts
Surgical methods
•	 Partial pancreatic resection, preserving the duodenum
•	 Pancreatico-jejunostomy
22.69  Intervention in chronic pancreatitis
Diseases of the pancreas
22
895
characteristically incessant and gnawing. It often radi-
ates from the upper abdomen through to the back and 
may be eased a little by bending forwards. Almost all 
patients lose weight and many are cachectic. Around 
60% of tumours arise from the head of the pancreas, and 
involvement of the common bile duct results in the 
development of obstructive jaundice, often with severe 
pruritus. A few patients present with diarrhoea, vomit-
ing from duodenal obstruction, diabetes mellitus, recur-
rent venous thrombosis, acute pancreatitis or depression. 
Physical examination reveals clear evidence of weight 
loss. An abdominal mass due to the tumour itself, a 
palpable gallbladder or hepatic metastasis is commonly 
found. A palpable gallbladder in a jaundiced patient is 
usually the consequence of distal biliary obstruction by 
a pancreatic cancer (Courvoisier’s sign).
Investigations
The diagnosis is usually made by ultrasound and 
contrast-enhanced CT (Fig. 22.47). Diagnosis in non-
jaundiced patients is often delayed because presenting 
symptoms are relatively non-specific. Fit patients with 
small localised tumours should undergo staging to 
define operability. EUS or laparoscopy with laparo-
scopic ultrasound will define tumour size, involvement 
of blood vessels and metastatic spread. In patients 
unsuitable for surgery because of advanced disease, 
frailty or comorbidity, EUS or CT-guided cytology or 
biopsy can be used to confirm the diagnosis. MRCP and 
ERCP are sensitive methods of diagnosing pancreatic 
cancer and are valuable when the diagnosis is in doubt, 
although differentiation between cancer and localised 
chronic pancreatitis can be difficult. The main role of 
ERCP is to insert a stent into the common bile duct to 
relieve obstructive jaundice in inoperable patients.
Management
Surgical resection is the only method of effecting cure, 
and 5-year survival in patients undergoing a complete 
resection is around 12%. Recent trials have demon-
strated improved survival (21–29%) with adjuvant 
chemotherapy using gemcitabine. Unfortunately, only 
10–15% of tumours are resectable for cure, since most 
are locally advanced at the time of diagnosis. For the 
great majority of patients, treatment is palliative. Chemo­
therapy with FOLFIRINOX (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, 
irinotecan and oxaliplatin) improves median survival to 
11 months. Pain relief can be achieved using analgesics 
but, in some patients, coeliac plexus neurolysis may be 
required. Jaundice can be relieved by choledochojeju-
nostomy in fit patients, whereas percutaneous or endo-
scopic stenting is preferable in the elderly and those with 
very advanced disease. Ampullary or periampullary 
adenocarcinomas are rare neoplasms which arise from 
the ampulla of Vater or adjacent duodenum. They are 
often polypoid and may ulcerate; they frequently infil-
trate the duodenum but behave less aggressively than 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Around 25% of patients 
undergoing resection of ampullary or periampullary 
tumours survive for 5 years, in contrast to patients with 
pancreatic ductal cancer.
Cystic neoplasms of the pancreas are increasingly 
being seen with widespread use of CT. These are a 
heterogeneous group; serous cystadenomas rarely, if 
ever, become malignant and do not require surgery. 
Cystic fibrosis
This disease is considered in detail on page 680. The 
major gastrointestinal manifestations are pancreatic 
insufficiency and meconium ileus. Peptic ulcer and 
hepatobiliary disease may also occur. In cystic fibrosis, 
pancreatic secretions are protein- and mucus-rich. The 
resultant viscous juice forms plugs which obstruct the 
pancreatic ductules, leading to progressive destruction 
of acinar cells. Steatorrhoea is universal and the large-
volume bulky stools predispose to rectal prolapse. Mal-
nutrition is compounded by the metabolic demands of 
respiratory failure and by diabetes, which develops in 
40% of patients by adolescence.
Most patients now survive well into adulthood and 
heart/lung transplantation can further prolong life. 
Optimal treatment depends upon an assiduous team 
approach to respiratory, nutritional and hepatobiliary 
complications. Nutritional counselling and supervision 
are important to ensure intake of high-energy foods, 
providing 120–150% of the recommended intake for 
normal subjects. Fats are an important calorie source 
and, despite the presence of steatorrhoea, fat intake 
should not be restricted. Supplementary fat-soluble vita-
mins are also necessary. High-dose oral pancreatic 
enzymes are required, in doses sufficient to control stea-
torrhoea and stool frequency. A PPI aids fat digestion 
by producing an optimal duodenal pH. Diabetic 
patients usually require insulin injections rather than 
oral hypoglycaemic agents.
Meconium ileus
Mucus-rich plugs within intestinal contents can obstruct 
the small or large intestine. Meconium ileus is treated by 
the mucolytic agent N-acetylcysteine, given orally, by 
Gastrografin enema or by gut lavage using polyethylene 
glycol. In resistant cases of meconium ileus, surgical 
resection may be necessary.
Tumours of the pancreas
Pancreatic carcinoma affects 10–15 per 100 000 in Western 
populations, rising to 100 per 100 000 in those over the 
age of 70. Men are affected twice as often as women. The 
disease is associated with increasing age, smoking and 
chronic pancreatitis. Between 5 and 10% of patients have 
a genetic predisposition (hereditary pancreatitis, MEN, 
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) and 
familial atypical mole multiple melanoma syndrome 
(FAMMM). Overall survival is only 3–5%, with median 
survival of 6–10 months for those with locally advanced 
disease and 3–5 months if metastases are present.
Pathophysiology
Some 90% of pancreatic neoplasms are adenocarcinomas 
which arise from the pancreatic ducts. These tumours 
involve local structures and metastasise to regional 
lymph nodes at an early stage. Most patients have 
advanced disease at the time of presentation.
Clinical features
Many patients are asymptomatic until an advanced 
stage, when they present with central abdominal pain, 
weight loss and obstructive jaundice (Fig. 22.46). The 
pain results from invasion of the coeliac plexus and is 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
896
lesion is mucinous or not. In fit patients, all mucinous 
lesions should be resected. A variant, called intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasia (IPMN), is often discov-
ered coincidentally on CT, frequently in elderly men. 
This may affect the main pancreatic duct with marked 
dilatation and plugs of mucus, or may affect a side 
branch. The histology varies from villous adenomatous 
change to dysplasia or carcinoma. Since IPMN is a pre-
malignant but indolent condition, the decision to resect 
or to monitor depends on age and fitness of the patient 
and location, size and evolution of lesions.
Pancreatic neuro-endocrine 
tumours
These can occur in association with parathyroid and 
pituitary adenomas (MEN 1, p. 795). The majority of 
endocrine tumours are non-secretory and, although 
malignant, grow slowly and metastasise late. Other 
tumours secrete hormones and present because of their 
endocrine effects (see Box 20.54, p. 784). Neuro-endocrine 
pancreatic tumours may be single, but are frequently 
multifocal and arise from other clusters of neuro-
endocrine cells derived from neural crest tissues. They 
are localised by CT and endoscopic ultrasound. 
111In-labelled DTPA is very sensitive in the diagnosis of 
glucagonoma.
Fig. 22.46  Features of pancreatic cancer. 
Lymphadenopathy
Pancreatic
tumour mass
Sister Joseph’s nodule
(tumour spread to umbilicus
via umbilical vein)
Erythema ab igne 
Venous thrombosis
(‘thrombophlebitis migrans’)
Metastases
common
Obstructed
common bile
duct and dilated
gallbladder
Cancer
Dilated
pancreatic
duct
Lymph node
spread at
early stage
Jaundice
Cachexia
Depression
Vomiting from
duodenal obstruction
Hepatomegaly
(extrahepatic biliary
obstruction/secondary
deposits)
Palpable gallbladder
(Courvoisier’s sign)
Scratch marks
(obstructive jaundice)
Fig. 22.47  Carcinoma of the pancreatic head. A large mass (M) in 
the head of pancreas involves the portal vein (PV) and obstructs the 
common bile duct (CBD). The gallbladder (GB) is distended. 
GB
CBD
M
PV
Mucinous cysts occur more often in women, are usually 
in the pancreatic tail and display a spectrum of behav-
iour from benign to frankly malignant. Aspiration of the 
cyst contents for cytology and measurement of carcino­
embryonic antigen (CEA) and amylase concentrations in 
fluid obtained at EUS can help determine whether a 
Inflammatory bowel disease
22
897
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease are chronic inflam-
matory bowel diseases which pursue a protracted 
relapsing and remitting course, usually extending over 
years. The diseases have many similarities and it is 
sometimes impossible to differentiate between them. A 
crucial distinction is that ulcerative colitis only involves 
the colon, while Crohn’s disease can involve any part of 
the gastrointestinal tract from mouth to anus. A summary 
of the main features of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s 
disease is provided in Box 22.70.
The incidence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 
varies widely between populations. There was a dra-
matic increase in the incidence of Crohn’s disease in the 
Western world, starting in the second half of the last 
century and coinciding with the introduction of a more 
‘hygienic’ environment with the advent of domestic 
refrigeration and the widespread use of antibiotics. The 
developing world has seen similar patterns, as these 
countries adopt an increasingly Westernised lifestyle.
In the West, the incidence of ulcerative colitis is stable 
at 10–20 per 100 000, with a prevalence of 100–200 per 
100 000, while the incidence of Crohn’s disease is increas-
ing and is now 5–10 per 100 000, with a prevalence of 
50–100 per 100 000. Both diseases most commonly start 
in the second and third decades of life, with a second 
smaller incidence peak in the seventh decade. Approxi-
mately 240 000 people are affected by IBD in the UK 
(approximately 1.4 million in the USA), equating to a 
prevalence of about 1 in 250. Life expectancy in patients 
with IBD is similar to that of the general population. 
Although many patients require surgery and admission 
to hospital for other reasons, with substantial associated 
Ulcerative colitis
Crohn’s disease
Age group
Any
Any
Gender
M = F
Slight female preponderance
Incidence
Stable
Increasing
Ethnic group
Any
Any; more common in Ashkenazi Jews
Genetic factors
HLA-DR*103; colonic epithelial barrier function 
(HNF4a, LAMB1, CDH1)
Defective innate immunity and autophagy (NOD2, 
ATG16L1, IRGM)
Risk factors
More common in non-/ex-smokers
More common in smokers
Appendicectomy protects
Anatomical distribution
Colon only; begins at anorectal margin with 
variable proximal extension
Any part of gastrointestinal tract; perianal disease 
common; patchy distribution, skip lesions
Extra-intestinal manifestations
Common
Common
Presentation
Bloody diarrhoea
Variable; pain, diarrhoea, weight loss all common
Histology
Inflammation limited to mucosa; crypt distortion, 
cryptitis, crypt abscesses, loss of goblet cells
Submucosal or transmural inflammation 
common; deep fissuring ulcers, fistulae; patchy 
changes; granulomas
Management
5-ASA; corticosteroids; azathioprine; biological 
therapy (anti-TNF); colectomy is curative
Corticosteroids; azathioprine; methotrexate; 
biological therapy (anti-TNF); nutritional therapy; 
surgery for complications is not curative; 5-ASA 
not effective
(5-ASA = 5-aminosalicylic acid; TNF = tumour necrosis factor)
22.70  Comparison of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease
morbidity, the majority have an excellent work record 
and pursue a normal life.
Pathophysiology
Inflammatory bowel disease has both environmental 
and genetic components, and evidence from genome-
wide association studies suggests that genetic variants 
that predispose to Crohn’s disease may have undergone 
positive selection by protecting against infectious dis-
eases, including tuberculosis (Box 22.71). It is thought 
that IBD develops because these genetically susceptible 
individuals mount an abnormal inflammatory response 
to environmental triggers, such as intestinal bacteria. 
This leads to inflammation of the intestine with release 
of inflammatory mediators, including TNF, IL-12 and 
IL-23, which cause tissue damage (Fig. 22.48). In both 
diseases, the intestinal wall is infiltrated with acute and 
chronic inflammatory cells but there are important dif-
ferences between the conditions in the distribution of 
lesions and in histological features (Fig. 22.49).
Ulcerative colitis
Inflammation invariably involves the rectum (proctitis) 
and spreads proximally in a continuous manner to 
involve the entire colon in some cases (pancolitis). In 
long-standing pancolitis, the bowel can become short-
ened and post-inflammatory ‘pseudopolyps’ develop; 
these are normal or hypertrophied residual mucosa 
within areas of atrophy. The inflammatory process is 
limited to the mucosa and spares the deeper layers of 
the bowel wall (Fig. 22.50). Both acute and chronic 
inflammatory cells infiltrate the lamina propria and the 
crypts (‘cryptitis’). Crypt abscesses are typical. Goblet 
cells lose their mucus and, in long-standing cases, glands 
become distorted. Dysplasia, characterised by heaping 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
898
Genetic
•	 Both CD and UC common in Ashkenazi Jews
•	 10% have first-degree relative/≥1 close relative with IBD
•	 High concordance in identical twins (40–50% CD;  
20–25% UC)
•	 163 susceptibility loci identified at genome-wide levels of 
significance; most confer susceptibility to both CD and UC; 
many are also susceptibility loci for other inflammatory 
conditions (esp. ankylosing spondylosis and psoriasis)
•	 UC and CD both associated with genetic variants at HLA 
locus, and with multiple genes involved with immune 
signalling (esp. IL-23 and IL-10 pathways)
•	 CD associated with genetic defects in innate immunity and 
autophagy (NOD2, ATG16L1 and IRGM genes)
•	 UC associated with genetic defects in barrier function
•	 NOD2 associated with ileal and stricturing disease, and 
hence need for resectional surgery
•	 HLA-DR*103 associated with severe UC
Environmental
•	 UC more common in non-smokers and ex-smokers
•	 CD more common in smokers (relative risk = 3)
•	 CD associated with low-residue, high-refined-sugar diet
•	 Commensal gut microbiota altered (dysbiosis) in CD and UC
•	 Appendicectomy protects against UC
(CD = Crohn’s disease; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; IL = interleukin; 
IBD = inflammatory bowel disease; UC = ulcerative colitis)
22.71  Factors associated with the development 
of inflammatory bowel disease
Fig. 22.48  Pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. 
(1) Bacterial antigens are taken up by specialised M cells, pass between 
leaky epithelial cells or enter the lamina propria through ulcerated mucosa. 
(2) After processing, they are presented to type 1 T-helper cells by 
antigen-presenting cells (APC) in the lamina propria. (3) T-cell activation 
and differentiation results in a Th1 T cell-mediated cytokine response 
(4) with secretion of cytokines, including interferon-gamma (IFN-γ). Further 
amplification of T cells perpetuates the inflammatory process with 
activation of non-immune cells and release of other important cytokines, 
including interleukin (IL)-12, IL-23, IL-1 IL-6 and tumour necrosis factor 
(TNF). These pathways occur in all normal individuals exposed to an 
inflammatory insult and this is self-limiting in healthy subjects. In 
genetically predisposed persons, dysregulation of innate immunity may 
trigger inflammatory bowel disease. 
M cell
APC
Macrophage
Type 1
TH cell
IL-12
IL-23
IFN-γ
IL-1
IL-6
TNF-α
release
4
3
2
1
Fig. 22.49  Common patterns of disease distribution in inflammatory bowel disease. 
Left-sided colitis
30–40%
Perianal disease alone
< 10%
Crohn's
disease
Ileal or ileocolonic
40%
Small intestinal
30–40%
Crohn's colitis
c. 20%
Ulcerative
colitis
Proctitis
40–50%
Extensive colitis
(up to pancolitis)
20%
of cells within crypts, nuclear atypia and increased 
mitotic rate, may herald development of colon cancer.
Crohn’s disease
The sites most commonly involved are, in order of fre-
quency, the terminal ileum and right side of colon, colon 
alone, terminal ileum alone, ileum and jejunum. The 
entire wall of the bowel is oedematous and thickened, 
and there are deep ulcers which often appear as linear 
fissures; thus the mucosa between them is described as 
‘cobblestone’. These may penetrate through the bowel 
wall to initiate abscesses or fistulae involving the bowel, 
bladder, uterus, vagina and skin of the perineum. The 
Inflammatory bowel disease
22
899
Fig. 22.50  Histology of ulcerative colitis. There is surface ulceration 
and inflammation is confined to the mucosa with excess inflammatory cells 
in the lamina propria, loss of goblet cells, and crypt abscesses (arrows). 
(SM = submucosa) 
SM
depending on the site and severity of the disease (see 
Fig. 22.49), as well as the presence of extra-intestinal 
manifestations. The first attack is usually the most severe 
and is followed by relapses and remissions. Emotional 
stress, intercurrent infection, gastroenteritis, antibiotics 
or NSAID therapy may all provoke a relapse. Proctitis 
causes rectal bleeding and mucus discharge, accompa-
nied by tenesmus. Some patients pass frequent, small-
volume fluid stools, while others pass pellety stools due 
to constipation upstream of the inflamed rectum. Con-
stitutional symptoms do not occur. Left-sided and exten-
sive colitis causes bloody diarrhoea with mucus, often 
with abdominal cramps. In severe cases, anorexia, 
malaise, weight loss and abdominal pain occur, and the 
patient is toxic, with fever, tachycardia and signs of peri-
toneal inflammation (Box 22.72).
Crohn’s disease
The major symptoms are abdominal pain, diarrhoea and 
weight loss. Ileal Crohn’s disease (Figs 22.52 and 22.53) 
may cause subacute or even acute intestinal obstruction. 
The pain is often associated with diarrhoea, which is 
usually watery and does not contain blood or mucus. 
Almost all patients lose weight because they avoid food, 
since eating provokes pain. Weight loss may also be due 
to malabsorption, and some patients present with fea-
tures of fat, protein or vitamin deficiencies. Crohn’s 
colitis presents in an identical manner to ulcerative 
colitis, but rectal sparing and the presence of perianal 
disease are features which favour a diagnosis of Crohn’s 
disease. Many patients present with symptoms of both 
small bowel and colonic disease. A few patients present 
with isolated perianal disease, vomiting from jejunal 
strictures or severe oral ulceration.
Physical examination often reveals evidence of 
weight loss, anaemia with glossitis and angular 
mesenteric lymph nodes are enlarged and the mesentery 
is thickened. Crohn’s disease has a patchy distribution 
and the inflammatory process is interrupted by islands 
of normal mucosa. On histological examination, the 
bowel wall is thickened with a chronic inflammatory 
infiltrate throughout all layers (Fig. 22.51).
Clinical features
Ulcerative colitis
The cardinal symptoms are rectal bleeding with passage 
of mucus and bloody diarrhoea. The presentation varies, 
Fig. 22.51  Histology of Crohn’s disease. A  Inflammation is 
‘transmural’; there is fissuring ulceration (arrow), with inflammation 
extending into the submucosa (SM). B  At higher power, a characteristic 
non-caseating granuloma is seen. 
SM
A
B
Mild
Severe
Daily bowel 
frequency
< 4
≥ 6*
Blood in stools
+/−
+++
Stool volume
< 200 g/24 hrs
> 400 g/24 hrs
Pulse
< 90 beats/min
≥ 90 beats/min*
Temperature
Normal
≥ 37.8°C*
Haemoglobin
Normal
< 100 g/L 
(< 10 g/dL)*
Erythrocyte 
sedimentation 
rate
Normal
> 30 mm/hr* (or 
equivalent 
C-reactive protein)
Serum albumin
> 35 g/L 
(> 3.5 g/dL)
< 30 g/L (< 3 g/dL)
Abdominal X-ray
Normal
Dilated bowel and/
or mucosal islands
Sigmoidoscopy
Normal or granular 
mucosa
Blood in lumen
*The Truelove–Witts criteria for acute severe ulcerative colitis are ≥ 6 
bloody stools/24 hrs plus one or more of anaemia, fever, tachycardia and 
high inflammatory markers.
22.72  Assessment of disease severity in 
ulcerative colitis
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
900
Complications
Life-threatening colonic inflammation
This can occur in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s 
colitis. In the most extreme cases, the colon dilates (toxic 
megacolon) and bacterial toxins pass freely across the 
diseased mucosa into the portal and then systemic cir-
culation. This complication arises most commonly 
during the first attack of colitis and is recognised by the 
features described in Box 22.72. An abdominal X-ray 
should be taken daily because, when the transverse 
colon is dilated to more than 6 cm (Fig. 22.54), there is a 
high risk of colonic perforation, although this complica-
tion can also occur in the absence of toxic megacolon.
Haemorrhage
Haemorrhage due to erosion of a major artery is rare but 
can occur in both conditions.
Fistulae
These are specific to Crohn’s disease. Enteroenteric fis-
tulae can cause diarrhoea and malabsorption due to 
blind loop syndrome. Enterovesical fistulation causes 
recurrent urinary infections and pneumaturia. An 
enterovaginal fistula causes a faeculent vaginal dis-
charge. Fistulation from the bowel may also cause peri-
anal or ischiorectal abscesses, fissures and fistulae.
Cancer
The risk of dysplasia and cancer increases with the dura-
tion and extent of uncontrolled colonic inflammation. 
Thus patients who have long-standing, extensive colitis 
are at highest risk. Oral mesalazine therapy reduces the 
Fig. 22.52  Ileal Crohn’s disease. MRI scan showing a thickened 
narrowed loop of ileum with enhancement after MR contrast (arrows), 
consistent with active Crohn’s disease. Normal small bowel can be seen at 
the top right of the image. (C = caecum) 
Fig. 22.53  Barium follow-through showing terminal ileal Crohn’s 
disease. A long stricture is present (arrow A), and more proximally there 
is ulceration with characteristic ‘rose thorn’ ulcers (arrow B). 
A
B
stomatitis. There is abdominal tenderness, most marked 
over the inflamed area. An abdominal mass may be pal-
pable and is due to matted loops of thickened bowel or 
an intra-abdominal abscess. Perianal skin tags, fissures 
or fistulae are found in at least 50% of patients.
Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnosis is summarised in Box 22.73. 
The most important issue is to distinguish the first attack 
of acute colitis from infection. In general, diarrhoea 
lasting longer than 10 days in Western countries is 
unlikely to be the result of infection, whereas a history 
of foreign travel, antibiotic exposure (pseudomembra-
nous colitis) or homosexual contact increases the possi-
bility of infection, which should be excluded by the 
appropriate investigations (see below). The diagnosis of 
Crohn’s disease is usually more straightforward and is 
made on the basis of imaging and clinical presentation, 
but in atypical cases, biopsy or surgical resection is nec-
essary to exclude other diseases (Box 22.74).
Infective
Bacterial
•	 Salmonella
•	 Shigella
•	 Campylobacter jejuni
•	 E. coli O157
•	 Gonococcal proctitis
•	 Pseudomembranous colitis
•	 Chlamydia proctitis
Viral
•	 Herpes simplex proctitis
•	 Cytomegalovirus
Protozoal
•	 Amoebiasis
Non-infective
•	 Ischaemic colitis
•	 Radiation proctitis
•	 Collagenous colitis
•	 Behçet’s disease
•	 NSAIDs
•	 Colonic carcinoma
•	 Diverticulitis
22.73  Conditions which can mimic ulcerative or 
Crohn’s colitis
•	 Other causes of right iliac fossa mass
Caecal carcinoma*
Appendix abscess*
•	 Infection (tuberculosis, Yersinia, actinomycosis)
•	 Mesenteric adenitis
•	 Pelvic inflammatory disease
•	 Lymphoma
22.74  Differential diagnosis of small bowel 
Crohn’s disease
*Common; other causes are rare.
Inflammatory bowel disease
22
901
Fig. 22.54  Plain abdominal X-ray showing a grossly dilated colon 
due to severe ulcerative colitis. There is also marked mucosal oedema 
and ‘thumb-printing’ (arrows). 
elevated in exacerbations and in response to abscess for-
mation. Faecal calproctectin has a high sensitivity for 
detecting gastrointestinal inflammation and may be 
elevated, even when the CRP is normal. It is particularly 
useful in distinguishing inflammatory bowel disease 
from irritable bowel syndrome at diagnosis, and for sub-
sequent monitoring of disease activity.
Bacteriology
At initial presentation, stool microscopy, culture and 
examination for Clostridium difficile toxin or for ova and 
cysts, blood cultures and serological tests should be per-
formed. These investigations may need to be repeated 
in established disease to exclude superimposed enteric 
infection in patients who present with exacerbations of 
IBD. During acute flares necessitating hospital admis-
sion, three separate stool samples should be sent for 
bacteriology to maximise sensitivity.
Endoscopy
Patients who present with diarrhoea plus raised inflam-
matory markers or alarm features, such as weight loss, 
rectal bleeding and anaemia, should undergo ileocolon-
oscopy. Flexible sigmoidoscopy is occasionally per-
formed to make a diagnosis, especially during acute 
severe presentations when ileocolonoscopy may confer 
an unacceptable risk; ileocolonoscopy should still be 
performed at a later date, however, in order to evaluate 
disease extent. In ulcerative colitis, there is loss of vas-
cular pattern, granularity, friability and contact bleed-
ing, with or without ulceration (Fig. 22.56). In Crohn’s 
disease, patchy inflammation, with discrete, deep ulcers, 
strictures and perianal disease (fissures, fistulae and skin 
tags), is typically observed, often with rectal sparing. 
In established disease, colonoscopy may show active 
inflammation with pseudopolyps or a complicating car-
cinoma. Biopsies should be taken from each anatomical 
segment (terminal ileum, right colon, transverse colon, 
left colon and rectum) to confirm the diagnosis and 
define disease extent, and also to seek dysplasia in 
patients with long-standing colitis. In Crohn’s disease, 
wireless capsule endoscopy is useful in the identification 
of small bowel inflammation but should be avoided in 
the presence of strictures. Enteroscopy may be required 
to make a histological diagnosis of small bowel Crohn’s 
disease, when the inflamed segment is out of reach of 
standard endoscopes. All children and most adults with 
Crohn’s disease should have upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy and biopsy to complete their staging. Not 
only is upper gastrointestinal Crohn’s disease relatively 
common in this group, but it may help to make a defini-
tive diagnosis in patients who otherwise appear to have 
non-specific colonic inflammation.
Radiology
Barium enema is a less sensitive investigation than 
colonoscopy in patients with colitis and, where colon­
oscopy is incomplete, a CT colonogram is preferred. 
Small bowel imaging is essential to complete staging of 
Crohn’s disease. Traditional contrast imaging by barium 
follow-through demonstrates affected areas of the bowel 
as narrowed and ulcerated, often with multiple stric-
tures (see Fig. 22.53). This has now largely been replaced 
by MRI enterography, which does not involve exposure 
to radiation and is a sensitive way of detecting extra-
intestinal manifestations and of assessing pelvic and 
risk of dysplasia and neoplasia in ulcerative colitis. Aza-
thioprine also seems to reduce the risk of colorectal 
cancer in ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s colitis. This pro-
tective effect probably extends to any medical treatment 
that results in sustained healing of the colonic mucosa. 
The cumulative risk for dysplasia in ulcerative colitis 
may be as high as 20% after 30 years but is probably 
lower for Crohn’s colitis. The risk is particularly high in 
patients who have concomitant primary sclerosing 
cholangitis for unknown reasons. Tumours develop in 
areas of dysplasia and may be multiple. Patients with 
long-standing colitis are therefore entered into surveil-
lance programmes beginning 10 years after diagnosis. 
Targeted biopsies of areas that show abnormalities on 
staining with indigo carmine or methylene blue increase 
the chance of detecting dysplasia and this technique 
(termed pancolonic chromo-endoscopy) has replaced 
colonoscopy with random biopsies taken every 10 cm in 
screening for malignancy. The procedure allows patients 
to be stratified into high-, medium- or low-risk groups 
to determine the interval between surveillance proce-
dures. If high-grade dysplasia is found, panproctocolec-
tomy is usually recommended because of the high risk 
of colon cancer.
Extra-intestinal complications
Extra-intestinal complications are common in IBD and 
may dominate the clinical picture. Some of these occur 
during relapse of intestinal disease; others appear unre-
lated to intestinal disease activity (Fig. 22.55).
Investigations
Investigations are necessary to confirm the diagnosis, 
define disease distribution and activity, and identify 
complications. Full blood count may show anaemia 
resulting from bleeding or malabsorption of iron, folic 
acid or vitamin B12. Serum albumin concentration falls 
as a consequence of protein-losing enteropathy, inflam-
matory disease or poor nutrition. The ESR and CRP are 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
902
a mechanical solution, such as surgical resection, stric-
turoplasty or endoscopic balloon dilatation). A plain 
abdominal X-ray is essential in the management of 
patients who present with severe active disease. Dilata-
tion of the colon (see Fig. 22.54), mucosal oedema 
(thumb-printing) or evidence of perforation may be 
found. In small bowel Crohn’s disease, there may be 
evidence of intestinal obstruction or displacement of 
bowel loops by a mass. Ultrasound is a very powerful 
tool to detect small bowel inflammation and stricture 
formation, but it is rather operator-dependent. The role 
of CT is limited to screening for complications, such as 
perforation or abscess formation, in the acutely unwell.
Management
Drugs that are used in the treatment of IBD are listed in 
Box 22.75. Although medical therapy plays an important 
role, optimal management depends on establishing a 
multidisciplinary team-based approach involving phy-
sicians, surgeons, radiologists, nurse specialists and 
dietitians. Both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease are 
life-long conditions and have important psychosocial 
implications; specialist nurses, counsellors and patient 
support groups have key roles in education, reassurance 
and coping. The key aims of medical therapy are to:
•	 treat acute attacks (induce remission)
•	 prevent relapses (maintain remission)
perineal involvement. These studies use an orally 
administered small bowel-distending agent and intra-
venous contrast to provide transmural imaging that can 
usefully distinguish between predominantly inflamma-
tory strictures (that should respond to anti-inflammatory 
medical strategies) and fibrotic strictures (that require 
Fig. 22.55  Systemic complications of inflammatory bowel disease. (See also Chs 19 and 20.) 
Unrelated to inflammatory
bowel disease activity
Autoimmune hepatitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
and cholangiocarcinoma
(ulcerative colitis)
Gallstones
Amyloidosis and oxalate calculi
Sacroiliitis/ankylosing spondylitis
(Crohn’s with HLA-B27)
Metabolic bone disease
Occur during the active phase of
inflammatory bowel disease
Mouth ulcers
Conjunctivitis
Iritis
Episcleritis
Mesenteric or portal vein thrombosis
Fatty liver
Liver abscess/portal pyaemia
Venous thrombosis
Large-joint arthritis
Erythema nodosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Fig. 22.56  Sigmoidoscopic view of moderately active ulcerative 
colitis. Mucosa is erythematous and friable with contact bleeding. 
Submucosal blood vessels are no longer visible. 
Inflammatory bowel disease
22
903
Class
Mechanism of action
Notes
Aminosalicylates (mesalazine 
(Asacol, Salofalk, Pentasa, 
Mezavant), olsalazine, 
sulfasalazine, balsalazide)
Modulate cytokine release from 
mucosa
Delivered to colon by one of three 
mechanisms:
1.	pH-dependent (Asacol, Salofalk)
2.	time-dependent (Pentasa)
3.	bacterial breakdown by colonic 
bacteria from a carrier molecule 
(sulfasalazine, balsalazide)
No proven value in CD
Available as oral or topical (enema/suppository)
Sulfasalazine causes side-effects in 10–45%: headache, 
nausea, diarrhoea, blood dyscrasias
Other aminosalicylates better tolerated; diarrhoea, headache 
in 2–5%
Rarely, renal impairment (check urea and electrolytes 
6-monthly)
Corticosteroids (prednisolone, 
hydrocortisone, budesonide)
Anti-inflammatory
Budesonide is a potent corticosteroid 
efficiently cleared from circulation by 
liver, thereby minimising adrenocortical 
suppression and steroid side-effects
Topical, oral or IV, according to disease severity
Budesonide considered for active ileitis and ileocolitis
High vigilance for complications
Never used for maintenance therapy
Calcium/vitamin D supplements
Thiopurines (azathioprine, 
mercaptopurine)
Immunomodulation by inducing T-cell 
apoptosis
Azathioprine is metabolised in liver to 
mercaptopurine, then by thiopurine 
methyltransferase (TPMT) to 
thioguanine nucleotides
Effective after 12 wks of starting therapy
Complications leading to drug withdrawal in ~20%.
Flu-like syndrome with myalgia, nausea and vomiting
Leucopenia in 3%, particularly in inherited TPMT deficiency 
(TPMT levels checked prior to therapy)
Hepatotoxicity; pancreatitis
60% of those intolerant of azathioprine will tolerate 
mercaptopurine
Increase in lymphoma (approximately 2–3-fold) and 
non-melanoma skin cancer (life-long sun protection advised)
Metabolite levels can be measured to tailor therapy
Methotrexate
Anti-inflammatory
Intolerance in 10–18%. Maximal efficacy when given by SC 
injection once weekly. Nausea, stomatitis, diarrhoea, 
hepatotoxicity and pneumonitis. Co-prescription of folic acid 
and antiemetics. Teratogenic; robust contraception required 
for females of child-bearing age
Ciclosporin
Inhibits T-cell activation
Rescue therapy to prevent surgery in UC responding poorly 
to corticosteroids. No value in CD
Major side-effects in 0–17%: nephrotoxicity, infections, 
neurotoxicity (including fits)
Minor complications in up to 50%: tremor, paraesthesiae, 
abnormal liver function tests, hirsutism
Anti-TNF antibodies 
(infliximab and adalimumab)
Suppress inflammation and induce 
apoptosis of inflammatory cells
Moderately to severely active CD, including fistulating 
disease
Moderate–severe UC and acute severe UC as rescue therapy
Acute (anaphylactic) and delayed (serum sickness) infusion 
reactions after multiple infusions; anti-drug antibody titres 
and drug levels can be measured
Contraindicated in the presence of infections; reactivation of 
latent tuberculosis
Increased risk of infections and possibly of malignancy
Antibiotics
Antibacterial
Useful in perianal CD and pouchitis
Major concern is peripheral neuropathy with long-term 
metronidazole
Antidiarrhoeal agents 
(loperamide, co-phenoxylate)
Reduce gut motility and small bowel 
secretion
Loperamide improves anal function
Avoided in acute flare-ups of disease
May precipitate colonic dilatation
22.75  Drugs used in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease
•	 prevent bowel damage
•	 detect dysplasia and prevent carcinoma
•	 select appropriate patients for surgery.
Ulcerative colitis
Active proctitis.  Most patients with ulcerative proctitis 
respond to a 1 g mesalazine suppository but some will 
additionally require oral 5-aminosalicylate (5-ASA) 
therapy. Topical corticosteroids are less effective and 
are reserved for patients who are intolerant of topical 
mesalazine. Patients with resistant disease may 
require treatment with systemic corticosteroids and 
immunosuppressants.
Active left-sided or extensive ulcerative colitis.  In mild 
to moderately active cases, the combination of a once-
daily oral and a topical 5-ASA preparation (‘top and tail 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
904
•	 Admit to hospital for intensive therapy and monitoring
•	 Intravenous fluids and correction of electrolyte imbalance
•	 Transfusion if haemoglobin < 100 g/L (< 10 g/dL)
•	 IV methylprednisolone (60 mg daily) or hydrocortisone 
(400 mg daily)
•	 Antibiotics until enteric infection excluded
•	 Nutritional support
•	 Subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin for prophylaxis 
of venous thromboembolism
•	 Avoidance of opiates and antidiarrhoeal agents
•	 Consider infliximab (5 mg/kg) or ciclosporin (2 mg/kg) in 
stable patients not responding to 3–5 days of corticosteroids
22.76  Medical management of fulminant 
ulcerative colitis
•	 Assess symptoms, including extra-intestinal manifestations
•	 Examine for abdominal mass or perianal disease
•	 Perform full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function 
tests, albumin, CRP
•	 Check haematinics (B12, folate, iron studies) at least annually
•	 Check faecal calprotectin (to monitor each disease flare/
change in therapy and assess response)
•	 Stool cultures (at each flare to exclude infection)
•	 Assess mucosal healing: surrogate markers (CRP/
calprotectin), ileocolonoscopy and/or small bowel MRI
•	 Enrol patient in a dedicated IBD clinic (can be nurse-led or 
phone clinic for stable, uncomplicated patients)
•	 Arrange IBD multidisciplinary meeting for acutely ill or 
complex patients
•	 Check vaccinations are up to date; ensure surveillance 
colonoscopy scheduled where appropriate
22.77  Monitoring of inflammatory bowel disease
approach’) is usually effective. The topical preparation 
(1 g foam or liquid enema) is typically withdrawn after 
1 month. The oral 5-ASA is continued long-term to 
prevent relapse and minimise the risk of dysplasia. In 
patients who do not respond to this approach within 
2–4 weeks, oral prednisolone (40 mg daily, tapered by 
5 mg/week over an 8-week total course) is indicated. 
Corticosteroids should never be used for maintenance 
therapy. At the first signs of corticosteroid resistance 
(lack of efficacy) or in patients who require high cortico­
steroid doses to maintain control, immunosuppressive 
therapy with a thiopurine should be introduced.
Severe ulcerative colitis.  Patients who fail to respond to 
maximal oral therapy and those who present with acute 
severe colitis (meeting the Truelove–Witts criteria; see 
Box 22.72) are best managed in hospital and should be 
monitored jointly by a physician and surgeon:
•	 clinically: for the presence of abdominal pain, 
temperature, pulse rate, stool blood and frequency
•	 by laboratory testing: haemoglobin, white cell 
count, albumin, electrolytes, ESR and CRP
•	 radiologically: for colonic dilatation on plain 
abdominal X-rays.
All patients should be given supportive treatment 
with intravenous fluids to correct dehydration, and 
enteral nutritional support should be provided for mal-
nourished patients (Box 22.76). Intravenous corticoster-
oids (methylprednisolone 60 mg or hydrocortisone 
400 mg/day) should be given by intravenous infusion 
or bolus injection. Topical and oral aminosalicylates 
have no role to play in the acute severe attack. Response 
to therapy is judged over the first 3 days. Patients who 
do not respond promptly to corticosteroids should be 
considered for medical rescue therapy with ciclosporin 
(intravenous infusion or oral) or infliximab (5 mg/kg), 
which, in approximately 60% of cases, can avoid the 
need for urgent colectomy.
Patients who develop colonic dilatation (> 6 cm), 
those whose clinical and laboratory measurements dete-
riorate and those who do not respond after 7–10 days’ 
maximal medical treatment usually require urgent 
colectomy. Subtotal colectomy can also be performed 
laparoscopically, given sufficient local expertise.
Maintenance 
of 
remission.  Life-long 
maintenance 
therapy is recommended for all patients with left-sided 
or extensive disease but is not necessary in those with 
proctitis (although 20% of these patients will develop 
proximal ‘extension’ over the lifetime of their disease). 
Once-daily oral 5-aminosalicylates are the preferred 
first-line agents. Sulfasalazine has a higher incidence of 
side-effects but is equally effective and can be consid-
ered in patients with coexistent arthropathy. Patients 
who frequently relapse despite aminosalicylate drugs 
should be treated with thiopurines.
Crohn’s disease
Principles of treatment.  Crohn’s disease is a progres-
sive condition which may result in stricture or fistula 
formation if suboptimally treated. It is therefore impor-
tant to agree long-term treatment goals with the patient; 
these are to induce remission and then maintain 
corticosteroid-free remission with a normal quality of 
life. Treatment should focus on monitoring the patient 
carefully for evidence of disease activity and complica-
tions (Box 22.77), and ensuring that mucosal healing is 
achieved.
Induction of remission.  Corticosteroids remain the 
mainstay of treatment for active Crohn’s disease. The 
drug of first choice in patents with ileal disease is budes-
onide, since it undergoes 90% first-pass metabolism in 
the liver and has very little systemic toxicity. A typical 
regimen is 9 mg once daily for 6 weeks, with a gradual 
reduction in dose over the subsequent 2 weeks when 
therapy is stopped. If there is no response to budesonide 
within 2 weeks, the patient should be switched to pred-
nisolone, which has greater potency. This is typically 
given in a dose of 40 mg daily, reducing by 5 mg/week 
over 8 weeks, at which point treatment is stopped. Oral 
prednisolone in the above dose regimen is the treatment 
of choice for inducing remission in colonic Crohn’s 
disease. Calcium and vitamin D supplements should be 
co-prescribed in patients who are on corticosteroids, to 
try to compensate for their inhibitory effect on intestinal 
calcium absorption.
As an alternative to corticosteroid therapy, enteral 
nutrition with either an elemental (constituent amino 
acids) or polymeric (liquid protein) diet may induce 
remission. Both types of diet are equally effective but the 
polymeric one is more palatable when taken by mouth. 
It is particularly effective in children, in whom equal 
efficacy to corticosteroids has been demonstrated, and 
in extensive ileal disease in adults. As well as resting the 
gut and providing excellent nutritional support, it also 
Inflammatory bowel disease
22
905
has a direct anti-inflammatory effect. It is an effective 
bridge to urgent staging investigations at first presenta-
tion and can be given by mouth or by nasogastric tube. 
With sufficient explanation, encouragement and motiva-
tion, most patients will tolerate it well.
Some patients with severe colonic disease require 
admission to hospital for intravenous corticosteroids. In 
severe ileal or panenteric disease, induction therapy 
with an anti-TNF agent is appropriate, provided that 
acute perforating complications, such as abscess, have 
not occurred. Both infliximab and adalimumab are 
licensed for use in the UK. Randomised trials have dem-
onstrated that combination therapy with an anti-TNF 
antibody and a thiopurine is the most effective strategy 
for inducing and maintaining remission in luminal 
Crohn’s patients. This strategy is more effective than 
anti-TNF monotherapy, which, in turn, is more effective 
than thiopurine monotherapy. Following induction of 
remission, a substantial proportion of patients (20–30%) 
remain well without the requirement for maintenance 
therapy. Patients with evidence of persistently active 
disease require further treatment (see below).
Maintenance therapy.  Immunosuppressive treatment 
with thiopurines (azathioprine and mercaptopurine) 
forms the core of maintenance therapy, but methotrexate 
is also effective and can be given once weekly, either 
orally or by subcutaneous injection. Women of child-
bearing potential who are prescribed methotrexate must 
use a robust contraceptive method, since it is teratogenic. 
Combination therapy with an immunosuppressant and 
an anti-TNF antibody is the most effective strategy but 
costs are high and there is an increased risk of serious 
adverse effects. In the UK, the use of anti-TNF therapy 
is limited to specific patient subgroups with severe 
disease (Boxes 22.78 and 22.79). Careful monitoring of 
disease activity (see Box 22.77) is the key to maintaining 
sustained remission and preventing the accumulation of 
bowel damage in Crohn’s disease. Cigarette smokers 
should be strongly counselled to stop smoking at every 
possible opportunity. Those that do not manage to stop 
smoking fare much worse, with increased rates of 
relapse and surgical intervention.
Fistulae and perianal disease.  Fistulae may develop in 
relation to active Crohn’s disease and are often associ-
ated with sepsis. The first step is to define the site by 
imaging (usually MRI of the pelvis). Surgical explora-
tion by an examination under anaesthetic is usually then 
required, to delineate the anatomy and drain abscesses. 
Seton sutures can be inserted through fistula tracts 
to ensure adequate drainage and to prevent future 
sepsis. Corticosteroids are ineffective. For simple peri-
anal disease, metronidazole and/or ciprofloxacin are 
first-line therapies. Thiopurines can be used in chronic 
disease but do not usually result in fistula healing. 
Infliximab and adalimumab can heal fistulae and peri-
anal disease in many patients and are indicated when 
the measures described above have been ineffective.
Surgical treatment
Ulcerative colitis
Up to 60% of patients with extensive ulcerative colitis 
eventually require surgery. The indications are listed in 
Box 22.80. Impaired quality of life, with impact upon 
occupation and on social and family life, is the most 
important of these. Surgery involves removal of the 
entire colon and rectum, and cures the patient. One-
third of those with pancolitis undergo colectomy within 
5 years of diagnosis. Before surgery, patients must be 
counselled by doctors, stoma nurses and patients who 
have undergone similar surgery. The choice of proce-
dure is either panproctocolectomy with ileostomy, or 
proctocolectomy with ileal–anal pouch anastomosis. The 
•	 Infliximab (5 mg/kg IV infusion) is given as 3 loading doses 
(at 0, 2 and 6 wks), with 8-weekly maintenance thereafter
•	 Adalimumab is given as SC injections, which patients can be 
trained to give themselves. Loading dose is 160 mg, followed 
by 80 mg 2 wks later and 40 mg every second wk 
thereafter; some patients require dose escalation to 40 mg 
once weekly
•	 Concomitant immunosuppression with a thiopurine or 
methotrexate may be more efficacious than monotherapy but 
has more side-effects
•	 Anti-TNF therapy is contraindicated in the presence of active 
infection and latent tuberculosis without appropriate 
prophylaxis; it carries an increased risk of opportunistic 
infections and possible increased risk of malignancy; and, 
rarely, multiple sclerosis may be unmasked in susceptible 
individuals. Counselling about the risk–benefit for each 
patient is important
•	 Prior to therapy, latent tuberculosis must be excluded
•	 Certolizumab is effective for luminal Crohn’s disease but is 
not licensed in Europe
•	 Etanercept is not effective in Crohn’s disease
22.78  How to give anti-TNF therapy in 
inflammatory bowel disease
‘Infliximab or adalimumab is recommended for patients with 
severely active Crohn’s disease not responding to conventional 
immunosuppressive therapy, including corticosteroids, or where 
such therapies are contraindicated. Infliximab is also licensed for 
use in children and for fistulating Crohn’s disease, and is an 
effective rescue therapy for patients with acute severe ulcerative 
colitis not responding to intravenous corticosteroids. Infliximab 
and adalimumab are also both effective for moderately active 
ulcerative colitis.’
•	 Crohn’s disease – management in adults, children and young people. NICE 
guideline, Oct 2012.
For further information: 
 http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG152
22.79  Biological therapy in the management of 
inflammatory bowel disease
Impaired quality of life
•	 Loss of occupation or 
education
•	 Disruption of family life
Failure of medical therapy
•	 Dependence on oral 
corticosteroids
•	 Complications of drug 
therapy
Fulminant colitis
Disease complications unresponsive to medical therapy
•	 Arthritis
•	 Pyoderma gangrenosum
Colon cancer or severe dysplasia
22.80  Indications for surgery in ulcerative colitis
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
906
sister surgical text to this book, Principles and Practice of 
Surgery, should be consulted for further details.
Crohn’s disease
The indications for surgery are similar to those for ulcer-
ative colitis. Operations are often necessary to deal with 
fistulae, abscesses and perianal disease, and may also be 
required to relieve small or large bowel obstruction. In 
contrast to ulcerative colitis, surgery is not curative and 
disease recurrence is the rule. The only method that 
has consistently been shown to reduce post-operative 
recurrence is smoking cessation. Antibiotics are effective 
in the short term only. It is common to undertake colon-
oscopy 6 months after surgery to inspect and biopsy the 
anastomosis and neo-terminal ileum. Patients with 
endoscopic recurrence are then prescribed thiopurines.
Surgery should be as conservative as possible in 
order to minimise loss of viable intestine and to avoid 
creation of a short bowel syndrome. Obstructing or fis-
tulating small bowel disease may require resection of 
affected tissue. Patients who have localised segments of 
Crohn’s colitis may be managed by segmental resection 
and/or multiple stricturoplasties, in which the stricture 
is not resected but instead incised in its longitudinal axis 
and sutured transversely. Others who have extensive 
colitis require total colectomy but ileal–anal pouch for-
mation should be avoided because of the high risk of 
recurrence within the pouch and subsequent fistulae, 
abscess formation and pouch failure.
Historical datasets show that around 80% of Crohn’s 
patients undergo surgery at some stage, and 70% of 
these require more than one operation during their life-
time. Clinical recurrence following resectional surgery is 
present in 50% of all cases at 10 years. Emerging data 
demonstrate that aggressive medical therapy, coupled 
with intense monitoring, probably reduces the require-
ment for surgery substantially.
IBD in special circumstances
Childhood
Chronic ill health in childhood or adolescent IBD may 
result in growth failure, metabolic bone disease and 
delayed puberty. Loss of schooling and social contact, as 
well as frequent hospitalisation, can have important psy-
chosocial consequences. Treatment is similar to that 
described for adults and may require corticosteroids, 
immunosuppressive drugs, biological agents and 
surgery. Monitoring of height, weight and sexual devel-
opment is crucial. Children with IBD should be managed 
by specialised paediatric gastroenterologists and transi-
tioned to adult care in dedicated clinics (Box 22.81).
Pregnancy
A women’s ability to become pregnant is adversely 
affected by active IBD. Pre-conceptual counselling 
should focus on optimising disease control. During 
pregnancy, the rule of thirds applies – roughly one-third 
of women improve, one-third get worse and one third 
remain stable with active disease. In the post-partum 
period, these changes sometimes reverse spontaneously. 
Drug therapy, including aminosalicylates, corticoster-
oids and azathioprine, can be safely continued through-
out pregnancy but methotrexate must be avoided, both 
during pregnancy and if the patient is trying to conceive 
(Box 22.82). Anti-TNF agents are transmitted through 
•	 Delayed growth and pubertal development: chronic active 
inflammation, malabsorption, malnutrition and long-term 
corticosteroids contribute to short stature and delayed 
development, with physical and psychological  
consequences.
•	 Metabolic bone disease: more common with chronic 
disease beginning in childhood, resulting from chronic 
inflammation, dietary deficiency and malabsorption of 
calcium and vitamin D.
•	 Drug side-effects and compliance issues: young 
people are more likely to require azathioprine or  
biological therapy than adults. Poor compliance with  
therapy is more common than with adults, as younger 
patients may feel well, lack self-motivation to adhere  
and believe that drugs are ineffective or cause  
side-effects.
•	 Loss of time from education: physical illness, surgery, 
fatigue in chronic IBD, privacy and dignity issues, and social 
isolation may all contribute.
•	 Emotional difficulties: may result from difficulties 
coping with illness, problems forming interpersonal 
relationships, and issues relating to body image or  
sexual function.
22.81  Inflammatory bowel disease in 
adolescence
Pre-conception
•	 Outcomes are best when pregnancy is carefully planned and 
disease is in remission
•	 Methotrexate must be stopped; other IBD drugs should be 
continued until discussed with a specialist
•	 Aminosalicylates and azathioprine are safe in pregnancy
•	 Corticosteroids are probably safe
•	 Safety of biological therapy in pregnancy is unclear; use only 
when absolutely necessary
•	 Daily folic acid supplements are recommended
Pregnancy
•	 Two-thirds of patients in remission will remain so in 
pregnancy
•	 Active disease is likely to remain active
•	 Severe active disease carries an increased risk of premature 
delivery and low birth weight
•	 Gentle flexible sigmoidoscopy is safe after the first trimester
•	 X-rays should be avoided
•	 Colonoscopy can be performed safely if the potential benefits 
outweigh the risks
Labour
•	 Needs careful discussion between patient, gastroenterologist 
and obstetrician
•	 Normal labour and vaginal delivery are possible for  
most
•	 Caesarean section may be preferred for patients  
with perianal Crohn’s or an ileo-anal pouch to reduce  
risks of pelvic floor damage, fistulation and late  
incontinence
Breastfeeding
•	 Safe and does not exacerbate IBD
•	 Data on the risk to babies from drugs excreted in breast milk 
are limited; most are probably safe
•	 Patients should discuss breastfeeding and drug therapy 
carefully with their doctor
22.82  Pregnancy and inflammatory bowel 
disease
Irritable bowel syndrome
22
907
Physiological factors
There is some evidence that IBS may be a serotoninergic 
(5-HT) disorder, as evidenced by relatively excessive 
release of 5-HT in diarrhoea-predominant IBS (D-IBS) 
and relative deficiency with constipation-predominant 
IBS (C-IBS). Accordingly, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are 
effective in D-IBS, while 5-HT4 agonists improve bowel 
function in C-IBS. There is some evidence that IBS may 
represent a state of low-grade gut inflammation or 
immune activation, not detectable by tests, with raised 
numbers of mucosal mast cells, which sensitise enteric 
neurons by releasing histamine and tryptase. Some 
patients respond positively to mast cell stabilisers, such 
as ketotifen, which supports a pathogenic role of mast 
cells in at least some patients. Immune activation may 
be associated with altered CNS processing of visceral 
pain signals. This is more common in women and in 
D-IBS, and may be triggered by a prior episode of gas-
troenteritis with Salmonella or Campylobacter species.
Luminal factors
Both quantitative and qualitative alterations in intestinal 
bacterial contents (the gut microbiota) have been 
reported. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) 
may be present in some patients and lead to symptoms. 
This ‘gut dysbiosis’ may explain the response to probiot-
ics or the non-absorbable antibiotic rifaximin that has 
been reported in trials.
Dietary factors are also important. Some patients 
have chemical food intolerances (not allergy) to poorly 
absorbed, short-chain carbohydrates (lactose, fructose 
and sorbitol, among others), collectively known as 
FODMAPs (fermentable oligo-, di- and monosaccha-
rides, and polyols). Their fermentation in the colon leads 
to bloating, pain, wind and altered bowel habit. Non-
coeliac gluten sensitivity (negative coeliac serology and 
normal duodenal biopsies) seems to be present in some 
IBS patients, while others may be intolerant of chemicals 
such as salicylates or benzoates, found in certain foods.
Clinical features
The most common presentation is that of recurrent 
abdominal discomfort (Box 22.83). This is usually colicky 
or cramping in nature, felt in the lower abdomen and 
relieved by defecation. Abdominal bloating worsens 
throughout the day; the cause is unknown but it is not 
due to excessive intestinal gas. The bowel habit is vari-
able. Most patients alternate between episodes of diar-
rhoea and constipation, but it is useful to classify patients 
as having predominantly constipation or predominantly 
diarrhoea. Those with constipation tend to pass infre-
quent pellety stools, usually in association with abdomi-
nal pain or proctalgia. Those with diarrhoea have 
frequent defecation but produce low-volume stools and 
rarely have nocturnal symptoms. Passage of mucus is 
the placenta (but not breast milk) and are usually omitted 
during the last trimester.
Metabolic bone disease
Patients with IBD are prone to developing osteoporosis 
due to effects of chronic inflammation, corticosteroids, 
weight loss, malnutrition and malabsorption. Osteo­
malacia can also occur in Crohn’s disease that is compli-
cated by malabsorption, but is less common than 
osteoporosis. The risk of osteoporosis increases with age 
and with the dose and duration of corticosteroid therapy.
Microscopic colitis
Microscopic colitis, which comprises two related condi-
tions, lymphocytic colitis and collagenous colitis, has no 
known cause. The presentation is with watery diar-
rhoea. The colonoscopic appearances are normal but 
histological examination of biopsies shows a range of 
abnormalities. It is therefore recommended that biopsies 
of the right and left colon plus terminal ileum should be 
undertaken in all patients undergoing colonoscopy for 
diarrhoea. Collagenous colitis is characterised by the 
presence of a submucosal band of collagen, often with a 
chronic inflammatory infiltrate. The disease is more 
common in women and may be associated with rheu-
matoid arthritis, diabetes, coeliac disease and some drug 
therapies, such as NSAIDs or PPIs. Treatment with 
budesonide is usually effective but the condition will 
recur in some patients on discontinuation of therapy.
IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is characterised by recur-
rent abdominal pain in association with abnormal def-
ecation in the absence of a structural abnormality of the 
gut. About 10–15% of the population are affected at some 
time but only 10% of these consult their doctors because 
of symptoms. Nevertheless, IBS is the most common 
cause of gastrointestinal referral and accounts for fre-
quent absenteeism from work and impaired quality of 
life. Young women are affected 2–3 times more often 
than men. Coexisting conditions, such as non-ulcer dys-
pepsia, chronic fatigue syndrome, dysmenorrhoea and 
fibromyalgia, are common. Between 5 and 10% of 
patients have a history of physical or sexual abuse.
Pathophysiology
The cause of IBS is incompletely understood but bio­
psychosocial factors are thought to play an important 
role, along with luminal factors, such as diet and the gut 
microbiota, as discussed below.
Behavioural and psychosocial factors
Most patients seen in general practice do not have psy-
chological problems but about 50% of patients referred 
to hospital have a psychiatric illness, such as anxiety, 
depression, somatisation and neurosis. Panic attacks are 
also common. Acute psychological stress and overt psy-
chiatric disease are known to alter visceral perception 
and gastrointestinal motility. There is an increased prev-
alence of abnormal illness behaviour, with frequent con-
sultations for minor symptoms and reduced coping 
ability (p. 236). These factors contribute to but do not 
cause IBS.
Recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort at least 3 days/mth in 
the last 3 months, associated with two or more of the following:
•	 Improvement with defecation
•	 Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool
•	 Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool
22.83  Rome III criteria for diagnosis of 
irritable bowel syndrome
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
908
Management
The most important steps are to make a positive diag-
nosis and reassure the patient. Many patients are con-
cerned that they have developed cancer, and a cycle of 
anxiety leading to colonic symptoms, which further 
heighten anxiety, can be broken by explanation that 
common but rectal bleeding does not occur. Patients do 
not lose weight and are constitutionally well. Physical 
examination is generally unremarkable, with the excep-
tion of variable tenderness to palpation.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is clinical in nature and can be made con-
fidently in most patients using the Rome criteria com-
bined with the absence of alarm symptoms, without 
resorting to complicated tests (Box 22.84). Full blood 
count and faecal calprotectin, with or without sig-
moidoscopy, are usually done and are normal in IBS. 
Colonoscopy should be undertaken in older patients 
(over 40 years of age) to exclude colorectal cancer. Endo-
scopic examination is also required in patients who 
report rectal bleeding to exclude colon cancer and IBD. 
Those who present atypically require investigations 
to exclude other gastrointestinal diseases. Diarrhoea-
predominant patients justify investigations to exclude 
coeliac disease (p. 880), microscopic colitis (p. 907), 
lactose intolerance (p. 887), bile acid malabsorption 
(p. 851), thyrotoxicosis (p. 740) and, in developing coun-
tries, parasitic infection.
Features supporting a diagnosis of IBS
•	 Symptoms > 6 mths
•	 Frequent consultations for 
non-gastrointestinal 
problems
•	 Previous medically 
unexplained symptoms
•	 Stress worsens symptoms
Alarm features
•	 Age > 50 yrs; male 
gender
•	 Weight loss
•	 Nocturnal symptoms
•	 Family history of colon 
cancer
•	 Anaemia
•	 Rectal bleeding
22.84  Supporting diagnostic features and 
alarm features in IBS
Fig. 22.57  Management of irritable bowel syndrome. (FODMAP = fermentable oligo-, di- and monosaccharides, and polyols) 
Irritable bowel syndrome confirmed
Constipation
predominant
Reassurance
Pain and bloating
Diarrhoea predominant
High-roughage
diet
Prucalopride
or linaclotide
Avoid legumes and excessive dietary 
fibre. Consider trials of low-FODMAP
or gluten-free diet
• Duloxetine 30–60 mg at night
• Relaxation therapy
• Biofeedback
• Hypnotherapy
Ispaghula or psyllium
Lactulose and/or macrogol
Antidiarrhoeal drugs
   • Loperamide 2–8 mg daily
   • Codeine phosphate 30–90 mg daily
   • Colestyramine 1 sachet daily
Amitriptyline or imipramine 10–25 mg
at night
Rifaximin 600 mg daily for 2 wks
Symptoms persist
Symptoms resolve
Symptoms persist
Symptoms
persist
Symptoms
persist
Symptoms
persist
Symptoms
persist
Symptoms
persist
Spasmolytic drugs
Probiotics
Rifaximin 600 mg daily for 2 wks
Amitriptyline or imipramine
10–25 mg at night
• Mebeverine
• Peppermint oil
• Hyoscine
     Dietary changes
• Low-FODMAP diet
• Exclude wheat
• Exclude dairy
• Gluten-free diet
Ischaemic gut injury
22
909
symptoms are not due to a serious underlying disease 
but instead are the result of behavioural, psychosocial, 
physiological and luminal factors described above. In 
patients who fail to respond to reassurance, treatment is 
traditionally tailored to the predominant symptoms 
(Fig. 22.57). Up to 20% may benefit from a wheat-free 
diet, some may respond to lactose exclusion, and excess 
intake of caffeine or artificial sweeteners, such as sorbi-
tol, should be addressed. A more restrictive, ‘low-
FODMAP’ diet, supervised by a dietitian, with gradual 
re-introduction of different food groups, may help some 
patients, as may a trial of a gluten-free diet. Probiotics, 
in capsule form, can be effective if taken for several 
months, although the optimum combination of bacterial 
strains and dose have yet to be clarified.
Patients with intractable symptoms sometimes 
benefit from several months of therapy with a tricyclic 
antidepressant, such as amitriptyline or imipramine 
(10–25 mg orally at night). Side-effects include dry 
mouth and drowsiness but these are usually mild and 
the drug is generally well tolerated, although patients 
with features of somatisation tolerate the drug poorly 
and lower doses should be used. It may act by reducing 
visceral sensation and by altering gastrointestinal 
motility. Anxiety and affective disorders may also 
require specific treatment (pp. 242 and 243). The 5-HT4 
agonist prucalopride, the guanylate cyclase-C receptor 
agonist linaclotide, and chloride channel activators, 
such as lubiprostone, can be effective in constipation-
predominant IBS.
Trials of anti-inflammatory agents, such as ketotifen 
or mesalazine, and the antibiotic rifaximin may be con-
sidered in some patients with difficult symptoms but are 
best prescribed only after specialist referral.
Psychological interventions, such as cognitive behav-
ioural therapy, relaxation and gut-directed hypno-
therapy, should be reserved for the most difficult cases. 
A range of complementary and alternative therapies 
exist; most lack a good evidence base but are popular 
and help some patients (Box 22.85).
Most patients have a relapsing and remitting course. 
Exacerbations often follow stressful life events, occupa-
tional dissatisfaction and difficulties with interpersonal 
relationships.
Manipulative and body-based
•	 Massage, chiropractic
Mind–body interventions
•	 Meditation, hypnosis*, cognitive therapy
Biologically based
•	 Herbal products*, dietary additives, probiotics*
Energy healing
•	 Biofield therapies (reiki), bio-electromagnetic field therapies
Alternative medical systems
•	 Ayurvedic, homeopathy, traditional Chinese medicine
22.85  Complementary and alternative therapies 
for IBS
*Some evidence for benefit exists.
From Hussain Z, et al. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006; 23:465–471.
AIDS AND THE GASTROINTESTINAL 
TRACT
Patients with HIV-AIDS may develop several symptoms 
referable to the gastrointestinal tract, as discussed in 
detail on page 399. Consider HIV testing in all patients 
with atypical or unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms 
and those resident in areas of high prevalence.
ISCHAEMIC GUT INJURY
Ischaemic gut injury is usually the result of arterial 
occlusion. Severe hypotension and venous insufficiency 
are less frequent causes (p. 198). The presentation is vari-
able, depending on the different vessels involved and 
the acuteness of the event. Diagnosis is often difficult.
Acute small bowel ischaemia
An embolus from the heart or aorta to the superior 
mesenteric artery is responsible for 40–50% of cases, 
thrombosis of underlying atheromatous disease for 
approximately 25%, and non-occlusive ischaemia due to 
hypotension complicating myocardial infarction, heart 
failure, arrhythmias or sudden blood loss for approxi-
mately 25%. Vasculitis and venous occlusion are rare 
causes. The clinical spectrum ranges from transient 
alteration of bowel function to transmural haemorrhagic 
necrosis and gangrene. Patients usually have evidence 
of cardiac disease and arrhythmia. Almost all develop 
abdominal pain that is more impressive than the physi-
cal findings. In the early stages, the only physical signs 
may be a silent, distended abdomen or diminished 
bowel sounds, peritonitis only developing later.
Leucocytosis, metabolic acidosis, hyperphosphatae-
mia and hyperamylasaemia are typical. Plain abdominal 
X-rays show ‘thumb-printing’ due to mucosal oedema. 
Mesenteric or CT angiography reveals an occluded or 
narrowed major artery with spasm of arterial arcades, 
although most patients undergo laparotomy on the basis 
of a clinical diagnosis without angiography. Resuscita-
tion, management of cardiac disease and intravenous 
antibiotic therapy, followed by laparotomy, are key 
steps. If treatment is instituted early, embolectomy and 
vascular reconstruction may salvage some small bowel. 
In these rare cases, a ‘second look’ laparotomy should 
be undertaken 24 hours later and further necrotic bowel 
resected. In patients at high surgical risk, thrombolysis 
may sometimes be effective. The results of therapy 
depend on early intervention; patients treated late have 
a 75% mortality rate. Survivors often have nutritional 
failure from short bowel syndrome (p. 884) and require 
intensive nutritional support, including home parenteral 
nutrition and anticoagulation. Small bowel transplanta-
tion is promising in selected patients. Patients with 
mesenteric venous thrombosis also require surgery if 
there are signs of peritonitis but are otherwise treated 
with anticoagulation. Investigations for underlying pro-
thrombotic disorders should be performed (p. 1054).
Acute colonic ischaemia
The splenic flexure and descending colon have little col-
lateral circulation and lie in ‘watershed’ areas of arterial 
supply. The spectrum of injury ranges from reversible 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
910
colopathy to transient colitis, colonic stricture, gangrene 
and fulminant pancolitis. Arterial thromboembolism is 
usually responsible but colonic ischaemia can also 
follow severe hypotension, colonic volvulus, strangu-
lated hernia, systemic vasculitis or hypercoagulable 
states. Ischaemia of the descending and sigmoid colon 
is also a complication of abdominal aortic aneurysm 
surgery (where the inferior mesenteric artery is ligated). 
The patient is usually elderly and presents with sudden 
onset of cramping, left-sided, lower abdominal pain and 
rectal bleeding. Symptoms usually resolve spontane-
ously over 24–48 hours and healing occurs in 2 weeks. 
Some may develop a fibrous stricture or segment of 
colitis. A minority develop gangrene and peritonitis. The 
diagnosis is established by colonoscopy within 48 hours 
of presentation; otherwise, mucosal ulceration may have 
resolved. Resection is required for peritonitis.
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia
This results from atherosclerotic stenosis of the coeliac 
axis, superior mesenteric artery and inferior mesenteric 
artery. At least two of the three vessels must be affected 
for symptoms to develop. The typical presentation is 
with dull but severe mid- or upper abdominal pain 
developing about 30 minutes after eating. Weight loss is 
common because the patient is reluctant to eat, and some 
experience diarrhoea. Physical examination shows evi-
dence of generalised arterial disease. An abdominal 
bruit is sometimes audible but is non-specific. The diag-
nosis is made by mesenteric angiography. Treatment is 
by vascular reconstruction or percutaneous angioplasty, 
if the patient’s clinical condition permits. The condition 
is frequently complicated by intestinal infarction, if left 
untreated.
DISORDERS OF THE COLON  
AND RECTUM
Tumours of the colon and rectum
Polyps and polyposis syndromes
Polyps may be neoplastic or non-neoplastic. The latter 
include hamartomas, metaplastic (‘hyperplastic’) polyps 
and inflammatory polyps. These have no malignant 
potential. Polyps may be single or multiple and vary 
from a few millimetres to several centimetres in size.
Colorectal adenomas are extremely common in the 
Western world and the prevalence rises with age; 50% 
of people over 60 years of age have adenomas, and in 
half of these the polyps are multiple. They are more 
common in the rectum and distal colon and are either 
pedunculated or sessile. Histologically, they are classi-
fied as either tubular, villous or tubulovillous, accord-
ing to the glandular architecture. Nearly all forms of 
colorectal 
carcinoma 
develop 
from 
adenomatous 
polyps, although not all polyps carry the same degree 
of risk. Features associated with a higher risk of sub­
sequent malignancy are listed in Box 22.86.
Adenomas are usually asymptomatic and discovered 
incidentally. Occasionally, they cause bleeding and 
anaemia. Villous adenomas can secrete large amounts of 
mucus, causing diarrhoea and hypokalaemia.
•	 Large size (> 2 cm)
•	 Multiple polyps
•	 Villous architecture
•	 Dysplasia
22.86  Risk factors for malignant change in 
colonic polyps
Fig. 22.58  Adenomatous colonic polyps. A  Before colonoscopic 
polypectomy (arrows show polyps). B  After polypectomy. 
A
B
Discovery of a polyp at sigmoidoscopy is an indica-
tion for colonoscopy because proximal polyps are 
present in 40–50% of such patients. Colonoscopic 
polypectomy should be carried out wherever possible, 
as this considerably reduces subsequent colorectal 
cancer risk (Fig. 22.58). Very large or sessile polyps can 
sometimes be removed safely by endoscopic mucosal 
resection (EMR) but many require surgery. Once all 
polyps have been removed, surveillance colonoscopy 
should be undertaken at 3–5-year intervals, as new 
polyps develop in 50% of patients. Patients over 75 years 
of age do not require repeated colonoscopies, as their 
subsequent lifetime cancer risk is low.
Between 10 and 20% of polyps show histological evi-
dence of malignancy. When cancer cells are found 
within 2 mm of the resection margin of the polyp, 
when the polyp cancer is poorly differentiated or when 
lymphatic invasion is present, segmental colonic resec-
tion is recommended because residual tumour or lym-
phatic spread (in up to 10%) may be present. Malignant 
polyps without these features can be followed up by 
surveillance colonoscopy.
Polyposis syndromes are classified by histopathol-
ogy (Box 22.87). It should be noted that, while the 
Disorders of the colon and rectum 
22
911
Neoplastic
Non-neoplastic*
Familial 
adenomatous 
polyposis
Peutz–Jeghers 
syndrome
Juvenile polyposis
Cronkhite–Canada 
syndrome
Cowden’s disease
Inheritance
Autosomal dominant
Autosomal dominant
Autosomal dominant 
in 1/3
None
Autosomal dominant
Oesophageal 
polyps
−
−
−
+
+
Gastric polyps
+
+
+
+++
+++
Small bowel 
polyps
++
+++
++
++
++
Colonic polyps
+++
++
++
+++
+
Other features
Colorectal cancer, 
bleeding, extra-
intestinal features 
(Box 22.88)
Pigmentation, 
bleeding, 
intussusception, 
bowel and other 
cancers
Colorectal cancer
Hair loss, 
pigmentation, nail 
dystrophy, 
malabsorption
Many congenital 
anomalies, oral and 
cutaneous 
hamartomas, thyroid 
and breast tumours
− absent; + may occur; ++ common; +++ very common. *The polyps themselves are not neoplastic but cancer risk is increased in several syndromes. 
22.87  Gastrointestinal polyposis syndromes
hamartomatous polyps in Peutz–Jeghers syndrome and 
juvenile polyposis are not themselves neoplastic, these 
disorders are associated with an increased risk of malig-
nancy of the breast, colon, ovary and thyroid.
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an uncommon 
autosomal dominant disorder affecting 1 in 13 000 of the 
population and accounting for 1% of all colorectal 
cancers. It results from germline mutation of the tumour 
suppressor APC gene, followed by acquired mutation of 
the remaining allele (Ch. 3). The APC gene is large and 
over 1400 different mutations have been reported, but 
most are loss-of-function mutations resulting in a trun-
cated APC protein. This protein normally binds to and 
sequesters β-catenin but is unable to do so when mutated, 
allowing β-catenin to translocate to the nucleus, where 
it up-regulates the expression of many genes.
Around 20% of cases arise as new mutations and 
have no family history. Hundreds to thousands of 
adenomatous colonic polyps develop in 80% of patients 
by age 15 (Fig. 22.59), with symptoms such as rectal 
bleeding beginning a few years later. In those affected, 
cancer will develop within 10–15 years of the appear-
ance of adenomas and 90% of patients will develop 
colorectal cancer by the age of 50 years. Despite surveil-
lance, approximately 1 in 4 patients with FAP have 
cancer by the time they undergo colectomy.
A second gene involved in base excision repair (MutY 
homolog, MUTYH) has been identified which may give 
rise to colonic polyposis. MUTYH displays autosomal 
recessive inheritance and leads to tens to hundreds 
of polyps and proximal colon cancer. This variant is 
referred to as MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP).
Non-neoplastic cystic fundic gland polyps occur in 
the stomach but adenomatous polyps also occur uncom-
monly. Duodenal adenomas occur in over 90% and are 
most common around the ampulla of Vater. Malignant 
transformation to adenocarcinoma occurs in 10% and 
Fig. 22.59  Familial adenomatous polyposis. There are hundreds of 
adenomatous polyps throughout the colon. 
is the leading cause of death in those who have had 
prophylactic colectomy. Many extra-intestinal features 
are also seen in FAP (Box 22.88).
Desmoid tumours occur in up to one-third of patients 
and usually arise in the mesentery or abdominal wall. 
Although benign, they may become very large, causing 
compression of adjacent organs, intestinal obstruction or 
vascular compromise, and are difficult to remove. They 
*Gardner’s syndrome.
•	 Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium 
(CHRPE, 70–80%)
•	 Epidermoid cysts (extremities, face, scalp)* (50%)
•	 Benign osteomas, especially skull and angle of mandible* 
(50–90%)
•	 Dental abnormalities (15–25%)*
•	 Desmoid tumours (10–15%)
•	 Other malignancies (brain, thyroid, liver, 1–3%)
22.88  Extra-intestinal features of familial 
adenomatous polyposis
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
912
examination is essential for men, while women should 
undergo pelvic examination, cervical smears and regular 
mammography. Asymptomatic relatives of affected 
patients should also undergo screening.
Juvenile polyposis
In juvenile polyposis (JPS), tens to hundreds of mucus-
filled hamartomatous polyps are found in the colorec-
tum. One-third of cases are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner and up to 20% develop colorectal 
cancer before the age of 40. The criteria for diagnosis are:
•	 ten or more colonic juvenile polyps
•	 juvenile polyps elsewhere in the gut, or
•	 any polyps in those with a family history.
Germline mutations in the SMAD4 gene are often 
found, as are PTEN mutations. Colonoscopy with 
polypectomy should be performed every 1–3 years and 
colectomy considered for extensive involvement.
Colorectal cancer
Although relatively rare in the developing world, 
colorectal cancer is the second most common internal 
malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer 
deaths in Western countries. In the UK, the incidence is 
50–60 per 100 000, equating to 30 000 cases per year. The 
condition becomes increasingly common over the age of 
50 years.
Pathophysiology
Both environmental and genetic factors are important in 
colorectal carcinogenesis (Fig. 22.61). Environmental 
factors account for 70% of all ‘sporadic’ colorectal 
cancers. This figure is based on the wide geographical 
variation in incidence and the decrease in risk seen in 
migrants who move from high- to low-risk countries. 
Dietary factors are most important and these are sum-
marised in Box 22.89; other recognised risk factors are 
listed in Box 22.90.
Colorectal cancer development results from the accu-
mulation of multiple genetic mutations arising from two 
major pathways: chromosomal instability and microsat-
ellite instability (Fig. 22.62).
•	 Chromosomal instability. Mutations or deletions of 
portions of chromosomes arise, with loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH) and inactivation of specific 
tumour suppressor genes. In LOH, one allele of a 
gene is deleted but gene inactivation only occurs 
when a subsequent unrelated mutation affects the 
other allele.
•	 Microsatellite instability. This involves germline 
mutations in one of six genes encoding enzymes 
involved in repairing errors that occur normally 
during DNA replication (DNA mismatch repair); 
these genes are designated hMSH2, hMSH6, hMLH1, 
hMLH3, hPMS1 and hPMS2. Replication errors 
accumulate and can be detected in ‘microsatellites’ 
of repetitive DNA sequences. They also occur  
in important regulatory genes, resulting in a 
genetically unstable phenotype and accumulation  
of multiple somatic mutations throughout the 
genome that eventually lead to cancer. A few 
sporadic cancers develop this way, as do most  
cases of hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 
(HNPCC).
sometimes respond to hormonal therapy with tamoxifen, 
and the NSAID sulindac may lead to regression in some, 
by unknown mechanisms. Congenital hypertrophy of 
the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) occurs in some 
and is seen as dark, round, pigmented retinal lesions. 
When present in an at-risk individual, they are 100% 
predictive of the presence of FAP. A variant, Turcot’s 
syndrome, is characterised by FAP with primary CNS 
tumours (astrocytoma or medulloblastoma).
Early identification of affected individuals before 
symptoms develop is essential. The diagnosis can be 
excluded if sigmoidoscopy is normal. In newly diag-
nosed cases, genetic testing should be carried out to 
confirm the diagnosis and identify the causal mutation. 
Subsequently, all first-degree relatives should also 
undergo testing (p. 60). In families with known FAP, 
family members should undergo mutation testing at 
13–14 years of age and patients who are found to have 
the mutation should be offered colectomy after school 
or college education has been completed. The operation 
of choice is total proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal 
anastomosis. Periodic upper gastrointestinal endoscopy 
every 1–3 years is recommended to detect and monitor 
duodenal and periampullary adenomas. If large, these 
may be amenable to endoscopic resection.
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome
Multiple hamartomatous polyps occur in the small intes-
tine and colon, as well as melanin pigmentation of the 
lips, mouth and digits (Fig. 22.60). Most cases are asymp-
tomatic, although chronic bleeding, anaemia or intus-
susception can occur. There is a significant risk of small 
bowel or colonic adenocarcinoma and of cancer of the 
pancreas, lung, ovary, breast and endometrium. It is an 
autosomal dominantly inherited disorder, most com-
monly resulting from truncating mutations in a serine–
threonine kinase gene on chromosome 19p (STK11). 
Diagnosis requires two of the three following features:
•	 small bowel polyposis
•	 mucocutaneous pigmentation
•	 a family history suggesting autosomal dominant 
inheritance.
The diagnosis can be made by genetic testing but this 
may be inconclusive, since mutations in genes other than 
STK11 can cause the disorder. Affected people should 
undergo regular upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, and 
small bowel and pancreatic imaging. Polyps greater 
than 1 cm in size should be removed. Testicular 
Fig. 22.60  Peutz–Jeghers syndrome. Typical lip pigmentation. 
Disorders of the colon and rectum 
22
913
Fig. 22.61  Pathogenesis of colorectal cancer (CRC). (FAP = familial 
adenomatous polyposis; HNPCC = hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer; 
JPS = juvenile polyposis syndrome; MAP = MUTYH-associated polyposis; 
PJS = Peutz–Jeghers syndrome) 
Pathogenesis of CRC
Dietary risk factors
Accumulation of
multiple somatic
mutations
Single gene
mutations
(large effects)
Multiple
susceptibility
genes
(small effects)
Sporadic CRC
(~70%)
Inherited CRC
(~5%)
Genetic
predisposition
to CRC
(~25%)
HNPCC (Lynch syndrome I)
Lynch syndrome II
FAP (APC)
PJS (STK11)
JPS (SMAD4)
MAP (MUTYH)
Without
polyposis
With
polyposis
Risk factor
Comments
Increased risk
Red meat*
High saturated fat and protein content
Carcinogenic amines formed during 
cooking
Saturated animal 
fat*
High faecal bile acid and fatty acid  
levels
May affect colonic prostaglandin  
turnover
Decreased risk
Dietary fibre*
Effects vary with fibre type; shortened 
transit time, binding of bile acids and 
effects on bacterial flora proposed
Fruit and 
vegetables
Green vegetables contain 
anticarcinogens, such as flavonoids
Little evidence for protection from 
vitamins A, C, E
Calcium
Binds and precipitates faecal bile acids
Folic acid
Reverses DNA hypomethylation
Omega-3 fatty 
acids
May be of modest benefit
*Evidence is inconsistent and a clear relationship is unproven.
22.89  Dietary risk factors for colorectal cancer
Medical conditions
•	 Colorectal adenomas (p. 910)
•	 Long-standing extensive ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s colitis 
(p. 897), especially if associated with primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (PSC)
•	 Ureterosigmoidostomy
•	 Acromegaly
•	 Pelvic radiotherapy
Others
•	 Obesity and sedentary lifestyle – may be related to diet
•	 Smoking (relative risk 1.5–3.0)
•	 Alcohol (weak association)
•	 Cholecystectomy (effect of bile acids in right colon)
•	 Type 2 diabetes (hyperinsulinaemia)
•	 Use of aspirin or NSAIDs (COX-2 inhibition) and perhaps 
statins associated with reduced risk
22.90  Non-dietary risk factors for 
colorectal cancer
About 5–10% of colon cancers are caused by HNPCC. 
Pedigrees with this disorder have an autosomal domi-
nant mode of inheritance and a positive family history 
of colon cancer occurring at a young age. The lifetime 
risk in affected individuals is 80%, with a mean age at 
cancer development of 45 years. In contrast to sporadic 
colon cancer, two-thirds of tumours occur proximally. 
The diagnostic criteria are listed in Box 22.91. In a subset 
of patients, there is also an increased incidence of cancers 
of the endometrium, ovary, urinary tract, stomach, pan-
creas, small intestine and CNS, related to inheritance of 
different mismatch repair gene mutations. Those who 
fulfil the criteria for HNPCC should be referred for pedi-
gree assessment, genetic testing (see above) and colon-
oscopy. These should begin around 25 years of age or 
5–10 years earlier than the youngest case of cancer in 
the family. Colonoscopy needs to be repeated every 
1–2 years but, even then, interval cancers can still occur.
A family history of colorectal cancer can be obtained 
in 20% of patients who do not fulfil the criteria for 
HNPCC. In these families, the lifetime risk of develop-
ing colon cancer is 1 in 12 and 1 in 6, respectively, when 
one or two first-degree relatives are affected. The risk is 
even higher if relatives were affected at an early age. The 
genes responsible for these cases are unknown, however. 
Most tumours arise from malignant transformation of a 
benign adenomatous polyp. Over 65% occur in the 
rectosigmoid and a further 15% recur in the caecum or 
ascending colon. Synchronous tumours are present in 
2–5% of patients. Spread occurs through the bowel wall. 
Rectal cancers may invade the pelvic viscera and side 
walls. Lymphatic invasion is common at presentation, as 
*These criteria are strict and may miss some families with mutations. 
HNPCC should also be considered in individuals with colorectal or 
endometrial cancer under 45 yrs of age.
•	 Three or more relatives with colon cancer (at least one 
first-degree)
•	 Colorectal cancer in two or more generations
•	 At least one member affected under 50 yrs of age
•	 FAP excluded
22.91  Modified Amsterdam criteria* for 
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
914
Fig. 22.62  The multistep origin of cancer: molecular events implicated in colorectal carcinogenesis. (GTP = guanine triphosphate) 
Late adenoma
Carcinoma
Key gene(s)
Chromosome
Alteration
Normal
function
Effect
APC
(adenomatous
polyposis coli)
5q
Truncating
mutations
Inhibits
translocation of
β-catenin to
nucleus and
suppresses
cell growth
Progression to
early adenoma
development
K-ras
12p
Gain-of-function
mutations
Transmembrane
GTP-binding
protein mediating
mitogenic
signals (p21)
Cell
proliferation
DCC (deleted in
colon cancer)
SMAD4
18q
Allelic deletion or
silencing (DCC)
Gain-of-function
mutations (SMAD4)
DCC regulates
apoptosis and has a
tumour suppressor
function
SMAD4 regulates
cell growth
Enhanced tumour
growth, invasion
and metastasis
p53
17p
Allelic deletion;
gain-of-function
mutations
Upregulated during
cell damage to
arrest cell cycle and
allow DNA repair or
apoptosis to occur
Cell proliferation;
impaired apoptosis
Further mutations
• Anchorage
  independence
• Protease
  synthesis
• Telomerase
  synthesis
• Multidrug
  resistance
• Evasion of
  immune system
Intermediate
adenoma
Early adenoma
Normal
perforation, leading to peritonitis, localised abscess or 
fistula formation. Carcinoma of the rectum usually 
causes early bleeding, mucus discharge or a feeling of 
incomplete emptying. Between 10 and 20% of patients 
present with iron deficiency anaemia or weight loss. On 
examination, there may be a palpable mass, signs of 
anaemia or hepatomegaly from metastases. Low rectal 
tumours may be palpable on digital examination.
Investigations
Colonoscopy is the investigation of choice because it is 
more sensitive and specific than barium enema. Further-
more, lesions can be biopsied and polyps removed. 
Patients in whom colonoscopy is incomplete and those 
is spread through both portal and systemic circulations 
to reach the liver and, less commonly, the lungs. Tumour 
stage at diagnosis is the most important determinant of 
prognosis (Fig. 22.63).
Clinical features
Symptoms vary depending on the site of the carcinoma. 
In tumours of the left colon, fresh rectal bleeding is 
common and obstruction occurs early. Tumours of the 
right colon present with anaemia from occult bleeding 
or with altered bowel habit, but obstruction is a late 
feature. Colicky lower abdominal pain is present in two-
thirds of patients and rectal bleeding occurs in 50%. A 
minority present with features of either obstruction or 
Fig. 22.63  Modified Dukes classification and survival in colorectal cancer. 
Prevalence
at diagnosis (%)
Dukes stage
Definition
5-year survival
rate (%)
A
B
C
D
Distant metastases
Tumour
involving
lymph nodes
Extension
through
bowel wall
Tumour
confined within
bowel wall
30
35
10
30–35
65
> 90
25
< 5
Disorders of the colon and rectum 
22
915
who are at high risk of complications can be investigated 
by CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy). This is a 
sensitive and non-invasive technique for diagnosing 
tumours and polyps of more than 6 mm diameter. When 
the diagnosis of colon cancer has been made, CT of chest, 
abdomen and pelvis should be performed as a staging 
investigation, particularly to detect hepatic metastases. 
Pelvic MRI or endoanal ultrasound should be used for 
local staging of rectal cancer. Measurement of serum 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels are of limited 
value in diagnosis, since values are normal in many 
patients, but CEA testing can be helpful during follow-up 
to monitor for the prescience of recurrence.
Management
Surgery
All patients should be discussed at a multidisciplinary 
team meeting. Those with locally advanced rectal cancer 
should be offered neoadjuvant radiotherapy or chemo-
radiotherapy to increase the subsequent chance of a 
complete (R0) surgical resection. A 1-week course of 
radiotherapy just prior to surgery reduces the risk of 
local recurrence in operable rectal cancer. The tumour 
should be removed, along with adequate resection 
margins and pericolic lymph nodes. Continuity should 
be restored by direct anastomosis, wherever possible. 
Carcinomas within 2 cm of the anal verge may require 
abdominoperineal resection and formation of a colos-
tomy. All patients should be counselled pre-operatively 
about the possible need for a stoma. Total mesorectal 
excision (TME) reduces recurrence rates and increases 
survival in rectal cancer. Metastatic disease confined to 
liver or lung should be considered for resection, as this 
can be potentially curative if there is truly no disease at 
other sites. Post-operatively, patients should undergo 
colonoscopy after 6–12 months and then at 5 years to 
search for local recurrence or development of new 
lesions, which occur in 6% of cases.
Adjuvant therapy
About 30–40% of patients have lymph node involve-
ment at presentation (see Fig. 22.63) and are, therefore, 
at risk of recurrence. Most recurrences are within 3 years 
of diagnosis and affect the liver, lung, distant lymph 
nodes and peritoneum. Adjuvant chemotherapy with 
5-fluorouracil/folinic acid or capecitabine, preferably in 
combination with oxaliplatin, can reduce the risk of 
recurrence in patients with Dukes stage C cancers and 
some high-risk Dukes B cancers. Post-operative radio-
therapy reduces the risk of local recurrence in rectal 
cancer if operative resection margins are involved.
Palliation of advanced disease
Surgical resection of the primary tumour is appropriate 
for some patients with metastases to treat obstruction, 
bleeding or pain. Palliative chemotherapy with 5- 
fluorouracil/folinic acid, capecitabine, oxaliplatin or iri-
notecan improves survival. Patients with advanced 
metastatic disease may be treated with monoclonal anti-
bodies using bevacizumab or cetuximab, either alone or 
together with chemotherapy. Pelvic radiotherapy is 
sometimes useful for distressing rectal symptoms such 
as pain, bleeding or severe tenesmus. Endoscopic laser 
therapy or insertion of an expandable metal stent can be 
used to relieve obstruction (Fig. 22.64).
Fig. 22.64  Placement of a colonic stent for an inoperable cancer 
with impending obstruction. A  The contrast study demonstrates 
an obstruction. B  The stent is deployed across the tumour. C  A 
satisfactory position is demonstrated on subsequent CT scanning. 
A
B
C
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
916
formation, fistula and peritonitis. Repeated attacks of 
inflammation lead to thickening of the bowel wall, nar-
rowing of the lumen and eventual obstruction.
Clinical features
Symptoms are usually the result of associated constipa-
tion or spasm. Colicky pain is suprapubic or felt in the 
left iliac fossa. The sigmoid colon may be palpable and, 
in attacks of diverticulitis, there is local tenderness, 
guarding, rigidity (‘left-sided appendicitis’) and some-
times a palpable mass. During these episodes, there may 
be diarrhoea, rectal bleeding or fever. The differential 
diagnosis includes colorectal cancer, ischaemic colitis, 
inflammatory bowel disease and infection. Diverticular 
disease may be complicated by perforation, pericolic 
abscess, fistula formation (usually colovesical) or acute 
rectal bleeding. These complications are more common 
in patients who take NSAIDs or aspirin. After one attack 
of diverticulitis, the recurrence rate is around 3% per 
year. Over 10–30 years, perforation, obstruction or 
bleeding may occur, each affecting 5% of patients.
Investigations
Investigations are usually performed to exclude colorec-
tal neoplasia. Barium enema can be used to confirm the 
presence of diverticula (see Fig. 22.11C, p. 847), strictures 
and fistulae. If barium studies are performed, flexible 
sigmoidoscopy is also necessary to exclude a coexisting 
neoplasm, which is easily missed radiologically. In 
severe diverticulosis, colonoscopy requires expertise 
and carries a risk of perforation. CT is used to assess 
complications, such as perforation or pericolic abscess.
Management
Diverticular disease that is asymptomatic and discov-
ered coincidentally requires no treatment. Constipation 
can be relieved by a high-fibre diet, with or without a 
Prevention and screening
Secondary prevention aims to detect and remove lesions 
at an early or pre-malignant stage. Several potential 
methods exist:
•	 Population-based screening of people over the age 
of 50 years by regular faecal occult blood (FOB) testing 
reduces colorectal cancer mortality (Box 22.92) and 
increases the proportion of early cancers detected. 
The sensitivity and specificity of these tests need to 
be improved.
•	 Colonoscopy remains the gold standard but is 
expensive and carries risks; many countries lack the 
resources to offer this form of screening.
•	 Flexible sigmoidoscopy is an alternative option and 
has been shown to reduce overall colorectal cancer 
mortality by approximately 35% (70% for cases 
arising in the rectosigmoid). It is recommended  
in the USA every 5 years in all persons over the  
age of 50.
•	 Screening for high-risk patients by molecular genetic 
analysis is an exciting prospect but is not yet 
available.
Diverticulosis
Diverticula are acquired and are most common in the 
sigmoid and descending colon of middle-aged people. 
Asymptomatic diverticula (diverticulosis) are present in 
over 50% of people above the age of 70 years. Sympto-
matic diverticular disease supervenes in 10–25% of 
cases, while complicated diverticulosis (acute diverticu-
litis, pericolic abscess, bleeding, perforation or stricture) 
is uncommon.
Pathophysiology
A life-long refined diet with a relative deficiency of fibre 
is widely thought to be responsible and the condition is 
rare in populations with a high dietary fibre intake, such 
as in Asia, where it more often affects the right side of 
the colon. It is postulated that small-volume stools 
require high intracolonic pressures for propulsion and 
this leads to herniation of mucosa between the taeniae 
coli (Fig. 22.65). Diverticula consist of protrusions of 
mucosa covered by peritoneum. There is commonly 
hypertrophy of the circular muscle coat. Inflammation 
is thought to result from impaction of diverticula with 
faecoliths. This may resolve spontaneously or progress 
to cause haemorrhage, perforation, local abscess 
Fig. 22.65  The human colon in diverticulosis. The colonic wall is 
weak between the taeniae. The blood vessels that supply the colon pierce 
the circular muscle and weaken it further by forming tunnels. Diverticula 
usually emerge through these points of least resistance. 
Mesocolon
Circular muscle
Diverticulum
Taenia
(longitudinal muscle)
‘Combined results from four randomised controlled trials show 
that participants allocated to screening by FOB testing had a 
16% reduction in the relative risk of colorectal cancer mortality 
(RR 0.84, CI: 0.78–0.90). When adjusted for screening 
attendance, there was a 25% relative risk reduction (RR 0.75, 
CI: 0.66–0.84) for those attending at least one round of FOB 
screening.’
•	 Hewitson P, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer using the faecal occult blood 
test, Hemoccult. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2007, issue 1. Art. 
no. CD001216; CD001216.pub2 (up to date 2010).
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
22.92  Faecal occult blood (FOB) testing and 
colon cancer mortality
Disorders of the colon and rectum 
22
917
Faecal impaction
In faecal impaction, a large, hard mass of stool fills the 
rectum. This tends to occur in disabled, immobile or 
institutionalised patients, especially the frail elderly or 
those with dementia. Constipating drugs, autonomic 
neuropathy and painful anal conditions also contrib-
ute. Megacolon, intestinal obstruction and urinary tract 
infections may supervene. Perforation and bleeding 
from pressure-induced ulceration are occasionally 
seen. Treatment involves adequate hydration and 
careful 
digital 
disimpaction 
after 
softening 
the 
impacted stool with arachis oil enemas. Stimulants 
should be avoided.
Melanosis coli and laxative  
misuse syndromes
Long-term consumption of stimulant laxatives leads to 
accumulation of lipofuscin pigment in macrophages in 
the lamina propria. This imparts a brown discoloration 
to the colonic mucosa, often described as resembling 
‘tiger skin’. The condition is benign and resolves when 
the laxatives are stopped. Prolonged laxative use may 
rarely result in megacolon or ‘cathartic colon’, in which 
barium enema demonstrates a featureless mucosa, loss 
of haustra and shortening of the bowel. Surreptitious 
laxative misuse is a psychiatric condition seen in young 
women, some of whom have a history of bulimia or 
anorexia nervosa (pp. 255 and 256). They complain of 
refractory watery diarrhoea. Laxative use is usually 
denied and may continue, even when patients are 
undergoing investigation. Screening of urine for laxa-
tives may reveal the diagnosis.
Hirschsprung’s disease
This disease is characterised by constipation and colonic 
dilatation (megacolon) due to congenital absence of gan-
glion cells in the large intestine. The incidence is approx-
imately 1 : 5000. About one-third of patients have a 
positive family history and, in these families, the disease 
is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with 
incomplete penetrance. About 50% of familial cases and 
15% of sporadic cases have mutations affecting the RET 
proto-oncogene, which is also implicated in multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) (p. 795). Unlike 
MEN 2, which is caused by activating RET mutations, 
Hirschprung’s disease is caused by loss-of-function 
mutations. Although RET is the most important suscep-
tibility gene, some patients with RET mutations do not 
develop clinical disease, and mutations in other genes 
have been identified which interact to cause the disease. 
All of the genes are implicated in Hirschprung’s disease 
are involved in the regulation of enteric neurogenesis, 
and the mutations cause failure of migration of neuro­
blasts into the gut wall during embryogenesis. Ganglion 
cells are absent from nerve plexuses, most commonly in 
a short segment of the rectum and/or sigmoid colon. As 
a result, the internal anal sphincter fails to relax. Consti-
pation, abdominal distension and vomiting usually 
develop immediately after birth but a few cases do not 
present until childhood or adolescence. The rectum is 
empty on digital examination.
Barium enema shows a small rectum and colonic 
dilatation above the narrowed segment. Full-thickness 
biopsies are required to demonstrate nerve plexuses and 
Class
Examples
Bulk-forming
Ispaghula husk, methylcellulose
Stimulants
Bisacodyl, dantron (only for terminally 
ill patients), docusate, senna
Faecal softeners
Docusate, arachis oil enema
Osmotic laxatives
Lactulose, lactitol, magnesium salts
Others
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)*, phosphate 
enema*
*Used mainly for bowel preparation prior to investigation or surgery.
22.93  Laxatives
bulking laxative (ispaghula husk, 1–2 sachets daily), 
taken with plenty of fluids. Stimulant laxatives (see Box 
22.93 below) should be avoided. Antispasmodics may 
sometimes help. Acute attacks of diverticulitis should be 
treated with 7 days of metronidazole (400 mg 3 times 
daily orally), along with co-amoxiclav (500/125 mg 
4 times daily). Severe cases require intravenous fluids, 
intravenous antibiotics, analgesia and nasogastric 
suction, but randomised trials show no benefit from 
acute resection compared to conservative management, 
and emergency surgery is reserved for severe haemor-
rhage or perforation. Percutaneous drainage of acute 
paracolic abscesses can be effective and avoids the need 
for emergency surgery. Patients who have repeated 
attacks of obstruction should undergo elective surgery 
once the acute episode has settled, in order to resect the 
affected segment of bowel with restoration of continuity 
by primary anastomosis.
Constipation and disorders of 
defecation
The clinical approach to patients with constipation and 
its aetiology have been described on page 860.
Simple constipation
Simple constipation is extremely common and does not 
signify underlying organic disease. It usually responds 
to increased dietary fibre or the use of bulking agents; 
an adequate fluid intake is also essential. Many types of 
laxative are available, and these are listed in Box 22.93.
Severe idiopathic constipation
This occurs almost exclusively in young women and 
often begins in childhood or adolescence. The cause is 
unknown but some have ‘slow transit’ with reduced 
motor activity in the colon. Others have ‘obstructed def-
ecation’, resulting from inappropriate contraction of 
the external anal sphincter and puborectalis muscle 
(anismus). The condition is often resistant to treatment. 
Bulking agents may exacerbate symptoms but pro­
kinetic agents or balanced solutions of polyethylene 
glycol ‘3350’ benefit some patients with slow transit. 
Glycerol suppositories and biofeedback techniques are 
used for those with obstructed defecation. Others benefit 
from agents such as prucalopride or linaclotide. Rarely, 
subtotal colectomy may be necessary as a last resort.
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
918
10 cm is associated with a high risk of perforation. 
Single-contrast or water-soluble barium enemas demon-
strate the absence of mechanical obstruction.
Management consists of treating the underlying dis-
order and correcting any biochemical abnormalities. 
The anticholinesterase, neostigmine, is effective in 
enhancing parasympathetic activity and gut motility. 
Decompression, either with a rectal tube or by colonos-
copy, may be effective but needs to be repeated until 
the condition resolves. In severe cases, surgical or 
fluoroscopic defunctioning caecostomy is necessary.
Anorectal disorders
Faecal incontinence
The normal control of anal continence is described on 
page 844. Common causes of incontinence are listed 
in Box 22.96. High-risk patients include frail older 
people, women after childbirth and those with severe 
neurological/spinal disorders, learning difficulties or 
cognitive impairment.
Patients are often embarrassed to admit incontinence 
and may complain only of ‘diarrhoea’. A careful history 
and examination, especially of the anorectum and 
perineum, may help to establish the underlying cause. 
Endoanal ultrasound is valuable for defining the integ-
rity of the anal sphincters, while anorectal physiology 
and MR proctography are also useful investigations.
Management
This is often very difficult. Underlying disorders should 
be treated and diarrhoea managed with loperamide, 
diphenoxylate or codeine phosphate. Attention must be 
paid to a proper diet and adequate fluid intake. Pelvic 
floor exercises, biofeedback and bowel retraining tech-
niques help some patients, and those with confirmed 
anal sphincter defects may benefit from sphincter repair 
operations. Where sphincter repair is not appropriate, a 
trial of sacral nerve stimulation is undertaken with a 
view to insertion of a permanent stimulator but, if 
unsuccessful, creation of a neo-sphincter may be possi-
ble, by graciloplasty or by an artificial anal sphincter.
confirm the absence of ganglion cells. Histochemical 
stains for acetylcholinesterase are also used. Anorectal 
manometry demonstrates failure of the rectum to relax 
with balloon distension. Treatment involves resection of 
the affected segment.
Acquired megacolon
This may develop in childhood as a result of voluntary 
withholding of stool during toilet training. In such cases, 
it presents after the first year of life and is distinguished 
from Hirschsprung’s disease by the urge to defecate and 
the presence of stool in the rectum. It usually responds 
to osmotic laxatives.
In adults, acquired megacolon has several causes. It 
is seen in depressed or demented patients, either as part 
of the condition or as a side-effect of antidepressant 
drugs. Prolonged misuse of stimulant laxatives may 
cause degeneration of the myenteric plexus, while inter-
ruption of sensory or motor innervation may be respon-
sible in a number of neurological disorders. Patients 
taking large doses of opioid analgesics can develop a 
megacolon: so-called ‘narcotic bowel syndrome’. Sclero-
derma and hypothyroidism are other recognised causes.
Most patients can be managed conservatively by 
treatment of the underlying cause, high-residue diets, 
laxatives and the judicious use of enemas. Prokinetics 
are helpful in a minority of patients. Subtotal colectomy 
is a last resort for the most severely affected patients.
Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction
Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie’s syndrome) 
has many causes (Box 22.95) and is characterised by 
sudden onset of painless, massive enlargement of the 
proximal colon; there are no features of mechanical 
obstruction. Bowel sounds are normal or high-pitched, 
rather than absent. Left untreated, it may progress to 
perforation, peritonitis and death.
Abdominal X-rays show colonic dilatation with air 
extending to the rectum. Caecal diameter greater than 
•	 Evaluation: particular attention should be paid to immobility, 
dietary fluid and fibre intake, drugs and depression.
•	 Immobility: predisposes to constipation by increasing the 
colonic transit time; the longer this is, the greater the fluid 
absorption and the harder the stool.
•	 Bulking agents: can make matters worse in patients with 
slow transit times and should be avoided.
•	 Overflow diarrhoea: if faecal impaction develops, 
paradoxical overflow diarrhoea may occur. If antidiarrhoeal 
agents are given, the underlying impaction may worsen and 
result in serious complications, such as stercoral ulceration 
and bleeding.
22.94  Constipation in old age
•	 Obstetric trauma: childbirth, hysterectomy
•	 Severe diarrhoea
•	 Faecal impaction
•	 Congenital anorectal anomalies
•	 Anorectal disease: haemorrhoids, rectal prolapse, Crohn’s 
disease
•	 Neurological disorders: spinal cord or cauda equina lesions, 
dementia
22.96  Causes of faecal incontinence
•	 Trauma, burns
•	 Recent surgery
•	 Drugs (opiates, 
phenothiazines)
•	 Respiratory failure
•	 Electrolyte and acid–base 
disorders
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Uraemia
22.95  Causes of acute colonic 
pseudo-obstruction
Haemorrhoids
Haemorrhoids (commonly known as piles) arise from 
congestion of the internal and/or external venous plex-
uses around the anal canal. They are extremely common 
in adults. The aetiology is unknown, although they are 
associated with constipation and straining, and may 
develop for the first time during pregnancy. First-degree 
piles bleed, while second-degree piles prolapse but 
Disorders of the colon and rectum 
22
919
bleeding, mucus discharge and pruritus. The skin may 
be indurated and an oedematous skin tag, or ‘sentinel 
pile’, adjacent to the fissure is common.
Avoidance of constipation with bulk-forming laxa-
tives and increased fluid intake is important. Relaxation 
of the internal sphincter is normally mediated by nitric 
oxide, and 0.2% glyceryl trinitrate, which donates nitric 
oxide and improves mucosal blood flow, is effective in 
60–80% of patients. Diltiazem cream (2%) can be used as 
an alternative. Resistant cases may respond to injection 
of botulinum toxin into the internal anal sphincter to 
induce relaxation. Manual dilatation under anaesthesia 
leads to long-term incontinence and should not be con-
sidered. The majority of cases can be treated without 
surgery, but where these measures fail, healing can be 
achieved surgically by lateral internal anal sphincterot-
omy or advancement anoplasty.
Anorectal abscesses and fistulae
Perianal abscesses develop between the internal and 
external anal sphincters and may point at the perianal 
skin. Ischiorectal abscesses occur lateral to the sphincters 
in the ischiorectal fossa. They usually result from infec-
tion of anal glands by normal intestinal bacteria. Crohn’s 
disease (p. 897) is sometimes responsible.
Patients complain of extreme perianal pain, fever 
and/or discharge of pus. Spontaneous rupture may lead 
to the development of fistulae. These may be superficial 
or track through the anal sphincters to reach the rectum. 
Abscesses are drained surgically and superficial fistulae 
are laid open with care to avoid sphincter damage.
Diseases of the peritoneal cavity
Peritonitis
Surgical peritonitis occurs as the result of a ruptured 
viscus (for details see this book’s companion text, Prin­
ciples and Practice of Surgery). Peritonitis may also com-
plicate ascites in chronic liver disease (spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis, p. 941) or may occur in children in 
the absence of ascites, due to infection with Streptococcus 
pneumoniae or β-haemolytic streptococci (p. 331).
Chlamydial peritonitis is a complication of pelvic 
inflammatory disease (p. 422). The patient presents with 
right upper quadrant pain, pyrexia and a hepatic rub 
(the Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome). Tuberculosis may 
cause peritonitis and ascites (p. 688).
Tumours
The most common is secondary adenocarcinoma from 
the ovary or gastrointestinal tract. Mesothelioma is a 
rare tumour complicating asbestos exposure. It presents 
as a diffuse abdominal mass, due to omental infiltration, 
and with ascites. The prognosis is extremely poor.
Other disorders
Endometriosis
Ectopic endometrial tissue can become embedded on the 
serosal aspect of the intestine, most frequently in the 
sigmoid and rectum. The overlying mucosa is usually 
retract spontaneously. Third-degree piles are those 
which require manual replacement after prolapsing. 
Bright red rectal bleeding occurs after defecation. 
Other symptoms include pain, pruritus ani and mucus 
discharge. Treatment involves measures to prevent con-
stipation and straining. Band ligation is effective for 
many, but a minority of patients require haemorrhoid-
ectomy, which is usually curative. Recently, haemor-
rhoidal artery ligation operation (HALO) procedures 
have been developed and may replace surgery. HALO 
involves using Doppler ultrasound to identify all the 
arteries feeding the haemorrhoids and ligating them.
Pruritus ani
This is common and can stem from many causes (Box 
22.97), most of which result in contamination of the peri-
anal skin with faecal contents.
Itching may be severe and results in an itch–scratch–
itch cycle which exacerbates the problem. When no 
underlying cause is found, all local barrier ointments 
and creams must be stopped. Good personal hygiene is 
essential, with careful washing after defecation. The 
perineal area must be kept dry and clean. Bulk-forming 
laxatives may reduce faecal soiling.
Local anorectal conditions
•	 Haemorrhoids
•	 Fistula, fissures
•	 Poor hygiene
Infections
•	 Threadworms
•	 Candidiasis
Skin disorders
•	 Contact dermatitis
•	 Psoriasis
•	 Lichen planus
Other
•	 Diarrhoea or incontinence 
of any cause
•	 Irritable bowel syndrome
•	 Anxiety
22.97  Causes of pruritus ani
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome
This is most common in young adults and occurs on the 
anterior rectal wall. It is thought to result from localised 
chronic trauma and/or ischaemia associated with disor-
dered puborectalis function and mucosal prolapse. The 
ulcer is seen at sigmoidoscopy and biopsies show a char-
acteristic accumulation of collagen.
Symptoms include minor bleeding and mucus per 
rectum, tenesmus and perineal pain. Treatment is often 
difficult but avoidance of straining at defecation is 
important and treatment of constipation may help. 
Marked mucosal prolapse is treated surgically.
Anal fissure
In this common problem, traumatic or ischaemic damage 
to the anal mucosa results in a superficial mucosal tear, 
most commonly in the midline posteriorly. Spasm of the 
internal anal sphincter exacerbates the condition. Severe 
pain occurs on defecation and there may be minor 
Alimentary tract and pancreatic disease
22
920
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Books and journal articles
Canard JM, Letard J-C, Palazzo L, Penman I, Lennon AM. 
Gastrointestinal endoscopy in practice. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2011.
Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ. Sleisenger and 
Fordtran’s gastrointestinal and liver disease. 9th edn. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2010.
Websites
www.bsg.org.uk British Society of Gastroenterology.
www.coeliac.org.uk Coeliac UK.
www.ecco-ibd.eu European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation.
www.gastro.org American Gastroenterological Association and 
American Digestive Health Foundation.
www.isg.org.in Indian Society of Gastroenterology.
www.nacc.org.uk Crohn’s and Colitis UK.
Figure acknowledgement
Fig. 22.39AB Hayes P, Simpson K. Gastroenterology and 
liver disease. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1995; 
copyright Elsevier.
intact. Cyclical engorgement and inflammation result in 
pain, bleeding, diarrhoea, constipation, and adhesions 
or obstruction. Low backache is frequent. The onset is 
usually between 20 and 45 years and is more common 
in nulliparous women. Bimanual examination may 
reveal tender nodules in the pouch of Douglas. Endo-
scopic studies only reveal the diagnosis if carried out 
during menstruation, when a bluish mass with intact 
overlying mucosa is apparent. In some patients, 
laparoscopy is required. Treatment options include 
laparoscopic diathermy and hormonal therapy with pro-
gestogens (e.g. norethisterone), gonadotrophin-releasing 
hormone analogues or danazol.
Pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis
In this rare condition, multiple gas-filled submucosal 
cysts line the colonic and small bowel walls. The cause 
is unknown, but the condition may be seen in patients 
with chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease, pyloric 
obstruction, scleroderma or dermatomyositis. Most 
patients are asymptomatic, although there may be 
abdominal cramp, diarrhoea, tenesmus, rectal bleeding 
and mucus discharge. The cysts are recognised on sig-
moidoscopy, plain abdominal X-rays or barium enema. 
Therapies reported to be effective include prolonged 
high-flow oxygen, elemental diets and antibiotics.
921
23 
Clinical examination of the abdomen for liver 
and biliary disease 922
Functional anatomy and physiology 924
Applied anatomy 924
Hepatic function 926
Investigation of liver and hepatobiliary 
disease 928
Liver blood biochemistry 928
Haematological tests 929
Immunological tests 929
Imaging 930
Histological examination 931
Non-invasive markers of hepatic  
fibrosis 932
Presenting problems in liver  
disease 932
Acute liver failure 932
Abnormal liver function tests 935
Jaundice 936
Hepatomegaly 938
Ascites 938
Hepatic encephalopathy 941
Variceal bleeding 942
Cirrhosis 942
Portal hypertension 945
Liver and  
biliary tract disease
Vascular liver disease 975
Hepatic arterial disease 975
Portal venous disease 975
Hepatic venous disease 976
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia of  
the liver 977
Pregnancy and the liver 977
Intercurrent and pre-existing liver  
disease 977
Pregnancy-associated liver disease 977
Liver transplantation 978
Indications and contraindications 978
Complications 979
Prognosis 979
Cholestatic and biliary disease 980
Chemical cholestasis 980
Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis 980
Intrahepatic biliary disease 980
Extrahepatic biliary disease 981
Secondary biliary cirrhosis 981
Gallstones 981
Cholecystitis 983
Choledocholithiasis 984
Tumours of the gallbladder and bile duct 985
Miscellaneous biliary disorders 986
Q.M. Anstee
D.E.J. Jones
Infections and the liver 948
Viral hepatitis 948
HIV infection and the liver 955
Liver abscess 956
Alcoholic liver disease 957
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 959
Autoimmune liver and biliary  
disease 961
Autoimmune hepatitis 962
Primary biliary cirrhosis 963
Primary sclerosing cholangitis 965
IgG4-associated cholangitis 966
Liver tumours and other focal liver  
lesions 966
Primary malignant tumours 967
Secondary malignant tumours 969
Benign tumours 970
Drugs and the liver 970
Drug-induced liver injury 970
Inherited liver diseases 972
Haemochromatosis 972
Wilson’s disease 973
Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency 974
Gilbert’s syndrome 974
Liver and biliary tract disease 
922
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE ABDOMEN FOR LIVER AND BILIARY DISEASE
Insets (Spider naevi) From Hayes and Simpson 1995; (Aspiration) Strachan 2008; (Palmar erythema) Martin 2011 – see p. 988.
4
3
5
1
6
2
Observation
Face
Jaundice
Spider naevi
Parotid swelling
Chest
Loss of body hair
Abdomen: inspection
Scars
Distension
Veins
Testicular atrophy
• Unkempt
• Smell of alcohol or fetor hepaticus
• Encephalopathy
• Weight loss
• Scratch marks from itching
Hands
Clubbing
Dupuytren’s contracture
Leuconychia
Bruising
Flapping tremor
(hepatic encephalopathy)
Legs
Bruising
Oedema
Xanthelasma and
jaundiced sclera in a patient
with chronic cholestasis
Palmar erythema
Spider naevi
Aspiration of ascitic fluid
Gynaecomastia
Abdomen: palpation/percussion/
auscultation
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Ascites
Palpable gallbladder
Hepatic bruit (rare)
Tumour
Dilated abdominal
wall veins (caput medusae)
Kayser–Fleischer rings
in Wilson’s disease
Clinical examination of the abdomen for liver and biliary disease
923
Causes
Associated clinical findings
Exudative (high protein)
Carcinoma
Weight loss ± hepatomegaly
Tuberculosis
Weight loss + fever
Transudative (low protein)
Cirrhosis
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Spider naevi
Renal failure (including nephrotic 
syndrome)
Generalised oedema
Peripheral oedema
Elevated jugular venous pressure (JVP)
Congestive heart failure
Ascites
Presenting features of liver disease represent combined effects of:
Impairment of liver function and metabolic sequelae of this
•	 Jaundice (failure of bilirubin clearance)
•	 Encephalopathy (failure of clearance of by-products of metabolism)
•	 Bleeding (impaired liver synthesis of clotting factors)
•	 Hypoglycaemia
Ongoing presence of aetiological factors (e.g. alcohol)
•	 Effects of aetiological agent, e.g. intoxication, withdrawal, cognitive impairment 
versus
•	 Effects of liver injury from agent, e.g. encephalopathy
Effects of chronic liver injury (> 6 mths)
Catabolic status (± poor nutrition)
•	 Skin thinning (‘paper-money skin’)
•	 Loss of muscle bulk
•	 Leuconychia
Impaired albumin synthesis
•	 Reduced oncotic pressure (contributes to ascites)
Reduced aldosterone clearance
•	 Na+ retention (contributes to ascites)
Reduced oestrogen clearance
•	 Mild feminisation of males (loss of body hair, gynaecomastia)
Presenting clinical features of liver disease
5  Assessment of liver size
Clinical assessment of hepatomegaly is 
important in diagnosing liver disease.
•	 Start in the right iliac fossa.
•	 Progress up the abdomen 2 cm with 
each breath (through open mouth).
•	 Confirm the lower border of the liver 
by percussion.
•	 Detect if smooth or irregular, tender 
or non-tender; ascertain shape.
•	 Identify the upper border by 
percussion.
History and significance of abdominal signs
1  Assessment of 
encephalopathy
Flapping tremor. Jerky forward 
movements every 5–10 seconds when arms 
are outstretched and hands are dorsiflexed 
suggest hepatic encephalopathy. The 
movements are coarser than those seen  
in tremor. 
Constructional apraxia. Drawing stars and 
clocks may reveal marked abnormality. 
Doctor
Patient
Number connection test. These 25 
numbered circles can normally be joined 
together within 30 seconds. Serial 
observations may provide useful information 
as long as the position of the numbers is 
varied to avoid the patient learning their 
pattern. 
Begin
End
19
20
18
15
16
13
3
2
17
8
14
5
1
9
7
6
4
10
25
23
11
24
12
22
21
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
924
Fig. 23.1  Liver blood supply. 
Inferior
vena cava
VIII
VII
II
I
VI
V
IV
III
Left hemiliver
(LHL) 
Right hemiliver
(RHL) 
Hepatic vein
Portal vein
Fig. 23.2  Liver structure and microstructure. A Liver anatomy showing relationship with pancreas, bile duct and duodenum.  B Hepatic lobule.
 C Hepatic acinus. 
Hepatic acinus
A
B
C
Right
hepatic duct
Gallbladder
Duodenum
Common hepatic duct
Left
hepatic duct
Common bile duct
Cystic duct
Liver
Blood flow
Bile flow
Central
vein
Portal
vein
Hepatic
artery
Bile
duct
Zone 1
(perivenous)
Good O2 supply
Gluconeogenesis
Bile salt formation
Zone 2
Zone 3
(pericentral)
Mono-oxygenation
Glycolysis
Lipolysis
Glucuronidation
Portal vein
Central vein
Hepatic
lobule
Hepatic artery
Bile duct
Sphincter of Oddi
Pancreatic duct
Pancreas
Sinusoid
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY
Applied anatomy
Normal liver structure and  
blood supply
The liver weighs 1.2–1.5 kg and has multiple functions, 
including key roles in metabolism, control of infection, 
elimination of toxins and by-products of metabolism. It 
is classically divided into left and right lobes by the 
falciform ligament, but a more useful functional division 
is into the right and left hemilivers, based on blood 
supply (Fig. 23.1). These are further divided into eight 
segments according to subdivisions of the hepatic and 
portal veins. Each segment has its own branch of the 
hepatic artery and biliary tree. The segmental anatomy 
of the liver has an important influence on imaging and 
treatment of liver tumours, given the increasing use of 
surgical resection. A liver segment is made up of multi-
ple smaller units known as lobules, comprised of a 
central vein, radiating sinusoids separated from each 
other by single liver cell (hepatocyte) plates, and periph-
eral portal tracts. The functional unit of the liver is the 
hepatic acinus (Fig. 23.2).
Blood flows into the acinus via a single branch of 
the portal vein and hepatic artery situated centrally in 
the portal tracts. Blood flows outwards along the hepatic 
sinusoids into one of several tributaries of the hepatic 
vein at the periphery of the acinus. Bile, formed by active 
and passive excretion by hepatocytes into channels 
called cholangioles which lie between them, flows in 
the opposite direction from the periphery of the acinus. 
The cholangioles converge in interlobular bile ducts 
in the portal tracts. The hepatocytes in each acinus lie in 
three zones, depending on their position relative to the 
portal tract. Those in zone 1 are closest to the terminal 
branches of the portal vein and hepatic artery, and are 
richly supplied with oxygenated blood, and blood 
containing the highest concentration of nutrients and 
toxins. Conversely, hepatocytes in zone 3 are furthest 
from the portal tracts and closest to the hepatic veins, 
and are therefore relatively hypoxic and exposed to 
lower concentrations of nutrients and toxins compared 
to zone 1. The different perfusion and toxin exposure 
patterns, and thus vulnerability, of hepatocytes in the 
different zones contribute to the often-patchy nature of 
liver injury.
Liver cells
Hepatocytes comprise 80% of liver cells. The remaining 
20% are the endothelial cells lining the sinusoids, 
Functional anatomy and physiology
23
925
epithelial cells lining the intrahepatic bile ducts, cells of 
the immune system (including macrophages (Kupffer 
cells) and unique populations of atypical lymphocytes), 
and a key population of non-parenchymal cells called 
stellate or Ito cells.
Endothelial cells line the sinusoids (Fig. 23.3), a 
network of capillary vessels that differ from other 
Fig. 23.3  Non-parenchymal liver cells. (B = B lymphocytes; 
NK = natural killer cells; PMN = polymorphonuclear leucocytes; 
T = T lymphocytes). 
Space of Disse
Hepatocyte
Kupffer
cell
B cell
Stellate
cell
Sinusoid
lumen
PMN cell
Endothelial
cells
NK cell
T cell
Fig. 23.4  Pathogenic mechanisms in hepatic fibrosis. Stellate cell activation occurs under the influence of cytokines released by other cell types in 
the liver, including hepatocytes, Kupffer cells (tissue macrophages), platelets and lymphocytes. Once stellate cells become activated, they can perpetuate 
their own activation by synthesis of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β1,) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) through autocrine loops. Activated 
stellate cells produce TGF-β1, stimulating the production of collagen matrix, as well as inhibitors of collagen breakdown. The inhibitors of collagen 
breakdown, matrix metalloproteinase 2 and 9 (MMP2 and MMP9), are inactivated in turn by tissue inhibitors TIMP1 and TIMP2, which are increased in 
fibrosis. Inflammation also contributes to fibrosis, with the cytokine profile produced by Th2 lymphocytes, such as interleukin-6 and 13 (IL-6 and IL-13). 
Activated stellate cells also produce endothelin 1 (ET1), which may contribute to portal hypertension. (EGF = epidermal growth factor; IGF1 = insulin-like 
growth factor 1; ROS = reactive oxygen species). 
Stellate
cell
Activated
stellate cell
Peroxide
products IGF1
TGF-α
Injured
hepatocyte
EGF
Platelets
TGF-β1
PDGF
Initiation
Activated
Kupffer cell
Chemotaxis
Vasoconstriction
(ET1)
Cytokine
production
(IL-10)
Perpetuation
TGF-β1
PDGF
ROS
PDGF
ROS
Matrix degeneration
(MMP2, TIMP1+ 2)
Fibrogenesis
(TGF-β1)
TGF-β1
capillary beds in the body in that there is no basement 
membrane. The endothelial cells have gaps between 
them (fenestrae) of about 0.1 micron in diameter, allow-
ing free flow of fluid and particulate matter to the 
hepatocytes. Individual hepatocytes are separated 
from the leaky sinusoids by the space of Disse, which 
contains stellate cells that store vitamin A and play an 
important part in regulating liver blood flow. They 
may also be immunologically active and play a role 
in the liver’s contribution to defence against pathogens. 
The key role of stellate cells in terms of pathology is 
in the development of hepatic fibrosis, the precursor 
of cirrhosis. They undergo activation in response to 
cytokines produced following liver injury, differentiat-
ing into myofibroblasts, which are the major producers 
of the collagen-rich matrix that forms fibrous tissue 
(Fig. 23.4).
Blood supply
The liver is unique as an organ as it has dual perfusion, 
receiving a majority of its supply via the portal vein, 
which drains blood from the gut via the splanchnic 
circulation and is the principal route for nutrient 
trafficking to the liver, and a minority from the hepatic 
artery. The portal venous contribution is 50–90%. The 
dual perfusion system, and the variable contribution 
from portal vein and hepatic artery, can have important 
effects on the clinical expression of liver ischaemia 
(which typically exhibits a less dramatic pattern than 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
926
•	 Amino acids from dietary proteins are used for 
synthesis of plasma proteins, including albumin. 
The liver produces 8–14 g of albumin per day, and 
this plays a critical role in maintaining oncotic 
pressure in the vascular space and in the transport 
of small molecules like bilirubin, hormones and 
drugs throughout the body. Amino acids that are 
not required for the production of new proteins  
are broken down, with the amino group being 
converted ultimately to urea.
•	 Following a meal, more than half of the glucose 
absorbed is taken up by the liver and stored as 
glycogen or converted to glycerol and fatty acids, 
thus preventing hyperglycaemia. During fasting, 
glycogen is broken down to release glucose 
(gluconeogenesis), thereby preventing 
hypoglycaemia (p. 800).
•	 The liver plays a central role in lipid metabolism, 
producing very low-density lipoproteins and 
further metabolising low- and high-density 
lipoproteins (see Fig. 16.14, p. 452). Dysregulation of 
lipid metabolism is thought to have a critical role  
in the pathogenesis of NAFLD. Lipids are now 
recognised to play a key part in the pathogenesis  
of hepatitis C, facilitating viral entry into 
hepatocytes.
Clotting factors
The liver produces key proteins that are involved in the 
coagulation cascade. Many of these coagulation factors 
(II, VII, IX and X) are post-translationally modified by 
vitamin K-dependent enzymes, and their synthesis is 
impaired in vitamin K deficiency (p. 997). Reduced clot-
ting factor synthesis is an important and easily accessi-
ble biomarker of liver function in the setting of liver 
injury. Prothrombin time (PT; or the International Nor-
malised Ratio, INR) is therefore one of the most impor-
tant clinical tools available for the assessment of 
hepatocyte function. Note that the deranged PT or INR 
ischaemia in other organs, a fact that can sometimes lead 
to it being missed clinically), and can raise practical chal-
lenges in liver transplant surgery.
Biliary system and gallbladder
Hepatocytes provide the driving force for bile flow by 
creating osmotic gradients of bile acids, which form 
micelles in bile (bile acid-dependent bile flow), and of 
sodium (bile acid-independent bile flow). Bile is secreted 
by hepatocytes and flows from cholangioles to the 
biliary canaliculi. The canaliculi join to form larger 
intrahepatic bile ducts, which in turn merge to form the 
right and left hepatic ducts. These ducts join as they 
emerge from the liver to form the common hepatic duct, 
which becomes the common bile duct after joining the 
cystic duct (see Fig. 23.2). The common bile duct is 
approximately 5 cm long and 4–6 mm wide. The distal 
portion of the duct passes through the head of the pan-
creas and usually joins the pancreatic duct before enter-
ing the duodenum through the ampullary sphincter 
(sphincter of Oddi). It should be noted, though, that the 
anatomy of the lower common bile duct can vary widely. 
Common bile duct pressure is maintained by rhythmic 
contraction and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi; this 
pressure exceeds gallbladder pressure in the fasting 
state, so that bile normally flows into the gallbladder, 
where it is concentrated tenfold by resorption of water 
and electrolytes.
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped sac typically lying 
under the right hemiliver, with its fundus located ante-
riorly behind the tip of the 9th costal cartilage. Anato­
mical variation is common and should be considered 
when assessing patients clinically and radiologically. 
The function of the gallbladder is to concentrate, and 
provide a reservoir for, bile. Gallbladder tone is main-
tained by vagal activity, and cholecystokinin released 
from the duodenal mucosa during feeding causes gall-
bladder contraction and reduces sphincter pressure, so 
that bile flows into the duodenum. The body and neck 
of the gallbladder pass postero-medially towards the 
porta hepatis, and the cystic duct then joins it to the 
common hepatic duct. The cystic duct mucosa has prom-
inent crescentic folds (valves of Heister), giving it a 
beaded appearance on cholangiography.
Hepatic function
Carbohydrate, amino acid  
and lipid metabolism
The liver plays a central role in carbohydrate, lipid and 
amino acid metabolism, and is also involved in metabo-
lising drugs and environmental toxins (Fig. 23.5). An 
important and increasingly recognised role for the liver 
is in the integration of metabolic pathways, regulating 
the response of the body to feeding and starvation. 
Abnormality in metabolic pathways and their regulation 
can play an important role both in liver disease (e.g. 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)) and in dis-
eases that are not conventionally regarded as diseases of 
the liver (such as type II diabetes mellitus and inborn 
errors of metabolism). Hepatocytes have specific path-
ways to handle each of the nutrients absorbed from the 
gut and carried to the liver via the portal vein.
Fig. 23.5  Important liver functions. 
Excretion
Bile salts
Bilirubin
Drugs
Phospholipid
Cholesterol
Storage
Iron
Copper
Vitamins A, D and B12
Nutrient metabolism
Carbohydrate
Protein
Lipids
Protein synthesis
Albumin
Coagulation factors
Complement factors
Haptoglobin
Caeruloplasmin
Transferrin
Protease inhibitors,
e.g. α1-antitrypsin
Immune
functions
Local cells
(Kupffer cells)
Innate factors
(defensins etc.)
Functional anatomy and physiology
23
927
bilirubin and cholesterol. Several biliary transporter 
proteins have been identified (Fig. 23.7). Mutations in 
genes encoding these proteins have been identified 
in inherited intrahepatic biliary diseases presenting 
in childhood, and in adult-onset disease such as 
intra­hepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and gallstone 
formation.
Storage of vitamins and minerals
Vitamins A, D and B12 are stored by the liver in large 
amounts, while others, such as vitamin K and folate, are 
stored in smaller amounts and disappear rapidly if 
dietary intake is reduced. The liver is also able to 
metabolise vitamins to more active compounds, e.g. 
7-dehydrocholesterol to 25(OH) vitamin D. Vitamin K is 
a fat-soluble vitamin and so the inability to absorb fat-
soluble vitamins, as occurs in biliary obstruction, results 
in a coagulopathy. The liver also stores minerals such as 
iron, in ferritin and haemosiderin, and copper, which is 
excreted in bile.
Immune regulation
Approximately 9% of the normal liver is composed of 
immune cells (see Fig. 23.3). Cells of the innate immune 
system include Kupffer cells derived from blood mono-
cytes, the liver macrophages and natural killer (NK) 
cells, as well as ‘classical’ B and T cells of the adaptive 
immune response (p. 76). An additional type of atypical 
lymphocyte, with phenotypic features of both T cells 
and NK cells is thought to play an important role in host 
defence, through linking of innate and adaptive immu-
nity. The enrichment of such cells in the liver reflects 
the unique importance of the liver in preventing 
microorganisms from the gut entering the systemic 
circulation.
seen in liver disease may not directly equate to increased 
bleeding risk, as these tests do not capture the concur-
rent reduced synthesis of anticoagulant factors, including 
protein C and protein S. In general, therefore, correction 
of PT using blood products before minor invasive pro-
cedures should be guided by clinical risk rather than the 
absolute value of the PT.
Bilirubin metabolism and bile
The liver plays a central role in the metabolism of 
bilirubin and is responsible for the production of bile 
(Fig. 23.6). Between 425 and 510 mmol (250–300 mg) of 
unconjugated bilirubin is produced from the catabolism 
of haem daily. Bilirubin in the blood is normally almost 
all unconjugated and, because it is not water-soluble, is 
bound to albumin and does not pass into the urine. 
Unconjugated bilirubin is taken up by hepatocytes at 
the sinusoidal membrane, where it is conjugated in the 
endoplasmic reticulum by UDP-glucuronyl transferase, 
producing bilirubin mono- and diglucuronide. Impaired 
conjugation by this enzyme is a cause of inherited hyper-
bilirubinaemias (see Box 23.17, p. 937). These bilirubin 
conjugates are water-soluble and are exported into the 
bile canaliculi by specific carriers on the hepatocyte 
membranes. The conjugated bilirubin is excreted in the 
bile and passes into the duodenal lumen.
Once in the intestine, conjugated bilirubin is metabo-
lised by colonic bacteria to form stercobilinogen, which 
may be further oxidised to stercobilin. Both sterco­
bilinogen and stercobilin are then excreted in the stool, 
contributing to its brown colour. Biliary obstruction 
results in reduced stercobilinogen in the stool, and the 
stools become pale. A small amount of stercobilinogen 
(4 mg/day) is absorbed from the bowel, passes through 
the liver, and is excreted in the urine, where it is known 
as urobilinogen or, following further oxidisation, uro­
bilin. The liver secretes 1–2 L of bile daily. Bile contains 
bile acids (formed from cholesterol), phospholipids, 
Fig. 23.6  Pathway of bilirubin excretion. 
Liver
Kidney
Urobilinogen
(4 mg/day)
Urobilin
Bilirubin
mono- or
diglucuronide
(conjugated)
Bile
Stercobilinogen
(100 –200 mg/day)
Stercobilin
Stool
Colonic
bacteria
Large
intestine
Bilirubin
(unconjugated)
Urobilinogen
(enterohepatic
circulation)
Blood
Fig. 23.7  Biliary transporter proteins. On the hepatocyte basolateral 
membrane, NTCP (sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide) 
mediates uptake of conjugated bile acids from portal blood. At the 
canalicular membrane, these bile acids are secreted via BSEP (bile salt 
export pump) into bile. MDR3 (multidrug resistance protein 3), also situated 
on the canalicular membrane, transports phospholipid to the outer side of 
the membrane. This solubilises bile acids, forming micelles and protecting 
bile duct membranes from bile salt damage. FIC1 (familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis 1) moves phosphatidylserine from the inside to the outside  
of the canalicular membrane; mutations result in familial cholestasis 
syndrome in childhood. MDR2 (multidrug resistance 2) regulates transport 
of glutathione. MRP2 (multidrug resistance protein 2) transports bilirubin 
and is induced by rifampicin. OATP (organic anion transporter protein) 
transports bilirubin and organic anions. 
Bile duct
NTCP
Bile acids
Bilirubin and
organic
anions
OATP
MDR3
BSEP
Hepatocytes
MDR2
Sinusoid
Bile
canaliculus
MRP2
FICI
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
928
injured hepatocytes, instead provide biochemical evi-
dence of liver cell damage. Liver function per se is best 
assessed by the serum albumin, PT and bilirubin because 
of the role played by the liver in synthesis of albumin 
and clotting factors and in clearance of bilirubin. 
Although LFT abnormalities are often non-specific, the 
patterns are frequently helpful in directing further 
investigations. Also, levels of bilirubin and albumin and 
the PT are related to clinical outcome in patients with 
severe liver disease, reflected by their use in several 
prognostic scores: the Child–Pugh and MELD scores in 
cirrhosis (see Boxes 23.30 and 23.32, p. 944), the Glasgow 
score in alcoholic hepatitis (see Box 23.54, p. 959) and the 
King’s College Hospital criteria for liver transplantation 
in acute liver failure (see Box 23.11, p. 934).
Bilirubin and albumin
The degree of elevation of bilirubin can reflect the degree 
of liver damage. A raised bilirubin often occurs earlier 
in the natural history of biliary disease (e.g. primary 
biliary cirrhosis) than in disease of the liver parenchyma 
(e.g. cirrhosis) where the hepatocytes are primarily 
involved. Swelling of the liver within its capsule in 
inflammation can, however, sometimes impair bile flow 
and cause an elevation of bilirubin level that is dispro-
portionate to the degree of liver injury. Caution is there-
fore needed in interpreting the level of liver injury 
purely on the basis of bilirubin elevation.
Serum albumin levels are often low in patients with 
liver disease. This is due to a change in the volume of 
distribution of albumin, and reduced synthesis. Since 
the plasma half-life of albumin is about 2 weeks, albumin 
levels may be normal in acute liver failure but are almost 
always reduced in chronic liver failure.
Alanine aminotransferase and 
aspartate aminotransferase
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate amino­
transferase (AST) are located in the cytoplasm of the 
hepatocyte; AST is also located in the hepatocyte mito-
chondria. Although both transaminase enzymes are 
widely distributed, expression of ALT outside the 
liver is relatively low and this enzyme is therefore 
considered more specific for hepatocellular damage. 
Large increases of aminotransferase activity favour 
hepatocellular damage, and this pattern of LFT abnor-
mality is known as ‘hepatitic’.
Alkaline phosphatase and  
gamma-glutamyl transferase
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is the collective name given 
to several different enzymes that hydrolyse phosphate 
esters at alkaline pH. These enzymes are widely distrib-
uted in the body, but the main sites of production 
are the liver, gastrointestinal tract, bone, placenta and 
kidney. ALPs are post-translationally modified, result-
ing in the production of several different isoenzymes, 
which differ in abundance in different tissues. ALP 
enzymes in the liver are located in cell membranes of 
the hepatic sinusoids and the biliary canaliculi. Accord-
ingly, levels rise with intrahepatic and extrahepatic 
biliary obstruction and with sinusoidal obstruction, as 
occurs in infiltrative liver disease.
Kupffer cells constitute the largest single mass of 
tissue-resident macrophages in the body and account 
for 80% of the phagocytic capacity of this system. They 
remove aged and damaged red blood cells, bacteria, 
viruses, antigen–antibody complexes and endotoxin. 
They also produce a wide variety of inflammatory medi-
ators that can act locally or may be released into the 
systemic circulation.
The immunological environment of the liver is unique 
in that antigens presented within it tend to induce 
immunological tolerance. This is of importance in liver 
transplantation, where classical major histocompatibil-
ity (MHC) barriers may be crossed, and also in chronic 
viral infections, when immune responses may be attenu-
ated. The mechanisms that underlie this phenomenon 
have not been fully defined.
INVESTIGATION OF LIVER AND 
HEPATOBILIARY DISEASE
Investigations play an important role in the manage-
ment of liver disease in three settings:
•	 identification of the presence of liver disease
•	 establishing the aetiology
•	 understanding disease severity (in particular, 
identification of cirrhosis with its complications).
When planning investigations it is important to be clear 
as to which of these goals is being addressed.
Suspicion of the presence of liver disease is normally 
based on blood biochemistry abnormality (‘liver func-
tion tests’, or ‘LFTs’), undertaken either as a result of 
clinical suspicion or, increasingly, in the setting of health 
screening. Less commonly, suspicion arises after a struc-
tural abnormality is identified on imaging.
Aetiology is typically established through a combina-
tion of history, specific blood tests and, where appropri-
ate, imaging and liver biopsy.
Staging of disease (in essence, the identification of 
cirrhosis) is largely histological, although there is 
increasing interest in non-invasive approaches, includ-
ing novel imaging modalities, serum markers of fibrosis 
and the use of predictive scoring systems.
The aims of investigation in patients with suspected 
liver disease are shown in Box 23.1.
Liver blood biochemistry
Liver blood biochemistry (LFTs) includes the measure-
ment of serum bilirubin, aminotransferases, alkaline 
phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transferase and albu­
min. Most analytes measured by LFTs are not truly 
‘function’ tests but, given that they are released by 
•	 Detect hepatic abnormality
•	 Measure the severity of liver damage
•	 Detect the pattern of liver function test abnormality: hepatitic 
or obstructive/cholestatic
•	 Identify the specific cause
•	 Investigate possible complications
23.1  Aims of investigations in patients with 
suspected liver disease
Investigation of liver and hepatobiliary disease
23
929
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) is a microsomal 
enzyme found in many cells and tissues of the body. 
The highest concentrations are located in the liver, 
where it is produced by hepatocytes and by the epi­
thelium lining small bile ducts. The function of GGT is 
to transfer glutamyl groups from gamma-glutamyl pep-
tides to other peptides and amino acids.
The pattern of a modest increase in aminotransferase 
activity and large increases in ALP and GGT activity 
favours biliary obstruction and is commonly described 
as ‘cholestatic’ or ‘obstructive’ (Box 23.2). Isolated eleva-
tion of the serum GGT is relatively common, and may 
occur during ingestion of microsomal enzyme-inducing 
drugs, including alcohol (Box 23.3), but also in NAFLD.
Other biochemical tests
Other widely available biochemical tests may become 
altered in patients with liver disease:
•	 Hyponatraemia occurs in severe liver disease due  
to increased production of antidiuretic hormone 
(ADH; Fig. 16.5, p. 435).
•	 Serum urea may be reduced in hepatic failure, 
whereas levels of urea may be increased following 
gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
•	 When high levels of urea are accompanied by raised 
bilirubin, high serum creatinine and low urinary 
sodium, this suggests hepatorenal failure, which 
carries a grave prognosis.
•	 Significantly elevated ferritin suggests 
haemochromatosis. Modest elevations can  
be seen in inflammatory disease and alcohol  
excess.
Haematological tests
Blood count
The peripheral blood count is often abnormal and can 
give a clue to the underlying diagnosis:
•	 A normochromic normocytic anaemia may reflect 
recent gastrointestinal haemorrhage, whereas 
•	 Barbiturates
•	 Carbamazepine
•	 Ethanol
•	 Griseofulvin
•	 Isoniazid
•	 Rifampicin
•	 Phenytoin
23.3  Drugs that increase levels of 
gamma-glutamyltransferase
Pattern
AST/ALT
GGT
ALP
Biliary obstruction
↑
↑↑
↑↑↑
Hepatitis
↑↑↑
↑
↑
Alcohol/enzyme-inducing drugs
N/↑
↑↑
N
N = normal; ↑ mild elevation (< twice normal); ↑↑ moderate elevation 
(2–5 times normal); ↑↑↑ marked elevation (> 5 times normal).
(ALT = alanine aminotransferase; ALP = alkaline phosphatase; AST = 
aspartate aminotransferase; GGT = gamma-glutamyltransferase)
23.2  ‘Hepatitic’ and ‘cholestatic’/‘obstructive’ 
liver function tests
chronic blood loss is characterised by a 
hypochromic microcytic anaemia secondary to iron 
deficiency. A high erythrocyte mean cell volume 
(macrocytosis) is associated with alcohol misuse, 
but target cells in any jaundiced patient also result 
in a macrocytosis. Macrocytosis can persist for a 
long period of time after alcohol cessation, making 
it a poor marker of ongoing consumption.
•	 Leucopenia may complicate portal hypertension and 
hypersplenism, whereas leucocytosis may occur 
with cholangitis, alcoholic hepatitis and hepatic 
abscesses. Atypical lymphocytes are seen in 
infectious mononucleosis, which may be 
complicated by an acute hepatitis.
•	 Thrombocytopenia is common in cirrhosis and 
is due to reduced platelet production, and  
increased breakdown because of hypersplenism. 
Thrombopoietin, required for platelet production,  
is produced in the liver and levels fall with 
worsening liver function. Thus platelet levels are 
usually more depressed than white cells and 
haemoglobin in the presence of hypersplenism  
in patients with cirrhosis. A low platelet count  
is often an indicator of chronic liver disease, 
particularly in the context of hepatomegaly. 
Thrombocytosis is unusual in patients with liver 
disease but may occur in those with active 
gastrointestinal haemorrhage and, rarely, in 
hepatocellular carcinoma.
Coagulation tests
These are often abnormal in patients with liver disease. 
The normal half-lives of the vitamin K-dependent coagu­
lation factors in the blood are short (5–72 hours) and so 
changes in the prothrombin time occur relatively quickly 
following liver damage; these changes provide valuable 
prognostic information in patients with both acute and 
chronic liver failure. An increased PT is evidence of 
severe liver damage in chronic liver disease. Vitamin K 
does not reverse this deficiency if it is due to liver 
disease, but will correct the PT if the cause is vitamin K 
deficiency, as may occur with biliary obstruction due to 
non-absorption of fat-soluble vitamins.
Immunological tests
A variety of tests are available to evaluate the aetiology 
of hepatic disease (Boxes 23.4 and 23.5). The presence 
of liver-related autoantibodies can be suggestive of the 
presence of autoimmune liver disease (although false-
positive results can occur in non-autoimmune inflam-
matory disease such as NAFLD). Elevation in overall 
•	 Hepatitis B surface antigen
•	 Hepatitis C antibody
•	 Liver autoantibodies 
(antinuclear antibody, 
smooth muscle antibody, 
antimitochondrial antibody)
•	 Immunoglobulins
•	 Ferritin
•	 α1-antitrypsin
•	 Caeruloplasmin
23.4  Chronic liver disease screen
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
930
Computed tomography and 
magnetic resonance imaging
Computed tomography (CT) detects smaller focal 
lesions in the liver, especially when combined with con-
trast injection (Fig. 23.9). Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) can also be used to localise and confirm the aetiol-
ogy of focal liver lesions, particularly primary and sec-
ondary tumours.
serum immunoglobulin levels can also be suggestive 
of autoimmunity (immunoglobulin (Ig)G and IgM). 
Elevated serum IgA can be seen, often in more advanced 
alcoholic liver disease and NAFLD, although the asso-
ciation is not specific.
Imaging
Several imaging techniques can be used to determine the 
site and general nature of structural lesions in the liver 
and biliary tree. In general, however, imaging tech-
niques are unable to identify hepatic inflammation and 
have poor sensitivity for liver fibrosis unless advanced 
cirrhosis with portal hypertension is present.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is non-invasive and most commonly used as 
a ‘first-line’ test to identify gallstones, biliary obstruction 
(Fig. 23.8) or thrombosis in the hepatic vasculature. 
Ultrasound is good for the identification of spleno­
megaly and abnormalities in liver texture, but is less 
effective at identifying diffuse parenchymal disease. 
Focal lesions, such as tumours, may not be detected if 
they are below 2 cm in diameter and have echogenic 
characteristics similar to normal liver tissue. Bubble-
based contrast media are now routinely used and can 
enhance discriminant capability. Doppler ultrasound 
allows blood flow in the hepatic artery, portal vein and 
hepatic veins to be investigated. Endoscopic ultrasound 
provides high-resolution images of the pancreas, biliary 
tree and liver (see Fig. 23.45, p. 985).
Fig. 23.8  Ultrasound showing a stone in the gallbladder. Stone 
(arrow) with acoustic shadow (S). 
S
Diagnosis
Clinical clue
Initial test
Additional tests
Alcoholic liver disease
History
LFTs
AST > ALT; high MCV
Random blood alcohol
Non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD)
Metabolic syndrome (central obesity, 
diabetes, hypertension)
LFTs
Liver biopsy
Chronic hepatitis B
Injection drug use; blood transfusion
HBsAg
HBeAg, HBeAb
HBV-DNA
Chronic hepatitis C
HCV antibody
HCV-RNA
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Itching; raised ALP
AMA
Liver biopsy
Primary sclerosing 
cholangitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
MRCP
ANCA
Autoimmune hepatitis
Other autoimmune diseases
ASMA, ANA, LKM, 
immunoglobulin
Liver biopsy
Haemochromatosis
Diabetes/joint pain
Transferrin saturation, ferritin
HFE gene test
Wilson’s disease
Neurological signs; haemolysis
Caeruloplasmin
24-hr urinary copper
α1-antitrypsin
Lung disease
α1-antitrypsin level
α1-antitrypsin genotype
Drug-induced liver disease
Drug/herbal remedy history
LFTs
Liver biopsy
Coeliac disease
Malabsorption
Endomysial antibody
Small bowel biopsy
(ALP = alkaline phosphatase; ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AMA = antimitochondrial antibody; ANA = antinuclear antibody; ANCA = antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibodies; ASMA = anti-smooth muscle antibody; AST = aspartate aminotransferase; HBeAb = antibody to hepatitis B e antigen; HBeAg = hepatitis 
B e antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus; HFE = haemochromatosis (high iron/Fe); LKM = liver-kidney 
microsomal antibody; MCV = mean cell volume; MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography)
23.5  How to identify the cause of LFT abnormality
Investigation of liver and hepatobiliary disease
23
931
Both endoscopic and percutaneous approaches allow 
therapeutic interventions, such as the insertion of biliary 
stents across malignant bile duct strictures. The percu-
taneous approach is only used if it is not possible to 
access the bile duct endoscopically.
Histological examination
An ultrasound-guided liver biopsy can confirm the 
severity of liver damage and provide aetiological infor-
mation. It is performed percutaneously with a Trucut 
or Menghini needle, usually through an intercostal 
space under local anaesthesia, or radiologically using a 
transjugular approach.
Percutaneous liver biopsy is a relatively safe proce-
dure if the conditions detailed in Box 23.6 are met, but 
carries a mortality of about 0.01%. The main com­
plications are abdominal and/or shoulder pain, bleed-
ing and biliary peritonitis. Biliary peritonitis is rare 
and usually occurs when a biopsy is performed in 
a patient with obstruction of a large bile duct. Liver 
biopsies can be carried out in patients with defective 
haemostasis if:
•	 the defect is corrected with fresh frozen plasma and 
platelet transfusion
•	 the biopsy is obtained by the transjugular route, or
Hepatic angiography is seldom used nowadays as a 
diagnostic tool, since CT and MRI are both able to 
provide images of hepatic vasculature, but it still has a 
therapeutic role in the embolisation of vascular tumours 
such as hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatic venography 
is now rarely performed.
Cholangiography
Cholangiography can be undertaken by magnetic reso-
nance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP, Fig. 23.10), 
endoscopy (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancrea-
tography, ERCP, Fig. 23.11) or the percutaneous 
approach (percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, 
PTC). The latter does not allow the ampulla of Vater or 
pancreatic duct to be visualised. MRCP is as good as 
ERCP at providing images of the biliary tree but has 
fewer complications and is the diagnostic test of choice. 
Fig. 23.9  CT scan in a patient with cirrhosis. The liver is small and 
has an irregular outline (black arrow), the spleen is enlarged (long white 
arrow), fluid (ascites) is seen around the liver, and collateral vessels are 
present around the proximal stomach (short white arrow). 
Fig. 23.10  MRCP showing a biliary stricture due to 
cholangiocarcinoma in the distal common bile duct (C). 
The proximal common bile duct (B) is dilated but the pancreatic  
duct (P) is normal. 
B
C
P
Fig. 23.11  ERCP showing the normal biliary (B) and pancreatic 
(P) duct system. 
B
P
•	 Cooperative patient
•	 Prothrombin time < 4 secs prolonged
•	 Platelet count > 80 × 109/L
•	 Exclusion of bile duct obstruction, localised skin infection, 
advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, marked 
ascites and severe anaemia
23.6  Conditions required for safe 
percutaneous liver biopsy
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
932
•	 the procedure is conducted percutaneously under 
ultrasound control and the needle track is then 
plugged with procoagulant material.
In patients with potentially resectable malignancy, 
biopsy should be avoided due to the potential risk of 
tumour dissemination. Operative or laparoscopic liver 
biopsy may sometimes be valuable.
Although the pathological features of liver disease 
are complex, with several features occurring together, 
liver disorders can be broadly classified histologically 
into fatty liver (steatosis), hepatitis (inflammation, 
‘grade’) and cirrhosis (fibrosis, ‘stage’). The use of special 
histological stains can help in determining aetiology. 
The clinical features and prognosis of these changes 
are dependent on the underlying aetiology, and are dis-
cussed in the relevant sections below.
Non-invasive markers of  
hepatic fibrosis
Non-invasive markers of liver fibrosis have been devel-
oped and can reduce the need for liver biopsy to assess 
the extent of fibrosis in some settings.
Serological markers of hepatic fibrosis, such as α2-
macroglobulin, haptoglobin and routine clinical bio-
chemistry tests, are used in the Fibrotest®. The ELF® 
(Enhanced Liver Fibrosis) serological assay uses a com-
bination of hyaluronic acid, procollagen peptide III 
(PIIINP) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 
(TIMP1). These tests are good at differentiating severe 
fibrosis from mild scarring, but are limited in their 
ability to detect subtle changes. A number of non- 
commercial scores based on standard biochemical and 
anthropometric indices have also been described that 
provide similar levels of sensitivity and specificity (e.g. 
the FIB4 Score).
An alternative to serological markers is transient elas-
tography in which ultrasound-based shock waves are 
sent through the liver to measure liver stiffness as a sur-
rogate for hepatic fibrosis. Once again, this test is good 
at differentiating severe fibrosis from mild scarring, but 
is limited in its ability to detect subtle changes, and 
validity may be affected by obesity.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN  
LIVER DISEASE
Liver injury may be either acute or chronic. The main 
causes are listed in Figure 23.12 and discussed in detail 
later in the chapter.
•	 Acute liver injury may present with non-specific 
symptoms of fatigue and abnormal LFTs, or  
with jaundice and acute liver failure.
•	 Chronic liver injury is defined as hepatic injury, 
inflammation and/or fibrosis occurring in the liver 
for more than 6 months. In the early stages, patients 
can be asymptomatic with fluctuating abnormal 
LFTs. With more severe liver damage, however,  
the presentation can be with jaundice, portal 
hypertension or other signs of cirrhosis and  
hepatic decompensation (Box 23.7).
Fig. 23.12  Causes of acute and chronic liver injury. *Although 
there is often evidence of chronic liver disease at presentation, may 
present acutely with jaundice. In alcoholic liver disease this is due to 
superimposed alcoholic hepatitis. (NAFLD = non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease; PBC = primary biliary cirrhosis; PSC = primary sclerosing 
cholangitis). 
Acute liver injury
Viral hepatitis
(A, B, E)
Alcoholic liver disease*
Autoimmune hepatitis*
Drugs
Chronic liver injury
Chronic viral hepatitis
(B + C)
PBC
PSC
NAFLD
Haemochromatosis
Wilson’s disease
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
Cryptogenic (unknown)
Severity
Acute liver injury
Chronic liver injury
Mild/moderate
Abnormal LFTs
Abnormal LFTs
Severe
Jaundice
Signs of cirrhosis ± 
portal hypertension
Very severe
Acute liver failure
Chronic liver failure*
Jaundice
Ascites
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
Portal hypertension 
with variceal bleeding
*May not occur until several years after cirrhosis has presented.
23.7  Presentation of liver disease
Acute liver failure
Acute liver failure is an uncommon but serious condi-
tion. The presentation is with progressive deterioration 
in liver function and mental changes progressing from 
confusion to coma. The syndrome was originally defined 
further as occurring within 8 weeks of onset of the 
precipitating illness, in the absence of evidence of pre-
existing liver disease. This distinguishes it from instances 
in which hepatic encephalopathy represents a deteriora-
tion in chronic liver disease.
Liver failure occurs when there is insufficient meta-
bolic and synthetic function for the needs of the patient. 
Although the direct cause is usually acute loss of func-
tional hepatocytes, this can occur in different settings, 
which have implications for outcome and treatment. In 
a patient whose liver was previously normal (fulminant 
liver failure), the level of injury needed to cause liver 
failure, and thus the patient risk, is very high. In a 
patient with pre-existing chronic liver disease, the addi-
tional acute insult needed to precipitate liver failure 
is much less. It is critical, therefore, to understand 
whether liver failure is a true acute event or an acute 
Presenting problems in liver disease 
23
933
deterioration on a background of pre-existing injury 
(which may itself not have been diagnosed). Although 
ultimately liver biopsy may be necessary, it is the pres-
ence or absence of the clinical features suggesting chro-
nicity that guides the clinician.
More recently, newer classifications have been devel-
oped to reflect differences in presentation and outcome 
of acute liver failure. One such classification divides 
acute liver failure into hyperacute, acute and subacute, 
according to the interval between onset of jaundice and 
encephalopathy (Box 23.8).
Pathophysiology
Any cause of liver damage can produce acute liver 
failure, provided it is sufficiently severe (Fig. 23.13). 
Acute viral hepatitis is the most common cause world-
wide, whereas paracetamol toxicity (p. 212) is the 
most frequent cause in the UK. Acute liver failure 
occurs occasionally with other drugs, or from Amanita 
phalloides (mushroom) poisoning, in pregnancy, in 
Wilson’s disease, following shock (p. 190) and, rarely, in 
extensive malignant disease of the liver. In 10% of cases 
the cause of acute liver failure remains unknown and 
these patients are often labelled as having ‘non-A–E 
viral hepatitis’ or ‘cryptogenic’ acute liver failure.
Type
Time: jaundice to 
encephalopathy
Cerebral 
oedema
Common 
causes
Hyperacute
< 7 days
Common
Viral, 
paracetamol
Acute
8–28 days
Common
Cryptogenic, 
drugs
Subacute
29 days– 
12 weeks
Uncommon
Cryptogenic, 
drugs
23.8  Classification of acute liver failure
Fig. 23.13  Causes of acute liver failure in the UK. The relative frequency of the different causes varies according to geographical area. 
Miscellaneous
(< 5%)
Acute
liver failure
Viral infections
(5%)
Drugs
(70–80%)
Poisons
(< 5%)
Amanita phalloides
Paracetamol
Halothane
Antituberculous drugs
Ecstasy
Herbal remedies
Hepatitis A, B, E (rare)
Wilson's disease
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Shock and cardiac failure
Budd–Chiari syndrome
Leptospirosis
Liver metastases
Lymphoma
      Cryptogenic
             (5–10%)
Non-A–E viral
hepatitis
Clinical assessment
Cerebral disturbance (hepatic encephalopathy and/or 
cerebral oedema) is the cardinal manifestation of acute 
liver failure, but in the early stages this can be mild and 
episodic and so its absence does not exclude a significant 
acute liver injury. The initial clinical features are often 
subtle and include reduced alertness and poor concen-
tration, progressing through behavioural abnormalities 
such as restlessness and aggressive outbursts, to drowsi-
ness and coma (Box 23.9). Cerebral oedema may occur 
due to increased intracranial pressure, causing unequal 
or abnormally reacting pupils, fixed pupils, hyperten-
sive episodes, bradycardia, hyperventilation, profuse 
sweating, local or general myoclonus, focal fits or decer-
ebrate posturing. Papilloedema occurs rarely and is a 
late sign. More general symptoms include weakness, 
nausea and vomiting. Right hypochondrial discomfort 
is an occasional feature.
The patient may be jaundiced; however, this may not 
be present at the outset (e.g. in paracetamol overdose) 
and there are a number of exceptions, including Reye’s 
syndrome, in which jaundice is rare. Occasionally, death 
may occur in fulminant cases of acute liver failure before 
Clinical grade
Clinical signs
Grade 1
Poor concentration, slurred speech, slow 
mentation, disordered sleep rhythm
Grade 2
Drowsy but easily rousable, occasional 
aggressive behaviour, lethargic
Grade 3
Marked confusion, drowsy, sleepy but 
responds to pain and voice, gross 
disorientation
Grade 4
Unresponsive to voice, may or may not 
respond to painful stimuli, unconscious
23.9  How to assess clinical grade of 
hepatic encephalopathy
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
934
be carried out at least twice daily. Its prognostic impor-
tance emphasises the necessity of avoiding the use of 
fresh frozen plasma to correct raised PT in acute liver 
failure, except in the setting of frank bleeding. Factor V 
levels can be used instead of the PT to assess the degree 
of liver impairment. The plasma bilirubin reflects the 
degree of jaundice. Plasma aminotransferase activity is 
particularly high after paracetamol overdose, reaching 
100–500 times normal, but falls as liver damage pro­
gresses and is not helpful in determining prognosis. 
Plasma albumin remains normal unless the course is 
prolonged. Percutaneous liver biopsy is contraindicated 
because of the severe coagulopathy, but biopsy can be 
undertaken using the transjugular route if appropriate.
Management
Patients with acute liver failure should be treated in a 
high-dependency or intensive care unit as soon as 
progressive prolongation of the PT occurs or hepatic 
encephalopathy is identified (Box 23.12), so that prompt 
treatment of complications can be initiated (Box 23.13). 
Conservative treatment aims to maintain life in the 
hope that hepatic regeneration will occur, but early 
transfer to a specialised transplant unit should always 
be considered. N-acetylcysteine therapy may improve 
jaundice develops. Fetor hepaticus can be present. The 
liver is usually of normal size but later becomes 
smaller. Hepatomegaly is unusual and, in the presence 
of a sudden onset of ascites, suggests venous outflow 
obstruction as the cause (Budd–Chiari syndrome, 
p. 976). Splenomegaly is uncommon and never promi-
nent. Ascites and oedema are late developments and 
may be a consequence of fluid therapy. Other features 
are related to the development of complications (see 
below).
Investigations
The patient should be investigated to determine the 
cause of the liver failure and the prognosis (Boxes 23.10 
and 23.11). Hepatitis B core IgM antibody is the best 
screening test for acute hepatitis B infection, as liver 
damage is due to the immunological response to the 
virus, which has often been eliminated, and the test for 
HBsAg may be negative. The PT rapidly becomes pro-
longed as coagulation factor synthesis fails; this is the 
laboratory test of greatest prognostic value and should 
•	 Encephalopathy and 
cerebral oedema
•	 Hypoglycaemia
•	 Metabolic acidosis
•	 Infection (bacterial, fungal)
•	 Renal failure
•	 Multi-organ failure 
(hypotension and 
respiratory failure)
23.13  Complications of acute liver failure
Cardiorespiratory
•	 Pulse
•	 Blood pressure
•	 Central venous pressure
•	 Respiratory rate
Neurological
•	 Intracranial pressure monitoring (specialist units, p. 198)
•	 Conscious level
Fluid balance
•	 Hourly output (urine, vomiting, diarrhoea)
•	 Input: oral, intravenous
Blood analyses
•	 Arterial blood gases
•	 Peripheral blood count (including platelets)
•	 Sodium, potassium, HCO3−, calcium, magnesium
•	 Creatinine, urea
•	 Glucose (2-hourly in acute phase)
•	 Prothrombin time
Infection surveillance
•	 Cultures: blood, urine, throat, sputum, cannula sites
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 Temperature
23.12  Monitoring in acute liver failure
•	 Toxicology screen of blood and urine
•	 HBsAg, IgM anti-HBc
•	 IgM anti-HAV
•	 Anti-HEV, HCV, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, Epstein–
Barr virus
•	 Caeruloplasmin, serum copper, urinary copper, slit-lamp eye 
examination
•	 Autoantibodies: ANA, ASMA, LKM, SLA
•	 Immunoglobulins
•	 Ultrasound of liver and Doppler of hepatic veins
23.10  Investigations to determine the cause of 
acute liver failure
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; ASMA = anti-smooth muscle antibody; 
LKM = liver-kidney microsomal antibody; SLA = soluble liver antigen)
•	 H+ > 50 nmol/L (pH < 7.3) at or beyond 24 hrs following the 
overdose
Or
•	 Serum creatinine > 300 µmol/L ( ≅ 3.38 mg/dL) plus 
prothrombin time > 100 secs plus encephalopathy 
grade 3 or 4
Non-paracetamol cases
•	 Prothrombin time > 100 secs
Or
•	 Any three of the following:
Jaundice to encephalopathy time > 7 days
Age < 10 or > 40 yrs
Indeterminate or drug-induced causes
Bilirubin > 300 µmol/L (≅ 17.6 mg/dL)
Prothrombin time > 50 secs
Or
•	 Factor V level < 15% and encephalopathy grade 3 or 4
23.11  Adverse prognostic criteria in 
acute liver failure*
*Predict a mortality rate of ≥ 90% and are an indication for referral for 
possible liver transplantation.
Presenting problems in liver disease 
23
935
outcome, particularly in patients with acute liver failure 
due to paracetamol poisoning. Liver transplantation is 
an increasingly important treatment option for acute 
liver failure, and criteria have been developed to iden-
tify patients unlikely to survive without a transplant 
(see Box 23.11). Patients should, wherever possible, be 
transferred to a transplant centre before these criteria 
are met to allow time for assessment and to maximise 
the time for a donor liver to become available. Survival 
following liver transplantation for acute liver failure 
is improving, and 1-year survival rates of about 60% 
can be expected.
Abnormal liver function tests
Frequently, LFTs are requested in patients who have no 
symptoms or signs of liver disease, as part of routine 
health checks, insurance medicals and drug monitoring. 
When abnormal results are found, it is important for the 
clinician to be able to interpret them and to investigate 
patients appropriately. Many patients with chronic liver 
disease are asymptomatic or have vague, non-specific 
symptoms. Apparently asymptomatic abnormal LFTs 
are therefore a common occurrence. When LFTs are 
measured routinely prior to elective surgery, 3.5% 
of patients are discovered to have mildly elevated 
transaminases. The prevalence of abnormal LFTs has 
been reported to be as high as 10% in some studies. The 
most common abnormalities are alcoholic (p. 957) or 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (p. 959). Since effective 
medical treatments are now available for many types 
of chronic liver disease, further evaluation is usually 
warranted to make sure the patient does not have a 
treatable condition. Although transient mild abnormali-
ties in LFTs may not be clinically significant, the majority 
of patients with persistently abnormal LFTs do have 
significant liver disease. Biochemical abnormalities in 
chronic liver disease often fluctuate over time, and 
therefore even mild abnormalities can indicate signifi-
cant underlying disease and so warrant follow-up and 
investigation.
When abnormal LFTs are detected, a thorough 
history should be compiled to determine the patient’s 
alcohol consumption, drug use (prescribed drugs or 
otherwise), risk factors for viral hepatitis (e.g. blood 
transfusion, injecting drug use, tattoos), the presence of 
autoimmune diseases, family history, neurological 
symptoms, and the presence of features of the meta-
bolic syndrome (p. 805), including diabetes and/or 
obesity (see Box 23.5, p. 930, and Box 5.18, p. 115). The 
presence or absence of stigmata of chronic liver disease 
does not reliably identify those individuals with signifi-
cant disease, and investigations are indicated, even in 
the absence of these signs.
Fig. 23.14  Suggested management of abnormal LFTs in asymptomatic patients. *No further investigation needed. 
Action
Clinical situation
Management
Liver screen, i.e.
  Full history
 Chronic liver disease
 screen (Box 23.4)
  Ultrasound abdomen
 HBsAg
 HCVAb
 α1-AT
  Autoimmune profile
  Ferritin
  Caeruloplasmin
  Immunoglobulins
Dilated
bile ducts
Non-dilated
bile ducts
Cholangiography
MRCP or ERCP
Consider liver biopsy
and treat underlying
disorder
Abnormal alkaline
phosphatase or
serum transaminases
> 2 × upper limit
of normal
Check GGT if raised
alkaline phosphatase
Recheck LFT in
3–6 months
Abnormal alkaline
phosphatase or
serum transaminases
< 2 × upper limit
of normal
Persistently abnormal LFT
Determine whether:
  NAFLD/increased BMI
  Enzyme induction from
  drugs
  Alcohol
Increased GGT only
Recheck with conjugated
bilirubin, exclude
haemolysis
Increased bilirubin only
Stage disease; lifestyle
modification (diet and exercise)
Alcohol abstinence
Review current medication
Reassure, as
likely Gilbert’s syndrome
Alcohol abstinence
Stop hepatotoxic drugs
Advise weight loss if BMI > 25
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
936
Pre-hepatic jaundice
This is caused either by haemolysis or by congenital 
hyperbilirubinaemia, and is characterised by an isolated 
raised bilirubin level.
In haemolysis, destruction of red blood cells or 
their marrow precursors causes increased bilirubin 
production. Jaundice due to haemolysis is usually mild 
because a healthy liver can excrete a bilirubin load 
six times greater than normal before unconjugated 
bilirubin accumulates in the plasma. This does not 
apply to newborns, who have less capacity to metabolise 
bilirubin.
The most common form of non-haemolytic hyper­
bilirubinaemia is Gilbert’s syndrome, an inherited 
disorder of bilirubin metabolism (Box 23.17). Other 
inherited disorders of bilirubin metabolism are very 
rare.
Hepatocellular jaundice
Hepatocellular jaundice results from an inability of the 
liver to transport bilirubin into the bile, occurring as a 
consequence of parenchymal disease. Bilirubin transport 
across the hepatocytes may be impaired at any point 
between uptake of unconjugated bilirubin into the cells 
and transport of conjugated bilirubin into the canaliculi. 
In addition, swelling of cells and oedema resulting from 
the disease itself may cause obstruction of the biliary 
canaliculi. In hepatocellular jaundice the concentrations 
of both unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin in the 
blood increase. Hepatocellular jaundice can be due to 
acute or chronic injury (see Fig. 23.12), and clinical fea-
tures of acute or chronic liver disease may be detected 
clinically (see Box 23.7, p. 932).
Characteristically, jaundice due to parenchymal liver 
disease is associated with increases in transaminases 
(AST, ALT), but increases in other LFTs, including 
cholestatic enzymes (GGT, ALP) may occur, and suggest 
specific aetiologies (see below). Acute jaundice in 
the presence of an ALT of greater than 1000 U/L is 
highly suggestive of an infectious cause (e.g. hepatitis 
A, B), drugs (e.g. paracetamol) or hepatic ischaemia. 
Intrahepatic
•	 Primary biliary cirrhosis
•	 Primary sclerosing 
cholangitis
•	 Alcohol
•	 Drugs
•	 Hepatic infiltrations 
(lymphoma, granuloma, 
amyloid, metastases)
•	 Cystic fibrosis
•	 Severe bacterial infections
•	 Pregnancy (p. 977)
•	 Inherited cholestatic liver 
disease, e.g. benign 
recurrent intrahepatic 
cholestasis
•	 Chronic right heart failure
Extrahepatic
•	 Carcinoma
Ampullary
Pancreatic
Bile duct 
(cholangiocarcinoma)
Liver metastases
•	 Choledocholithiasis
•	 Parasitic infection
•	 Traumatic biliary strictures
•	 Chronic pancreatitis
23.15  Causes of cholestatic jaundice
Minor elevation (< 100 U/L*)
•	 Chronic hepatitis C
•	 Chronic hepatitis B
•	 Haemochromatosis
•	 Fatty liver disease
Moderate elevation (100–300 U/L*)
As above plus:
•	 Alcoholic hepatitis
•	 Non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis
•	 Autoimmune hepatitis
•	 Wilson’s disease
Major elevation (> 300 U/L*)
•	 Drugs (e.g. paracetamol)
•	 Acute viral hepatitis
•	 Autoimmune liver disease
•	 Ischaemic liver
•	 Toxins (e.g. Amanita 
phalloides poisoning)
•	 Flare of chronic hepatitis B
23.14  Common causes of elevated 
serum transaminases
*Note: These ranges are indicative but do not rigidly discriminate between 
different aetiologies
Both the pattern of LFT abnormality, hepatitic or 
obstructive, and the degree of elevation are helpful in 
determining the cause of underlying liver disease 
(Boxes 23.14 and 23.15). The investigations that make 
up a standard liver screen and additional or confirma-
tory tests are shown in Boxes 23.4 and 23.5. An algo-
rithm for investigating abnormal LFTs is provided in 
Figure 23.14.
Jaundice
Jaundice is usually detectable clinically when the plasma 
bilirubin exceeds 40 µmol/L (~2.5 mg/dL). The causes 
of jaundice overlap with the causes of abnormal LFTs 
discussed above. In a patient with jaundice it is useful 
to consider whether the cause might be pre-hepatic, 
hepatic or post-hepatic and there are often important 
clues in the history (Box 23.16).
*Symptoms may be absent and abnormal LFTs detected incidentally.
Symptoms*
•	 Itching preceding jaundice
•	 Abdominal pain (suggests 
stones)
•	 Weight loss (chronic liver 
disease and malignancy)
•	 Dark urine and pale stools
•	 Fever ± rigors
•	 Dry eyes/dry mouth
•	 Fatigue
Recent drug history
Other
•	 Exposure to intravenous drug or blood transfusions
•	 Travel history and country of birth
•	 Metabolic syndrome (increased body mass index ± type 2 
diabetes/hypertension)
•	 Autoimmune disease history
•	 Alcohol history
•	 Inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Family history of liver disease, autoimmune disease or the 
metabolic syndrome
23.16  Key history points in patients 
with jaundice
Presenting problems in liver disease 
23
937
Imaging is essential, in particular to identify features 
suggestive of cirrhosis, to define the patency of the 
hepatic vasculature, and to obtain evidence of portal 
hypertension. Liver biopsy has an important role in 
defining the aetiology of hepatocellular jaundice and the 
extent of liver injury.
Obstructive (cholestatic) jaundice
Cholestatic jaundice may be caused by:
•	 failure of hepatocytes to initiate bile flow
•	 obstruction of the bile ducts or portal tracts
•	 obstruction of bile flow in the extrahepatic bile  
ducts between the porta hepatis and the papilla of 
Vater.
In the absence of treatment, cholestatic jaundice tends 
to become progressively more severe because conju-
gated bilirubin is unable to enter the bile canaliculi and 
passes back into the blood, and also because there is a 
failure of clearance of unconjugated bilirubin arriving 
at the liver cells. The causes of cholestatic jaundice are 
listed in Box 23.15. Cholestasis may result from defects 
at more than one of these levels. Those confined to the 
extrahepatic bile ducts may be amenable to surgical or 
endoscopic correction.
Clinical features (Box 23.18) comprise those due to 
cholestasis itself, those due to secondary infection 
Syndrome
Inheritance
Abnormality
Clinical features
Treatment
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia
Gilbert’s
Autosomal dominant
↓ Glucuronyl transferase
Mild jaundice, especially 
with fasting
No treatment necessary
↓ Bilirubin uptake
Crigler–Najjar
Type I
Autosomal recessive
Absent glucuronyl 
transferase
Rapid death in neonate 
(kernicterus)
Type II
Autosomal dominant
↓↓ Glucuronyl 
transferase
Presents in neonate
Phenobarbital, ultraviolet 
light or liver transplant
Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia
Dubin–Johnson
Autosomal recessive
↓ Canalicular excretion of 
organic anions, including 
bilirubin
Mild
No treatment necessary
Rotor’s
Autosomal recessive
↓ Bilirubin uptake
↓ Intrahepatic binding
Mild
No treatment necessary
23.17  Congenital non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia
Cholestasis
Early features
•	 Jaundice
•	 Dark urine
•	 Pale stools
•	 Pruritus
Late features
•	 Malabsorption (vitamins A, D, E and K): weight loss, 
steatorrhoea, osteomalacia, bleeding tendency
•	 Xanthelasma and xanthomas
Cholangitis
•	 Fever
•	 Rigors
•	 Pain (if gallstones  
present)
23.18  Clinical features and complications of 
cholestatic jaundice
(cholangitis) and those of the underlying condition (Box 
23.19). Obstruction of the bile duct drainage due to 
blockage of the extrahepatic biliary tree is character­
istically associated with pale stools and dark urine. Pru-
ritus may be a dominant feature and can be accompanied 
by skin excoriations. Peripheral stigmata of chronic liver 
disease are absent. If the gallbladder is palpable, the 
jaundice is unlikely to be caused by biliary obstruc­
tion due to gallstones, probably because a chronically 
Clinical feature
Causes
Jaundice
Static or increasing
Carcinoma
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Fluctuating
Choledocholithiasis
Stricture
Pancreatitis
Choledochal cyst
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Abdominal pain
Choledocholithiasis
Pancreatitis
Choledochal cyst
Cholangitis
Stone
Stricture
Choledochal cyst
Abdominal scar
Stone
Stricture
Irregular hepatomegaly
Hepatic carcinoma
Palpable gallbladder
Carcinoma below cystic duct 
(usually pancreas)
Abdominal mass
Carcinoma
Pancreatitis (cyst)
Choledochal cyst
Occult blood in stools
Ampullary tumour
23.19  Clinical features suggesting an underlying 
cause of cholestatic jaundice*
*Each of the diseases listed here can give rise to almost any of the clinical 
features shown, but the box indicates the most likely cause of the clinical 
features listed.
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
938
inflamed stone-containing gallbladder cannot readily 
dilate. This is Courvoisier’s Law, and suggests that 
jaundice is due to a malignant biliary obstruction 
(e.g. pancreatic cancer). Cholangitis is characterised by 
‘Charcot’s triad’ of jaundice, right upper quadrant pain 
and fever. Cholestatic jaundice is characterised by a 
relatively greater elevation of ALP and GGT than the 
aminotransferases.
Ultrasound is indicated to determine whether there 
is evidence of mechanical obstruction and dilatation of 
the biliary tree (Fig. 23.15). Management of cholestatic 
jaundice depends on the underlying cause and is dis-
cussed in the relevant sections below.
Hepatomegaly
Hepatomegaly may occur as the result of a general 
enlargement of the liver or because of primary or sec-
ondary liver tumour (Box 23.20). The most common liver 
tumour in Western countries is liver metastasis, whereas 
primary liver cancer complicating chronic viral hepatitis 
is more common in the Far East. Unlike metastases, 
neuro-endocrine tumours typically cause massive 
hepatomegaly but without significant weight loss. 
Cirrhosis can be associated with either hepatomegaly 
or reduced liver size in advanced disease. Although 
all causes of cirrhosis can involve hepatomegaly, it is 
much more common in alcoholic liver disease and 
haemochromatosis. Hepatomegaly may resolve in patients 
with alcoholic cirrhosis when they stop drinking.
Ascites
Ascites is present when there is accumulation of free 
fluid in the peritoneal cavity. Small amounts of ascites 
are asymptomatic, but with larger accumulations of 
fluid (> 1 L) there is abdominal distension, fullness in 
the flanks, shifting dullness on percussion and, when the 
ascites is marked, a fluid thrill. Other features include 
eversion of the umbilicus, herniae, abdominal striae, 
divarication of the recti and scrotal oedema. Dilated 
superficial abdominal veins may be seen if the ascites is 
due to portal hypertension.
Fig. 23.15  Investigation of jaundice. 
History and examination
Serum for biochemical liver tests (LFTs)
Liver ultrasound
Urine for bilirubin
Isolated bilirubin rise (other LFTs normal)
Normal ultrasound
Urobilinogen present
Prehepatic jaundice
Unconjugated
bilirubin rise
Conjugated
bilirubin rise
Blood film/
reticulocyte count
Dubin–Johnson/
Rotor’s syndrome
(very rare)
Gilbert’s
syndrome
Coombs test
+
Haemolysis
work-up
Raised conjugated bilirubin
and other LFTs abnormal
Evidence of biliary disease
Raised conjugated bilirubin
and other LFTs abnormal
No evidence of biliary disease
Biliary obstruction
(i.e. dilated bile ducts)
Obstructive
jaundice
Cholangiography
(MRCP or ERCP)
Hepatocellular
jaundice
Clotting
Hepatitis/serology
Immunoglobulins
Autoantibodies
Copper studies
Iron studies
Large liver (hepatomegaly)
•	 Liver metastases
•	 Multiple or large hepatic cysts
•	 Cirrhosis (early): NAFLD, alcohol, haemochromatosis
•	 Hepatic vein outflow obstruction
•	 Infiltration: amyloid
Small liver
•	 Cirrhosis (late)
23.20  Causes of change in liver size
Presenting problems in liver disease 
23
939
Pathophysiology
Ascites has numerous causes, the most common of 
which are malignant disease, cirrhosis and heart failure. 
Many primary disorders of the peritoneum and visceral 
organs can also cause ascites, and these need to be con-
sidered even in a patient with chronic liver disease (Box 
23.21). Splanchnic vasodilatation is thought to be the 
main factor leading to ascites in cirrhosis. This is medi-
ated by vasodilators (mainly nitric oxide) that are 
released when portal hypertension causes shunting of 
blood into the systemic circulation. Systemic arterial 
pressure falls due to pronounced splanchnic vasodilata-
tion as cirrhosis advances. This leads to activation of 
the renin–angiotensin system with secondary aldos-
teronism, increased sympathetic nervous activity, 
increased atrial natriuretic hormone secretion and 
altered activity of the kallikrein–kinin system (Fig. 
23.16). These systems tend to normalise arterial pres-
sure but produce salt and water retention. In this setting 
the combination of splanchnic arterial vasodilatation 
and portal hypertension alters intestinal capillary per-
meability, promoting accumulation of fluid within the 
peritoneum.
Investigations
Ultrasonography is the best means of detecting ascites, 
particularly in the obese and those with small volumes 
of fluid. Paracentesis (if necessary under ultrasonic 
guidance) can be used to obtain ascitic fluid for analysis. 
The appearance of ascitic fluid may point to the under­
lying cause (Box 23.22). Pleural effusions are found in 
about 10% of patients, usually on the right side (hepatic 
hydrothorax); most are small and only identified on 
chest X-ray, but occasionally a massive hydrothorax 
occurs. Pleural effusions, particularly those on the left 
side, should not be assumed to be due to the ascites.
Measurement of the protein concentration and the 
serum–ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) are used to dis-
tinguish a transudate from an exudate. Cirrhotic patients 
Cause/appearance
•	 Cirrhosis: clear, straw-coloured or light green
•	 Malignant disease: bloody
•	 Infection: cloudy
•	 Biliary communication: heavy bile staining
•	 Lymphatic obstruction: milky-white (chylous)
Useful investigations
•	 Total albumin (plus serum 
albumin) and protein*
•	 Amylase
•	 Neutrophil count
•	 Cytology
•	 Microscopy and culture
*To calculate the serum–ascites albumin gradient (SAAG).
23.22  Ascitic fluid: appearance and analysis
Common causes
•	 Malignant disease
Hepatic
Peritoneal
•	 Cardiac failure
•	 Hepatic cirrhosis
Other causes
•	 Hypoproteinaemia
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-losing 
enteropathy
Malnutrition
•	 Pancreatitis
•	 Lymphatic obstruction
•	 Hepatic venous occlusion  
(p. 976)
Budd–Chiari syndrome
Veno-occlusive disease
•	 Infection
Tuberculosis
Rare causes
•	 Meigs’ syndrome*
•	 Hypothyroidism
*Meigs’ syndrome is the association of a right pleural effusion with or 
without ascites and a benign ovarian tumour. The ascites resolves on 
removal of the tumour.
23.21  Causes of ascites
Fig. 23.16  Pathogenesis of ascites. 
Ascites
Transudation
of fluid
↓ Oncotic
pressure
Portal
hypertension
Reduced
aldosterone
metabolism
≠ Aldosterone
Reduced
renal
blood flow
Underfilling
of circulation
Activation of
renin–angiotensin
system
Splanchnic
vasodilatation
Reduced
albumin
Salt
and water
retention
Lymph
formation
exceeds
lymph return
Cirrhosis
typically develop a transudate with a total protein 
concentration below 25 g/L and relatively few cells. 
However, in up to 30% of patients, the total protein 
concentration is more than 30 g/L. In these cases, it is 
useful to calculate the SAAG by subtracting the concen-
tration of the ascites fluid albumin from the serum 
albumin. A gradient of more than 11 g/L is 96% predic-
tive that ascites is due to portal hypertension. Venous 
outflow obstruction due to cardiac failure or hepatic 
venous outflow obstruction can also cause a transuda-
tive ascites, as indicated by an albumin gradient above 
11 g/L but, unlike in cirrhosis, the total protein content 
is usually above 25 g/L.
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
940
Exudative ascites (ascites protein concentration 
> 25 g/L or a SAAG < 11 g/L) raises the possibility of 
infection (especially tuberculosis), malignancy, hepatic 
venous obstruction, pancreatic ascites or, rarely, hypo­
thyroidism. Ascites amylase activity above 1000 U/L 
identifies pancreatic ascites, and low ascites glucose 
concentrations suggest malignant disease or tuberculo-
sis. Cytological examination may reveal malignant cells 
(one-third of cirrhotic patients with a bloody tap have a 
hepatocellular carcinoma). Polymorphonuclear leuco-
cyte counts above 250 × 106/L strongly suggest infection 
(spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, see below). Laparo­
scopy can be valuable in detecting peritoneal disease.
Management
Successful treatment relieves discomfort but does not 
prolong life; if over-vigorous, it can produce serious dis-
orders of fluid and electrolyte balance and precipitate 
hepatic encephalopathy (p. 941). Treatment of transuda-
tive ascites is based on restricting sodium and water 
intake, promoting urine output with diuretics and, if 
necessary, removing ascites directly by paracentesis. 
Exudative ascites due to malignancy is treated with 
paracentesis, but fluid replacement is generally not 
required. During management of ascites, the patient 
should be weighed regularly. Diuretics should be 
titrated to remove no more than 1 L of fluid daily, so 
body weight should not fall by more than 1 kg daily to 
avoid excessive fluid depletion.
Sodium and water restriction
Restriction of dietary sodium intake is essential to 
achieve negative sodium balance, and a few patients can 
be managed satisfactorily by this alone. Restriction of 
sodium intake to 100 mmol/day (‘no added salt diet’) is 
usually adequate. Drugs con­taining relatively large 
amounts of sodium, and those promoting sodium reten-
tion such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), must be avoided (Box 23.23). Restriction of 
water intake to 1.0–1.5 L/day is necessary only if the 
plasma sodium falls below 125 mmol/L.
Diuretics
Most patients require diuretics in addition to sodium 
restriction. Spironolactone (100–400 mg/day) is the 
first-line drug because it is a powerful aldosterone 
antagonist; it can cause painful gynaecomastia and 
hyperkalaemia, in which case amiloride (5–10 mg/day) 
can be substituted. Some patients also require loop 
diuretics, such as furosemide, but these can cause fluid 
High sodium content
•	 Alginates
•	 Antacids
•	 Antibiotics
•	 Phenytoin
•	 Sodium valproate
•	 Effervescent preparations 
(e.g. aspirin, calcium, 
paracetamol)
Sodium retention
•	 Carbenoxolone
•	 Corticosteroids
•	 Metoclopramide
•	 NSAIDs
•	 Oestrogens
23.23  Some drugs containing relatively large 
amounts of sodium or causing sodium retention
and electrolyte imbalance and renal dysfunction. 
Diuresis may be improved if patients are rested in bed, 
perhaps because renal blood flow increases in the hori-
zontal position. Patients who do not respond to doses of 
400 mg spironolactone and 160 mg furosemide, or who 
are unable to tolerate these doses due to hyponatraemia 
or renal impairment, are considered to have refractory 
or diuretic-resistant ascites and should be treated by 
other measures.
Paracentesis
First-line treatment of refractory ascites is large-volume 
paracentesis. Paracentesis to dryness is safe, provided 
the circulation is supported with an intravenous colloid 
such as human albumin (6–8 g per litre of ascites 
removed, usually as 100 mL of 20% human albumin 
solution (HAS) for every 1.5–2 L of ascites drained) or 
another plasma expander. Paracentesis can be used as 
an initial therapy or when other treatments fail.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt
A transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt 
(TIPSS) (p. 947) can relieve resistant ascites but does not 
prolong life; it may be an option where the only alterna-
tive is frequent, large-volume paracentesis. It can be 
used in patients awaiting liver transplantation or in 
those with reasonable liver function, but can aggravate 
encephalopathy in those with poor function.
Peritoneo-venous shunt
The peritoneo-venous shunt is a long tube with a 
non-return valve running subcutaneously from the 
peritoneum to the internal jugular vein in the neck; it 
allows ascitic fluid to pass directly into the systemic 
circulation. Complications, including infection, superior 
vena caval thrombosis, pulmonary oedema, bleeding 
from oesophageal varices and disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulopathy, limit its use and insertion of these 
shunts is now rare.
Complications
Renal failure
Renal failure can occur in patients with ascites. It can be 
pre-renal due to vasodilatation from sepsis and/or diu-
retic therapy, or due to hepatorenal syndrome.
Hepatorenal syndrome
This occurs in 10% of patients with advanced cirrhosis 
complicated by ascites. There are two clinical types; both 
are mediated by renal vasoconstriction due to underfill-
ing of the arterial circulation.
•	 Type 1 hepatorenal syndrome is characterised by 
progressive oliguria, a rapid rise of the serum 
creatinine and a very poor prognosis (without 
treatment, median survival is less than 1 month). 
There is usually no proteinuria, a urine sodium 
excretion of less than 10 mmol/day and a urine/
plasma osmolarity ratio of more than 1.5. Other 
non-functional causes of renal failure must be 
excluded before the diagnosis is made. Treatment 
consists of albumin infusions in combination with 
terlipressin and is effective in about two-thirds of 
patients. Haemodialysis should not be used 
routinely because it does not improve the outcome. 
Presenting problems in liver disease 
23
941
Patients who survive should be considered for liver 
transplantation.
•	 Type 2 hepatorenal syndrome usually occurs in 
patients with refractory ascites, is characterised by a 
moderate and stable increase in serum creatinine, 
and has a better prognosis.
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) may present 
with abdominal pain, rebound tenderness, absent bowel 
sounds and fever in a patient with obvious features of 
cirrhosis and ascites. Abdominal signs are mild or absent 
in about one-third of patients, and in these patients 
hepatic encephalopathy and fever are the main features. 
Diagnostic paracentesis may show cloudy fluid, and an 
ascites neutrophil count above 250 × 106/L almost invar-
iably indicates infection. The source of infection cannot 
usually be determined, but most organisms isolated are 
of enteric origin and Escherichia coli is most frequently 
found. Ascitic culture in blood culture bottles gives the 
highest yield of organisms. SBP needs to be differenti-
ated from other intra-abdominal emergencies, and the 
finding of multiple organisms on culture should arouse 
suspicion of a perforated viscus.
Treatment should be started immediately with broad-
spectrum antibiotics, such as cefotaxime or piperacillin/
tazobactam). Recurrence of SBP is common but may 
be reduced with prophylactic quinolones such as nor-
floxacin or ciprofloxacin (Box 23.24).
‘In patients with a previous episode of SBP and continued 
ascites, norfloxacin 400 mg/day prevents recurrence (NNTB 4.5).’
‘In patients with cirrhosis who have had a gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage, prophylactic antibiotics reduce the risk of bacterial 
peritonitis (NNTB 12.5) and improve survival (NNTB 11).’
•	 Gines P, et al. Hepatology 1990; 12:716.
•	 Bernard B, et al. Hepatology 1999; 29:1655–1661.
For further information: 
www.easl.eu/_clinical-practice-guideline/
23.24  Antibiotics and spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis (SBP)
consciousness, with or without neurological signs. The 
degree of encephalopathy can be graded from 1 to 4, 
depending on these features, and this is useful in assess-
ing response to therapy (see Box 23.9, p. 933). When an 
episode develops acutely, a precipitating factor may be 
found (Box 23.26). The earliest features are very mild 
and easily overlooked but, as the condition becomes 
more severe, apathy, inability to concentrate, confusion, 
disorientation, drowsiness, slurring of speech and even-
tually coma develop. Convulsions sometimes occur. 
Examination usually shows a flapping tremor (asterixis), 
inability to perform simple mental arithmetic tasks or 
to draw objects such as a star (constructional apraxia; 
p. 923), and, as the condition progresses, hyper-reflexia 
and bilateral extensor plantar responses. Hepatic 
encephalopathy rarely causes focal neurological signs; if 
these are present, other causes must be sought. Fetor 
hepaticus, a sweet musty odour to the breath, is usually 
present but is more a sign of liver failure and portosys-
temic shunting than of hepatic encephalopathy. Rarely, 
chronic hepatic encephalopathy (hepatocerebral degen-
eration) gives rise to variable combinations of cerebellar 
dysfunction, Parkinsonian syndromes, spastic para­
plegia and dementia.
Pathophysiology
Hepatic encephalopathy is thought to be due to a 
disturbance of brain function provoked by circulating 
neurotoxins that are normally metabolised by the liver. 
Accordingly, most affected patients have evidence of 
liver failure and portosystemic shunting of blood, but 
the balance between these varies from individual 
to individual. Some degree of liver failure is a key 
factor, as portosystemic shunting of blood alone hardly 
ever causes encephalopathy. The ‘neurotoxins’ causing 
encephalopathy are unknown, but they are thought to 
be mainly nitrogenous substances produced in the gut, 
at least in part by bacterial action. These substances 
are normally metabolised by the healthy liver and 
excluded from the systemic circulation. Ammonia has 
•	 Intracranial bleed (subdural, extradural haematoma, p. 1218)
•	 Drug or alcohol intoxication (pp. 252 and 254)
•	 Delirium tremens/alcohol withdrawal (p. 253)
•	 Wernicke’s encephalopathy (p. 253)
•	 Primary psychiatric disorders (p. 242)
•	 Hypoglycaemia (p. 814)
•	 Neurological Wilson’s disease (p. 1198)
•	 Post-ictal state
23.25  Differential diagnosis of 
hepatic encephalopathy
•	 Drugs (especially sedatives, antidepressants)
•	 Dehydration (including diuretics, paracentesis)
•	 Portosystemic shunting
•	 Infection
•	 Hypokalaemia
•	 Constipation
•	 ↑Protein load (including GI bleeding)
23.26  Factors precipitating 
hepatic encephalopathy
Prognosis
Only 10–20% of patients survive 5 years from the first 
appearance of ascites due to cirrhosis. The outlook is not 
universally poor, however, and is best in those with 
well-maintained liver function and a good response to 
therapy. The prognosis is also better when a treatable 
cause for the underlying cirrhosis is present or when a 
precipitating cause for ascites, such as excess salt intake, 
is found. The mortality at 1 year is 50% following the 
first episode of bacterial peritonitis.
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatic encephalopathy is a neuropsychiatric syndrome 
caused by liver disease. As it progresses, confusion 
is followed by coma. Confusion needs to be differenti-
ated from delirium tremens and Wernicke’s encepha-
lopathy, and coma from subdural haematoma, which 
can occur in alcoholics after a fall (Box 23.25). Features 
include changes of intellect, personality, emotions and 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
942
CIRRHOSIS
Cirrhosis is characterised by diffuse hepatic fibrosis and 
nodule formation. It can occur at any age, has significant 
morbidity and is an important cause of premature death. 
Worldwide, the most common causes are chronic viral 
hepatitis, prolonged excessive alcohol consumption and 
NAFLD. Cirrhosis is the most common cause of portal 
hypertension and its complications.
The causes of cirrhosis are listed in Box 23.27; 
any condition leading to persistent or recurrent hepa-
tocyte death, such as chronic hepatitis C infection, 
alcoholic liver disease (ALD) or NAFLD may lead 
to cirrhosis. It may also occur in prolonged biliary 
damage or obstruction, as is found in primary biliary 
cirrhosis (PBC), primary sclerosing cholangitis and 
post-surgical biliary strictures. Persistent blockage of 
venous return from the liver, such as occurs in veno-
occlusive disease and Budd–Chiari syndrome, can also 
result in cirrhosis.
Pathophysiology
Following liver injury, stellate cells in the space of Disse 
(see Fig. 23.3, p. 925) are activated by cytokines pro-
duced by Kupffer cells and hepatocytes. This transforms 
the stellate cell into a myofibroblast-like cell, capable of 
producing collagen, pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
traditionally been considered an important factor. 
Recent interest has focused on γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) as a mediator, along with octopamine, amino 
acids, mercaptans and fatty acids that can act as neuro-
transmitters. The brain in cirrhosis may also be sensi-
tised to other factors such as drugs that can precipitate 
hepatic encephalopathy (see Box 23.26). Disruption of 
the function of the blood–brain barrier is a feature of 
acute hepatic failure and may lead to cerebral oedema.
Investigations
The diagnosis can usually be made clinically, but 
when doubt exists, an electroencephalogram (EEG) 
shows diffuse slowing of the normal alpha waves with 
eventual development of delta waves. The arterial 
ammonia is usually increased in patients with hepatic 
encephalopathy. However, increased concentrations can 
occur in the absence of clinical encephalopathy, render-
ing this investigation of little diagnostic value.
Management
The principles are to treat or remove precipitating causes 
(see Box 23.26) and to suppress the production of neu-
rotoxins by bacteria in the bowel. Dietary protein restric-
tion is rarely needed and is no longer recommended as 
first-line treatment because it is unpalatable and can lead 
to a worsening nutritional state in already malnourished 
patients. Lactulose (15–30 mL 3 times daily) is increased 
gradually until the bowels are moving twice daily. It 
produces an osmotic laxative effect, reduces the pH of 
the colonic content, thereby limiting colonic ammonia 
absorption, and promotes the incorporation of nitrogen 
into bacteria. Rifaximin (400 mg 3 times daily) is a well-
tolerated, non-absorbed antibiotic that acts by reducing 
the bacterial content of the bowel and has been shown 
to be effective. It can be used in addition, or as an alter-
native, to lactulose if diarrhoea becomes troublesome. 
Chronic or refractory encephalopathy is one of the main 
indications for liver transplantation.
Variceal bleeding
Acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage from gastro-
oesophageal varices (Fig. 23.17) is common in chronic 
liver disease. Investigation and management are dis-
cussed on page 853 and the specific management of 
variceal bleeding on page 946.
Fig. 23.17  Varices: endoscopic views. A Oesophageal varices (arrows) at the lower end of the oesophagus.  B Gastric varices (arrows).
 C Appearance of oesophageal varices following application of strangulating bands (band ligation, arrow). 
B
A
C
•	 Alcohol
•	 Chronic viral hepatitis  
(B or C)
•	 Non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease
•	 Immune
Primary sclerosing 
cholangitis
Autoimmune liver 
disease
•	 Biliary
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Secondary biliary 
cirrhosis
Cystic fibrosis
•	 Genetic
Haemochromatosis
Wilson’s disease
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
•	 Cryptogenic  
(unknown – 15%)
•	 Chronic venous outflow 
obstruction
•	 Any chronic liver disease
23.27  Causes of cirrhosis
Cirrhosis
23
943
other mediators that promote hepatocyte damage and 
tissue fibrosis (see Fig. 23.4, p. 925).
Cirrhosis is a histological diagnosis (Fig. 23.18). It 
evolves over years as progressive fibrosis and wide-
spread hepatocyte loss lead to distortion of the normal 
liver architecture that disrupts the hepatic vasculature, 
causing portosystemic shunts. These changes usually 
affect the whole liver, but in biliary cirrhosis (e.g. PBC) 
they can be patchy. Cirrhosis can be classified histologi-
cally into:
•	 Micronodular cirrhosis, characterised by small 
nodules about 1 mm in diameter and typically  
seen in alcoholic cirrhosis.
•	 Macronodular cirrhosis, characterised by larger 
nodules of various sizes. Areas of previous collapse 
of the liver architecture are evidenced by large 
fibrous scars.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is highly variable. Some 
patients are asymptomatic and the diagnosis is made 
incidentally at ultrasound or at surgery. Others present 
with isolated hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, signs of portal 
hypertension (p. 945)  or hepatic insufficiency. When 
symptoms are present, they are often non-specific and 
include weakness, fatigue, muscle cramps, weight loss, 
anorexia, nausea, vomiting and upper abdominal dis-
comfort (Box 23.28). Cirrhosis will occasionally present 
because of shortness of breath due to a large right pleural 
effusion, or with hepatopulmonary syndrome (p. 975).
Hepatomegaly is common when the cirrhosis is due 
to ALD or haemochromatosis. Progressive hepatocyte 
destruction and fibrosis gradually reduce liver size as 
the disease progresses in other causes of cirrhosis. A 
reduction in liver size is especially common if the cause 
is viral hepatitis or autoimmune liver disease. The liver 
is often hard, irregular and non-tender. Jaundice is mild 
when it first appears and is due primarily to a failure to 
excrete bilirubin. Palmar erythema can be seen early in 
the disease, but is of limited diagnostic value, as it occurs 
in many other conditions associated with a hyper­
dynamic circulation, including normal pregnancy, as 
well as being found in some healthy people. Spider tel-
angiectasias occur and comprise a central arteriole 
(which occasionally raises the skin surface), from which 
small vessels radiate. They vary in size from 1 to 2 mm 
in diameter, and are usually found only above the 
nipples. One or two small spider telangiectasias may be 
present in about 2% of healthy people and may occur 
transiently in greater numbers in the third trimester of 
pregnancy, but otherwise they are a strong indicator of 
liver disease. Florid spider telangiectasia, gynaecomas-
tia and parotid enlargement are most common in 
alcoholic cirrhosis. Pigmentation is most striking in 
haemochromatosis and in any cirrhosis associated with 
prolonged cholestasis. Pulmonary arteriovenous shunts 
also develop, leading to hypoxaemia and eventually to 
central cyanosis, but this is a late feature.
Endocrine changes are noticed more readily in men, 
who show loss of male hair distribution and testicular 
Fig. 23.18  Histological features in normal liver, hepatic fibrosis 
and cirrhosis. A Normal liver. Columns of hepatocytes 1–2 cells thick 
radiate from the portal tracts (PT) to the central veins. The portal tract 
contains a normal intralobular bile duct branch of the hepatic artery and 
portal venous radical.  B Bridging fibrosis (stained pink, arrows) spreading 
out around the hepatic vein and single liver cells (pericellular) and linking 
adjacent portal tracts and hepatic veins.  C A cirrhotic liver. The liver 
architecture is disrupted. The normal arrangement of portal tracts and 
hepatic veins is now lost and nodules of proliferating hepatocytes are 
broken up by strands of pink/orange-staining fibrous tissue (arrows) 
forming cirrhotic nodules (CN). 
PT
PT
PT
CN
A
B
C
•	 Hepatomegaly (although liver may also be small)
•	 Jaundice
•	 Ascites
•	 Circulatory changes: spider telangiectasia, palmar erythema, 
cyanosis
•	 Endocrine changes: loss of libido, hair loss
Men: gynaecomastia, testicular atrophy, impotence
Women: breast atrophy, irregular menses, amenorrhoea
•	 Haemorrhagic tendency: bruises, purpura, epistaxis
•	 Portal hypertension: splenomegaly, collateral vessels, variceal 
bleeding
•	 Hepatic (portosystemic) encephalopathy
•	 Other features: pigmentation, digital clubbing, Dupuytren’s 
contracture
23.28  Clinical features of hepatic cirrhosis
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
944
and, more recently, the MELD (Model for End-stage 
Liver Disease) score can be used to assess prognosis. 
The MELD is more difficult to calculate at the bedside 
but, unlike the Child–Pugh score, includes renal func-
tion; if this is impaired, it is known to be a poor prog-
nostic feature in end-stage disease (Box 23.32). Although 
atrophy. Gynaecomastia is common and can be due to 
drugs such as spironolactone. Easy bruising becomes 
more frequent as cirrhosis advances.
Splenomegaly and collateral vessel formation are 
features of portal hypertension, which occurs in more 
advanced disease (see below). Ascites also signifies 
advanced disease. Evidence of hepatic encephalopathy 
also becomes common with disease progression. Non-
specific features of chronic liver disease include club-
bing of the fingers and toes. Dupuytren’s contracture is 
traditionally regarded as a complication of cirrhosis, but 
the evidence for this is weak. Chronic liver failure devel-
ops when the metabolic capacity of the liver is exceeded. 
It is characterised by the presence of encephalopathy 
and/or ascites. The term ‘hepatic decompensation’ or 
‘decompensated liver disease’ is often used when 
chronic liver failure occurs.
Other clinical and laboratory features may be present 
(Box 23.29); these include peripheral oedema, renal 
failure, jaundice, and hypoalbuminaemia and coagula-
tion abnormalities due to defective protein synthesis.
Management
This includes treatment of the underlying cause, main-
tenance of nutrition and treatment of complications, 
including ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, portal hyper-
tension and varices. Once the diagnosis of cirrhosis is 
made, endoscopy should be performed to screen for 
oesophageal varices (p. 946) and repeated every 2 years. 
As cirrhosis is associated with an increased risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), patients should be 
placed under regular surveillance for it (p. 967).
Chronic liver failure due to cirrhosis can also be 
treated by liver transplantation. This currently accounts 
for about three-quarters of all liver transplants (p. 978).
Prognosis
The overall prognosis in cirrhosis is poor. Many patients 
present with advanced disease and/or serious com­
plications that carry a high mortality. Overall, only 25% 
of patients survive 5 years from diagnosis but, where 
liver function is good, 50% survive for 5 years and 25% 
for up to 10 years. The prognosis is more favourable 
when the underlying cause of the cirrhosis can be 
corrected, as in alcohol misuse, haemochromatosis or 
Wilson’s disease.
Laboratory tests give only a rough guide to prognosis 
in individual patients. Deteriorating liver function, as 
evidenced by jaundice, ascites or encephalopathy, indi-
cates a poor prognosis unless a treatable cause such 
as infection is found. Increasing bilirubin, falling 
albumin (or an albumin concentration < 30 g/L), marked 
hyponatraemia (< 120 mmol/L) not due to diuretic 
therapy, and a prolonged PT are all bad prognostic 
features (Boxes 23.30 and 23.31). The Child–Pugh score 
•	 Worsening synthetic liver 
function
Prolonged PT
Low albumin
•	 Jaundice
•	 Portal hypertension
•	 Variceal bleeding
•	 Hepatic encephalopathy
•	 Ascites
Spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis
Hepatorenal failure
23.29  Features of chronic liver failure
Score
1
2
3
Encephalopathy
None
Mild
Marked
Bilirubin (µmol/L)*
PBC/sclerosing cholangitis
< 68
68–170
> 170
Other causes of cirrhosis
< 34
34–50
> 50
Albumin (g/L)
> 35
28–35
< 28
PT (seconds prolonged)
< 4
4–6
> 6
Ascites
None
Mild
Marked
Add the individual scores: < 7 = Child’s A, 7–9 = Child’s B, 
> 9 = Child’s C
*To convert bilirubin in µmol/L to mg/dL, divide by 17.
23.30  Child–Pugh classification of prognosis 
in cirrhosis
Survival (%)
Child–Pugh 
grade
1 year
5 years
10 years
Hepatic 
deaths (%)
A
82
45
25
43
B
62
20
7
72
C
42
20
0
85
Based on Powell LW, Mortimer R, Harris OD. Cirrhosis of the liver: a 
comparative study of the four major aetiological groups. Med J Aust 1971; 
1:941–950.
23.31  Survival in cirrhosis
One-year survival (%)
MELD score
No complications
Complications*
< 9
97
90
10–19
90
85
20–29
70
65
30–39
70
50
MELD from SI units
10 × (0.378 [In serum bilirubin (µmol/L) + 1.12 [In INR] + 0.957 
[In serum creatinine (µmol/L)] + 0.643)
MELD from non-SI units
3.8 [In serum bilirubin (mg/dL)] + 11.2 [In INR] + 9.3 [In serum 
creatinine (mg/dL)] + 6.4
In = natural log. To calculate online, go to http://optn.transplant.
hrsa.gov/resources/MeldPeldCalculator.asp?index=98.
*‘Complications’ means the presence of ascites, encephalopathy or variceal 
bleeding.
23.32  One-year survival rate depending on 
MELD score
Portal hypertension
23
945
Clinical features
The clinical features result principally from portal 
venous congestion and collateral vessel formation 
(Box 23.33). Splenomegaly is a cardinal finding, and a 
diagnosis of portal hypertension is unusual when 
splenomegaly cannot be detected clinically or by ultra-
sonography. The spleen is rarely enlarged more than 
5 cm below the left costal margin in adults, but more 
marked splenomegaly can occur in childhood and ado-
lescence. Collateral vessels may be visible on the ante-
rior abdominal wall and occasionally several radiate 
from the umbilicus to form a caput medusae. Rarely, 
a large umbilical collateral vessel has a blood flow 
sufficient to give a venous hum on auscultation 
(Cruveilhier–Baumgarten syndrome). The most impor-
tant collateral vessel formation occurs in the oesopha-
gus and stomach, and this can be a source of severe 
bleeding. Rectal varices also cause bleeding and are 
often mistaken for haemorrhoids (which are no more 
common in portal hypertension than in the general 
population). Fetor hepaticus results from portosystemic 
shunting of blood, which allows mercaptans to pass 
directly to the lungs.
Ascites occurs as a result of renal sodium retention 
and portal hypertension that may be due, for example, 
to post-hepatic portal hypertension (hepatic outflow 
obstruction, p. 939) or cirrhosis.
The most important consequence of portal hyperten-
sion is variceal bleeding, which commonly arises from 
oesophageal varices located within 3–5 cm of the gastro-
oesophageal junction, or from gastric varices. The size 
of the varices, endoscopic variceal features such as red 
spots and stripes, high portal pressure and liver failure 
are all general factors that predispose to bleeding. Drugs 
capable of causing mucosal erosion, such as salicylates 
and NSAIDs, can also precipitate bleeding. Variceal 
bleeding is often severe, and recurrent if preventative 
treatment is not given.
Pathophysiology
Increased portal vascular resistance leads to a gradual 
reduction in the flow of portal blood to the liver and 
simultaneously to the development of collateral vessels, 
allowing portal blood to bypass the liver and enter the 
systemic circulation directly. Portosystemic shunting 
occurs, particularly in the gastrointestinal tract and 
especially the distal oesophagus, stomach and rectum, 
in the anterior abdominal wall, and in the renal, lumbar, 
ovarian and testicular vasculature. Stomal varices can 
also occur at the site of an ileostomy. As collateral vessel 
formation progresses, more than half of the portal blood 
flow may be shunted directly to the systemic circulation. 
Increased portal flow contributes to portal hypertension 
but is not the dominant factor.
these scores give a guide to prognosis, the course of 
cirrhosis can be unpredictable, as complications such as 
variceal bleeding may occur.
PORTAL HYPERTENSION
This frequently complicates cirrhosis but has other 
causes. The normal hepatic venous pressure gradient 
(difference between the wedged hepatic venous pres-
sure and free hepatic venous pressure, see below) is 
5–6 mm Hg. Clinically significant portal hypertension is 
present when the gradient exceeds 10 mm Hg and risk 
of variceal bleeding increases beyond a gradient of 
12 mm Hg. Increased vascular resistance is common. 
Causes are classified in accordance with the main sites 
of obstruction to blood flow in the portal venous system 
(Fig. 23.19). Extrahepatic portal vein obstruction is the 
usual source of portal hypertension in childhood and 
adolescence, while cirrhosis causes at least 90% of cases 
of portal hypertension in adults in developed countries. 
Schistosomiasis is the most common cause of portal 
hypertension worldwide but is infrequent outside 
endemic areas (e.g. Egypt; p. 376).
Heart
Inferior vena cava
Portal vein
Hepatic vein
Liver
Blood
flow
Blood 
flow
Post-hepatic post-sinusoidal
Budd–Chiari syndrome
5
Intrahepatic post-sinusoidal
Veno-occlusive disease
4
Sinusoidal
Cirrhosis*
Polycystic liver disease
Nodular regenerative
hyperplasia
Metastatic malignant
disease
3
Intrahepatic
pre-sinusoidal
Schistosomiasis*
Congenital hepatic
fibrosis
Drugs
Vinyl chloride
Sarcoidosis
2
Prehepatic pre-sinusoidal
Portal vein thrombosis due to sepsis (umbilical,
portal pyaemia) or procoagulopathy or secondary
to cirrhosis
Abdominal trauma including surgery
1
5
4
3
2
1
Splenic
vein
Spleen
Superior
mesenteric vein
Blood
from gut
Fig. 23.19  Classification of portal hypertension according to site 
of vascular obstruction. *Most common cause. Note that splenic vein 
occlusion can also follow pancreatitis, leading to gastric varices. 
•	 Variceal bleeding: 
oesophageal, gastric, 
other (rare)
•	 Congestive gastropathy
•	 Hypersplenism
•	 Ascites
•	 Iron deficiency anaemia
•	 Renal failure
•	 Hepatic encephalopathy
23.33  Complications of portal hypertension
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
946
Investigations
The diagnosis is often made clinically. Portal venous 
pressure measurements are rarely needed for clinical 
assessment or routine management, but can be used to 
confirm portal hypertension and to differ­entiate sinusoi-
dal and pre-sinusoidal forms. Pressure measurements 
are made by using a balloon catheter inserted using the 
transjugular route (via the inferior vena cava into a 
hepatic vein and then hepatic venule) to measure the 
wedged hepatic venous pressure (WHVP). This is an 
indirect measurement of portal vein pressure. Thrombo-
cytopenia is common due to hypersplenism, and platelet 
counts are usually in the region of 100 × 109/L; values 
below 50 × 109/L are uncommon. Leucopenia occurs 
occasionally but anaemia is seldom attributed directly 
to hypersplenism; if anaemia is found, a source of bleed-
ing should be sought.
The most useful investigation is endoscopy to deter-
mine whether gastro-oesophageal varices are present 
(see Fig. 23.17, p. 942). Once the diagnosis of cirrhosis is 
made, endoscopy should be performed to screen for 
oesophageal varices (and repeated every 2 years). Ultra-
sonography often shows features of portal hypertension, 
such as splenomegaly and collateral vessels, and can 
sometimes indicate the cause, such as liver disease or 
portal vein thrombosis. CT and MRI angiography can 
identify the extent of portal vein clot and are used to 
identify hepatic vein patency.
Management
Acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage from gastro-
oesophageal varices is a common manifestation of 
chronic liver disease. In the presence of portal hyperten-
sion, the risk of a variceal bleed occurring within 2 years 
varies from 7% for small varices up to 30% for large 
varices. The mortality following a variceal bleed has 
improved to around 15% overall but is still about 45% 
in those with poor liver function (i.e. Child–Pugh C).
The management of portal hypertension is largely 
focused on the prevention and/or control of variceal 
haemorrhage. However, it should be remembered that 
bleeding can also result from peptic ulceration, which is 
more common in patients with liver disease than in the 
general population. The investigation and management 
of gastrointestinal bleeding are dealt with in more detail 
on page 853.
Primary prevention of variceal bleeding
If non-bleeding varices are identified at endoscopy, 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist (β-blocker) therapy with 
propranolol (80–160 mg/day) or nadolol is effective 
in reducing portal venous pressure. Administration of 
these drugs at doses that reduce the heart rate by 
25% has been shown to be effective in the primary 
prevention of variceal bleeding (Box 23.34). The efficacy 
of β-blockers in primary prevention is similar to that 
of prophylactic banding, which may also be consid-
ered, particularly in patients that are unable to tolerate 
β-blocker therapy. Carvedilol, a non-cardioselective 
vasodilating β-blocker, is also effective.
Management of acute variceal bleeding
The priority in acute bleeding is to restore the circulation 
with blood and plasma, not least because shock reduces 
liver blood flow and causes further deterioration of 
liver function. The source of bleeding should always 
be confirmed by endoscopy, because about 20% of 
patients are bleeding from non-variceal lesions. Man-
agement of acute variceal bleeding is described in 
Box 23.35 and illustrated in Figure 23.20. All patients 
with cirrhosis and gastrointestinal bleeding should 
receive prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotics, such 
as oral ciprofloxacin or intravenous cephalosporin, 
because sepsis is common and treatment with anti­
biotics has been shown to improve outcomes. The 
measures used to control acute variceal bleeding 
include vasoactive medications (e.g. terlipressin), endo-
scopic therapy (banding or sclerotherapy), balloon tam-
ponade, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent 
shunting (TIPSS) and, rarely, oesophageal transection.
Pharmacological reduction of portal venous pres-
sure.  Terlipressin is a synthetic vasopressin analogue 
that, in contrast to vasopressin, can be given by intermit-
tent injection rather than continuous infusion. It reduces 
portal blood flow and/or intrahepatic resistance and 
hence reduces portal pressure. It reduces mortality in 
the setting of acute variceal bleeding. The dose is 2 mg 
IV 4 times daily until bleeding stops, and then 1 mg 
4 times daily for up to 72 hours. Caution is needed in 
patients with severe ischaemic heart disease or periph-
eral vascular disease because of the drug’s vasoconstric-
tor properties.
Banding ligation and sclerotherapy.  This is the most 
widely used initial treatment and is undertaken if pos-
sible at the time of diagnostic endoscopy (see Fig. 23.17C, 
p. 942). It stops variceal bleeding in 80% of patients and 
can be repeated if bleeding recurs. Band ligation involves 
‘In patients with cirrhosis, treatment with propranolol reduces 
variceal bleeding by 47% (NNTB 10), death from bleeding by 
45% (NNTB 25) and overall mortality by 22% (NNTB 16).’
•	 Hayes PC, et al. Lancet 1990; 336:153–156.
For further information: 
www.bsg.org.uk
23.34  Primary prevention of variceal bleeding
Management
Reason
IV fluids (colloid)
Extracellular volume 
replacement
Vasopressor (terlipressin)
Reduces portal pressure, 
acute bleeding and risk  
of early rebleeding
Prophylactic antibiotics 
(cephalosporin IV)
Reduces incidence of SBP
Emergency endoscopy
Confirms variceal rather than 
ulcer bleed
Variceal band ligation
To stop bleeding
Proton pump inhibitor
To prevent peptic ulcers
Phosphate enema and/or 
lactulose
To prevent hepatic 
encephalopathy
23.35  Emergency management of bleeding
Portal hypertension
23
947
the lower oesophagus respectively (Fig. 23.21). Addi-
tional lumens allow material to be aspirated from the 
stomach and from the oesophagus above the oesopha-
geal balloon. This technique may be used in the event of 
life-threatening haemorrhage if early endoscopic therapy 
is not available or is unsuccessful.
Endotracheal intubation prior to tube insertion 
reduces the risk of pulmonary aspiration. The tube 
should be passed through the mouth and its presence in 
the stomach should be checked by auscultating the 
upper abdomen while injecting air and by radiology. 
The safest technique is to inflate the balloon in the 
stomach under direct endoscopic vision. Gentle traction 
is essential to maintain pressure on the varices. Initially, 
only the gastric balloon should be inflated, with 200–
250 mL of air, as this will usually control bleeding. Infla-
tion of the gastric balloon must be stopped if the patient 
experiences pain because inadvertent inflation in the 
oesophagus can cause oesophageal rupture. If the 
oesophageal balloon needs to be used because of contin-
ued bleeding, it should be deflated for about 10 minutes 
every 3 hours to avoid oesophageal mucosal damage. 
Pressure in the oesophageal balloon should be moni-
tored with a sphygmomanometer, and should not 
exceed 40 mm Hg. Balloon tamponade will almost 
always stop oesophageal and gastric fundal variceal 
bleeding, but is only a bridge to more definitive therapy. 
Self-expanding removable oesophageal stents are a new 
alternative in patients with bleeding oesophageal, but 
not gastric, varices.
TIPSS.  This technique uses a stent placed between the 
portal vein and the hepatic vein within the liver to 
provide a portosystemic shunt and therefore reduce 
portal pressure (Fig. 23.22). It is carried out under radio-
logical control via the internal jugular vein; prior patency 
of the portal vein must be determined angiographically, 
Fig. 23.20  Management of acute bleeding from oesophageal 
varices. (TIPSS = transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt). 
Start IV terlipressin and
antibiotic prophylaxis
Suspected variceal
haemorrhage
Varices present?
Urgent upper GI
endoscopy
Yes
Endoscopic therapy
(variceal banding,
sclerotherapy)
Haemostasis?
No
Stop terlipressin
(treat as for non-
variceal haemorrhage)
Yes
Continue
terlipressin to 72 hrs
Introduce β-blocker as
secondary prophylaxis
Enter patient into
endoscopic banding
programme to
obliterate varices
No
Further endoscopic
therapy
or
Balloon tamponade
or
Emergency TIPSS
the varices being sucked into a cap placed on the end of 
the endoscope, allowing them to be occluded with a 
tight rubber band. The occluded varix subsequently 
sloughs with variceal obliteration. Banding is repeated 
every 4–6 weeks until the varices are obliterated. Regular 
follow-up endoscopy is required to identify and treat 
any recurrence of varices. Band ligation has fewer side-
effects than, and has largely replaced, sclerotherapy, a 
technique in which varices are injected with a sclerosing 
agent. Banding is associated with a lower risk of 
oesophageal perforation or stricturing than sclero­
therapy. Prophylactic acid suppression with proton 
pump inhibitors reduces the risk of secondary bleeding 
from banding-induced ulceration.
Active bleeding may make endoscopic therapy diffi-
cult. Protection of the patient’s airway with endotracheal 
intubation may aid the endoscopist, facilitating endo-
scopic therapy, and significantly reduce the risk of pul-
monary aspiration.
Balloon 
tamponade.  This 
technique 
employs 
a 
Sengstaken–Blakemore tube possessing two balloons 
that exert pressure in the fundus of the stomach and in 
Fig. 23.21  Sengstaken–Blakemore tube. 
Oesophageal
balloon
Oesophageal
aspirate
Traction
Gastric balloon
(clamped)
Gastric aspirate
Gastric balloon
(inflated with
200–250 mL of air)
Oesophageal
balloon
(deflated)
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
948
Congestive gastropathy
Long-standing portal hypertension causes chronic 
gastric congestion recognisable at endoscopy as multiple 
areas of punctate erythema (‘snake skin gastropathy’). 
Rarely, similar lesions occur more distally in the gas-
trointestinal tract. These areas may become eroded, 
causing bleeding from multiple sites. Acute bleeding 
can occur but repeated minor bleeding causing iron-
deficiency anaemia is more common. Anaemia may be 
prevented by oral iron supplements but repeated blood 
transfusions can become necessary. Reduction of the 
portal pressure using propranolol (80–160 mg/day) is 
the best initial treatment. If this is ineffective, a TIPSS 
procedure can be undertaken.
INFECTIONS AND THE LIVER
The liver may be subject to a number of different infec-
tions. These include hepatotropic viral infections, and 
bacterial and protozoal infections. Each has specific 
clinical features and requires targeted therapies.
Viral hepatitis
This must be considered in anyone presenting with hep-
atitic liver blood tests (high transaminases). The causes 
are listed in Box 23.37.
All these viruses cause illnesses with similar clinical 
and pathological features and which are frequently anic­
teric or even asymptomatic. They differ in their ten-
dency to cause acute and chronic infections. The features 
of the major hepatitis viruses are shown in Box 23.38.
Clinical features of acute infection
A non-specific prodromal illness characterised by head-
ache, myalgia, arthralgia, nausea and anorexia usually 
precedes the development of jaundice by a few days 
to 2 weeks. Vomiting and diarrhoea may follow, and 
abdominal discomfort is common. Dark urine and pale 
stools may precede jaundice. There are usually few 
physical signs. The liver is often tender but only mini-
mally enlarged. Occasionally, mild splenomegaly and 
cervical lymphadenopathy are seen. These are more fre-
quent in children or those with Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) 
infection. Symptoms rarely last longer than 3–6 weeks. 
Complications may occur (Box 23.39) but are rare.
Investigations
A hepatitic pattern of LFTs develops, with serum trans­
aminases typically between 200 and 2000 U/L in an 
coagulation deficiencies may require correction with 
fresh frozen plasma, and antibiotic cover is provided. 
Successful shunt placement stops and prevents variceal 
bleeding. Further bleeding necessitates investigation 
and treatment (e.g. angioplasty) because it is usually 
associated with shunt narrowing or occlusion. Hepatic 
encephalopathy may occur following TIPSS and is 
managed by reducing the shunt diameter. Although 
TIPSS is associated with less rebleeding than endoscopic 
therapy, survival is not improved (Box 23.36).
Portosystemic shunt surgery.  Surgery prevents recur-
rent bleeding, but carries a high mortality and often 
leads to encephalopathy. In practice, portosystemic 
shunts are now reserved for patients in whom other 
treatments have not been successful and are offered only 
to those with good liver function.
Oesophageal transection.   Rarely, surgical transection 
of the varices may be performed as a last resort when 
bleeding cannot be controlled by other means, but oper-
ative mortality is high.
Secondary prevention of variceal bleeding
Beta-blockers are used as a secondary measure to 
prevent recurrent variceal bleeding. Following success-
ful treatment by endoscopic therapy, patients should be 
entered into an oesophageal banding programme with 
repeated sessions of therapy at 1- to 2-week intervals 
until the varices are obliterated. In selected individuals, 
TIPSS may also be considered in this setting.
Fig. 23.22  Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt 
(TIPSS). X-ray showing placement of TIPSS within the portal vein (PV), 
allowing blood to flow from the portal vein into the hepatic vein (HV) and 
then the inferior vena cava (IVC). 
IVC
HV
PV
‘While TIPSS is more effective than endoscopic treatment in 
reducing variceal rebleeding, it does not improve survival and is 
associated with more encephalopathy.’
•	 Jalan R, et al. Gut 2000; 6:1–15.
•	 Laine L. Hepatology 1995; 22:663–665.
For further information: 
 www.bsg.org.uk
23.36  Secondary prevention of variceal bleeding 
in patients with cirrhosis
Common
•	 Hepatitis A
•	 Hepatitis B ± hepatitis D
•	 Hepatitis C
•	 Hepatitis E
Less common
•	 Cytomegalovirus
•	 Epstein–Barr virus
Rare
•	 Herpes simplex
•	 Yellow fever
23.37  Causes of viral hepatitis
Infections and the liver
23
949
then for a further 2 weeks or so. Infection is common in 
children but often asymptomatic, and so up to 30% of 
adults will have serological evidence of past infection 
but give no history of jaundice. Infection is also more 
common in areas of overcrowding and poor sanitation. 
In occasional outbreaks, water and shellfish have been 
the vehicles of transmission. In contrast to hepatitis B, a 
chronic carrier state does not occur.
Investigations
Only one HAV antigen has been found and infected 
people make an antibody to this antigen (anti-HAV). 
Anti-HAV is important in diagnosis, as HAV is only 
present in the blood transiently during the incubation 
period. Excretion in the stools occurs for only 
7–14 days after the onset of the clinical illness and the 
virus cannot be grown readily. Anti-HAV of the IgM 
type, indicating a primary immune response, is already 
present in the blood at the onset of the clinical illness 
and is diagnostic of an acute HAV infection. Titres of 
this antibody fall to low levels within about 3 months of 
recovery. Anti-HAV of the IgG type is of no diagnostic 
value, as HAV infection is common and this antibody 
persists for years after infection, but it can be used as a 
marker of previous HAV infection. Its presence indicates 
immunity to HAV.
Management
Infection in the community is best prevented by improv-
ing social conditions, especially overcrowding and poor 
sanitation. Individuals can be given substantial protec-
tion from infection by active immunisation with an inac-
tivated virus vaccine.
Immunisation should be considered for individuals 
with chronic hepatitis B or C infections. Immediate pro-
tection can be provided by immune serum globulin if 
this is given soon after exposure to the virus. The 
acute infection (usually lower and fluctuating in chronic 
infections). The plasma bilirubin reflects the degree of 
liver damage. The ALP rarely exceeds twice the upper 
limit of normal. Prolongation of the PT indicates the 
severity of the hepatitis but rarely exceeds 25 seconds, 
except in rare cases of acute liver failure. The white cell 
count is usually normal with a relative lymphocytosis. 
Serological tests confirm the aetiology of the infection.
Management
Most individuals do not need hospital care. Drugs such 
as sedatives and narcotics, which are metabolised in the 
liver, should be avoided. No specific dietary modifica-
tions are needed. Alcohol should be avoided during the 
acute illness. Elective surgery should be avoided in cases 
of acute viral hepatitis, as there is a risk of post-operative 
liver failure.
Liver transplantation is very rarely indicated for 
acute viral hepatitis complicated by liver failure, but 
is commonly performed for complications of cirrhosis 
resulting from chronic hepatitis B and C infection.
Hepatitis A
The hepatitis A virus (HAV) belongs to the picornavirus 
group of enteroviruses. HAV is highly infectious and is 
spread by the faecal–oral route. Infected individuals, 
who may be asymptomatic, excrete the virus in faeces 
for about 2–3 weeks before the onset of symptoms and 
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Hepatitis E
Virus
Group
Enterovirus
Hepadna virus
Flavivirus
Incomplete virus
Calicivirus
Nucleic acid
RNA
DNA
RNA
RNA
RNA
Size (diameter)
27 nm
42 nm
30–38 nm
35 nm
27 nm
Incubation (wks)
2–4
4–20
2–26
6–9
3–8
Spread
Faeces
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Blood
Uncommon
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Saliva
Yes
Yes
Yes
Unknown
Unknown
Sexual
Uncommon
Yes
Uncommon
Yes
Unknown
Vertical
No
Yes
Uncommon
Yes
No
Chronic infection
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No (rarely in 
immune-
compromised)
Prevention
Active
Vaccine
Vaccine
No
Prevented by 
hepatitis B 
vaccination
No
Passive
Immune serum 
globulin
Hyperimmune 
serum globulin
No
No
Note All body fluids are potentially infectious, although some (e.g. urine) are less infectious than others.
23.38  Features of the main hepatitis viruses
•	 Acute liver failure
•	 Cholestatic hepatitis 
(hepatitis A)
•	 Aplastic anaemia
•	 Chronic liver disease and 
cirrhosis (hepatitis B and C)
•	 Relapsing hepatitis
23.39  Complications of acute viral hepatitis
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
950
protective effect of immune serum globulin is attributed 
to its anti-HAV content. Immunisation should be con-
sidered for those at particular risk, such as close contacts 
of HAV-infected patients, the elderly, those with other 
major disease and perhaps pregnant women.
Immune serum globulin can be effective in an out-
break of hepatitis, in a school or nursery, as injection of 
those at risk prevents secondary spread to families. 
People travelling to endemic areas are best protected by 
vaccination.
Acute liver failure is rare in hepatitis A (0.1%) and 
chronic infection does not occur. However, HAV infec-
tion in patients with chronic liver disease may cause 
serious or life-threatening disease. In adults, a chole­
static phase with elevated ALP levels may complicate 
infection. There is no role for antiviral drugs in the 
therapy of HAV infection.
Hepatitis B
The hepatitis B virus consists of a core containing DNA 
and a DNA polymerase enzyme needed for virus repli-
cation. The core of the virus is surrounded by surface 
protein (Fig. 23.23). The virus, also called a Dane parti-
cle, and an excess of its surface protein (known as hepa-
titis B surface antigen) circulate in the blood. Humans 
are the only source of infection.
Hepatitis B is one of the most common causes of 
chronic liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma 
worldwide. Approximately one-third of the world’s 
population have serological evidence of past or 
current infection with hepatitis B and approximately 
350–400 million people are chronic HBsAg carriers.
Hepatitis B may cause an acute viral hepatitis; 
however, acute infection is often asymptomatic, particu-
larly when acquired at birth. Many individuals with 
chronic hepatitis B are also asymptomatic.
The risk of progression to chronic liver disease 
depends on the source and timing of infection (Box 
23.40). Vertical transmission from mother to child 
in the perinatal period is the most common cause of 
infection worldwide and carries the highest risk of 
ongoing chronic infection. In this setting, adaptive 
immune responses to HBV may be absent initially, 
Fig. 23.23  Schematic diagram of hepatitis B virus. Hepatitis B 
surface antigen (HBsAg) is a protein that makes up part of the viral 
envelope. Hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) is a protein that makes up  
the capsid or core part of the virus (found in the liver but not in blood). 
Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) is part of the HBcAg that can be found  
in the blood and indicates infectivity. 
HBV-DNA
HBV-DNA
polymerase
HBsAg
HBcAg
HBeAg (blood)
with apparent immunological tolerance. Several mecha-
nisms contribute towards this.
•	 Firstly, the introduction of antigen in the neonatal 
period is tolerogenic.
•	 Secondly, the presentation of such antigen within 
the liver, as described above, promotes tolerance; 
this is particularly evident in the absence of a 
significant innate or inflammatory response.
•	 Finally, very high loads of antigen may lead to 
so-called ‘exhaustion’ of cellular immune responses. 
However, the state of tolerance is not permanent 
and may be reversed as a result of therapy, or 
through spontaneous changes in innate responses 
such as interferon-alpha and NK cells, accompanied 
by host-mediated immunopathology.
Chronic hepatitis can lead to cirrhosis or HCC, 
usually after decades of infection (Fig. 23.24). Chronic 
HBV infection is a dynamic process that can be divided 
into five phases (Box 23.41); however, these are not 
necessarily sequential and not all patients will go 
through all phases. It should be remembered that the 
virus is not directly cytotoxic to cells; rather it is 
an immune response to viral antigens displayed on 
infected hepatocytes that initiates liver injury. This 
explains why there may be very high levels of viral 
replication but little hepatocellular damage during the 
‘immune tolerant’ phase.
Investigations
Serology
HBV contains several antigens to which infected persons 
can make immune responses (Fig. 23.25); these antigens 
and their antibodies are important in identifying HBV 
infection (Boxes 23.41 and 23.42), although the wide-
spread availability of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
techniques to measure viral DNA levels in peripheral 
blood means that longitudinal monitoring is now also 
frequently guided by direct assessment of viral load.
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg).  HBsAg is an 
indicator of active infection, and a negative test for 
HBsAg makes HBV infection very unlikely. In acute 
liver failure from hepatitis B, the liver damage is medi-
ated by viral clearance and so HBsAg is negative, with 
evidence of recent infection shown by the presence 
of hepatitis B core IgM. HBsAg appears in the blood 
late in the incubation period, but before the prodromal 
phase of acute type B hepatitis; it may be present for a 
few days only, disappearing even before jaundice has 
developed, but usually lasts for 3–4 weeks and can 
Horizontal transmission (10%)
•	 Injection drug use
•	 Infected unscreened blood products
•	 Tattoos/acupuncture needles
•	 Sexual (homosexual and heterosexual)
•	 Close living quarters/playground play as a toddler (may 
contribute to high rate of horizontal transmission in Africa)
Vertical transmission (90%)
•	 HBsAg-positive mother
23.40  Source of hepatitis B infection and risk of 
chronic infection
Infections and the liver
23
951
Fig. 23.24  Natural history of chronic hepatitis B infection. There is an initial immunotolerant phase with high levels of virus and normal liver 
biochemistry. An immunological response to the virus then occurs, with elevation in serum transaminases, which causes liver damage: chronic hepatitis.  
If this response is sustained over many years and viral clearance does not occur promptly, chronic hepatitis may result in cirrhosis. In individuals with  
a successful immunological response, viral load falls, HBe antibody develops and there is no further liver damage. Some individuals may subsequently 
develop HBV-DNA mutants that escape from immune regulation, and viral load again rises with further chronic hepatitis. Mutations in the core protein 
result in the virus’s inability to secrete HBe antigen despite high levels of viral replication; such individuals have HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis.  
(ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase) 
HBeAg-positive
HBeAg-negative
Viral
load
HBV-tolerant
HBV clearance
Latent phase
HBV mutant
Liver
transaminases
ALT/AST
Time (years)
Chronic
infection
Liver
histology
Normal
Chronic
hepatitis
Minimal
inflammation
Chronic hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Hepatocellular
carcinoma
Phase
HBsAg
HBeAg
Anti-HBe 
Ab
Viral load
ALT
Histology
Notes
‘Immune tolerant’ 
phase
+
+
–
+++
Normal/
Low
Normal/minimal 
necroinflammation
Prolonged in perinatally 
infected individuals; may be 
short or absent if infected 
as an adult. High viral load 
and so very infectious
‘Immune reactive’ 
HBeAg-positive 
chronic hepatitis 
phase
+
+
–
++
Raised
Moderate/severe 
necroinflammation
May last weeks or years. 
High risk of cirrhosis or 
HCC if prolonged. Increased 
chance of spontaneous  
loss of HBeAg with 
seroconversion to anti-HBe 
Ab-positive state
‘Inactive carrier’ 
phase
+
–
+
–/+
Normal
Normal/minimal 
necroinflammation
Low risk of cirrhosis or HCC 
in majority
HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis 
phase
+
–
+
Fluctuating 
+/++
Raised/
Fluctuating
Moderate/severe 
necroinflammation
May represent late immune 
reactivation or presence of 
‘pre-core mutant’ HBV. High 
risk of cirrhosis or HCC
HBsAg-negative 
phase
–
–
+
–/±
Normal
Normal
Ultrasensitive techniques 
may detect low-level HBV 
even after HBsAg loss
23.41  The five phases of chronic hepatitis B virus infection
persist for up to 5 months. The persistence of HBsAg 
for longer than 6 months indicates chronic infection. 
Antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) usually appears after 
about 3–6 months and persists for many years or 
perhaps permanently. Anti-HBs implies either a 
previous infection, in which case anti-HBc (see below) is 
usually also present, or previous vaccination, in which 
case anti-HBc is not present.
Hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg).  HBcAg is not found 
in the blood, but antibody to it (anti-HBc) appears early 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
952
Viral load and genotype
HBV-DNA can be measured by PCR in the blood. Viral 
loads are usually in excess of 105 copies/mL in the pres-
ence of active viral replication, as indicated by the pres-
ence of e antigen. In contrast, in those with low 
viral replication, HBsAg- and anti-HBe-positive, viral 
loads are less than 105 copies/mL. The exception is in 
patients who have a mutation in the pre-core protein, 
which means they cannot secrete e antigen into serum 
(Fig. 23.26). Such individuals will be anti-HBe-positive 
but have a high viral load and often evidence of 
chronic hepatitis. These mutations are common in 
the Far East, and those patients affected are classified 
as having e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis. They 
respond differently to antiviral drugs from those with 
classical e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis.
Measurement of viral load is important in monitor­
ing antiviral therapy and identifying patients with 
pre-core mutants. Specific HBV genotypes (A–H) can 
also be identified using PCR. In some settings these 
may be useful in guiding therapy, as genotype A tends 
to respond better to pegylated interferon alfa, compared 
to genotypes C and D.
Management of acute hepatitis B
Treatment is supportive, with monitoring for acute liver 
failure, which occurs in less than 1% of cases. There is 
no definitive evidence that antiviral therapy reduces the 
severity or duration of acute hepatitis B.
Full recovery occurs in 90–95% of adults following 
acute HBV infection. The remaining 5–10% develop a 
chronic hepatitis B infection that usually continues 
for life, although later recovery occasionally occurs. 
Infection passing from mother to child at birth leads 
to chronic infection in the child in 90% of cases and 
recovery is rare. Chronic infection is also common 
in the illness and rapidly reaches a high titre, which 
subsides gradually but then persists. Anti-HBc is ini-
tially of IgM type, with IgG antibody appearing later. 
Anti-HBc (IgM) can sometimes reveal an acute HBV 
infection when the HBsAg has disappeared and before 
anti-HBs has developed (see Fig. 23.25 and Box 23.42).
Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg).  HBeAg is an indicator 
of viral replication. In acute hepatitis B it may appear 
only transiently at the outset of the illness; its 
appearance is followed by the production of antibody 
(anti-HBe). The HBeAg reflects active replication of the 
virus in the liver.
Chronic HBV infection (see below) is marked by the 
presence of HBsAg and anti-HBc (IgG) in the blood. 
Usually, HBeAg or anti-HBe is also present; HBeAg 
indicates continued active replication of the virus in the 
liver. The absence of HBeAg usually implies low viral 
replication; the exception is HBeAg-negative chronic 
hepatitis B (also called ‘pre-core mutant’ infection, dis-
cussed below), in which high levels of viral replication, 
serum HBV-DNA and hepatic necroinflammation are 
seen, despite negative HBeAg.
Fig. 23.25  Serological responses to hepatitis B virus infection. 
(HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; anti-HBe = antibody to HBeAg; HBsAg = 
hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to HBsAg; anti-HBc = 
antibody to hepatitis B core antigen) 
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
11
12
Clinical
illness
Relative amount of
product detectable
HBeAg
HBsAg
Anti-HBe
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc
IgM anti-HBc
Time after exposure (months)
Interpretation
HBsAg
Anti-HBc 
IgM
Anti-HBc 
IgG
Anti-HBs
Incubation 
period
+
+
–
–
Acute hepatitis
Early
+
+
–
–
Established
+
+
+
–
Established 
(occasional)
–
+
+
–
Convalescence
(3–6 months)
–
±
+
±
(6–9 months)
–
–
+
+
Post-infection
–
–
+
±
Immunisation 
without 
infection
–
–
–
+
+ Positive; – negative; ± present at low titre or absent.
23.42  How to interpret the serological tests of 
acute hepatitis B virus infection
Fig. 23.26  The site of HBV-DNA mutations. HBV-DNA encodes four 
proteins: a DNA polymerase needed for viral replication (P), a surface 
protein (S), a core protein (C) and an X protein. The pre-C and C regions 
encode a core protein and an e antigen. Although mutations in the 
hepatitis B virus are frequent, certain mutations have important clinical 
consequences. Pre-C encodes a signal sequence needed for the C protein 
to be secreted from the liver cell into serum as e antigen. A mutation in 
the pre-core region leads to a failure of secretion of e antigen into serum, 
and so individuals have high levels of viral production but no detectable e 
antigen in the serum. Mutations can also occur in the surface protein and 
may lead to the failure of vaccination to prevent infection since surface 
antibodies are produced against the native S protein. Mutations also occur 
in the DNA polymerase during antiviral treatment with lamivudine. 
Mutations
P
X
S
C
HBV-DNA
pre-S1
pre-S2
pre-C
Mutations
Mutations
Infections and the liver
23
953
1–2% after 3 years of entecavir drug exposure. Both 
drugs have anti-HIV action and so their use as mono-
therapy is contraindicated in HIV-positive patients, as it 
may lead to HIV antiviral drug resistance. Current Euro-
pean guidelines advise that the other nucleoside/
nucleotide antivirals should not be used as first-line 
monotherapy due to the induction of viral mutations, 
unless more potent drugs with a high barrier to resist-
ance are not available or appropriate.
Interferon-alfa
This is most effective in patients with a low viral load 
and serum transaminases greater than twice the upper 
limit of normal, in whom it acts by augmenting a native 
immune response. In HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis, 
33% lose e antigen after 4–6 months of treatment, com-
pared to 12% of controls. Response rates are lower in 
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis, even when patients 
are given longer courses of treatment. Interferon is con-
traindicated in the presence of cirrhosis, as it may cause 
a rise in serum transaminases and precipitate liver 
failure. Longer-acting pegylated interferons that can be 
given once weekly have been evaluated in both HBeAg-
positive and HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis (Box 
23.45). Side-effects are common and include fatigue, 
depression, irritability, bone marrow suppression and 
the triggering of autoimmune thyroid disease.
Liver transplantation
Historically, liver transplantation was contraindicated 
in hepatitis B because infection often recurred in the 
graft. However, the use of post-liver transplant prophy-
laxis with direct-acting antiviral agents and hepatitis 
B immunoglobulins has reduced the re-infection rate 
to 10% and increased 5-year survival to 80%, making 
transplantation an acceptable treatment option.
in immunodeficient individuals, such as those with 
Down’s syndrome or human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) infection. Fulminant liver failure due to acute 
hepatitis B occurs in less than 1% of cases.
Recovery from acute HBV infection occurs within 
6 months and is characterised by the appearance of anti-
body to viral antigens. Persistence of HBeAg beyond this 
time indicates chronic infection. Combined HBV and 
HDV infection causes more aggressive disease.
Management of chronic hepatitis B
Treatments are still limited, as no drug is consistently 
able to eradicate hepatitis B infection completely (i.e. 
render the patient HBsAg-negative). The goals of treat-
ment are HBeAg seroconversion, reduction in HBV-DNA 
and normalisation of the LFTs. The indication for treat-
ment is a high viral load in the presence of active hepa-
titis, as demonstrated by elevated serum transaminases 
and/or histological evidence of inflammation and fibro-
sis. The oral antiviral agents are more effective in reduc-
ing viral loads in patients with e antigen-negative 
chronic hepatitis B than in those with e antigen-positive 
chronic hepatitis B, as the pre-treatment viral loads are 
lower.
Most patients with chronic hepatitis B are asympto-
matic and develop complications such as cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma only after many years (see Fig. 
23.24). Cirrhosis develops in 15–20% of patients with 
chronic HBV over 5–20 years. This proportion is higher 
in those who are e antigen-positive.
Two different types of drug are used to treat hepatitis 
B: direct-acting nucleoside/nucleotide analogues and 
pegylated interferon-alfa.
Direct-acting nucleoside/nucleotide antiviral agents
Orally administered nucleoside/nucleotide antiviral 
agents are the mainstay of therapy. These act by inhibit-
ing the reverse transcription of pre-genomic RNA to 
HBV-DNA by HBV-DNA polymerase but do not directly 
affect the cccDNA (covalently closed circular DNA) tem-
plate for viral replication, and so relapse is common if 
treatment is withdrawn. One major concern is the selec-
tion of antiviral-resistant mutations with long-term 
treatment. This is particularly important with some of 
the older agents, such as lamivudine, as mutations 
induced by previous antiviral exposure may also induce 
resistance to newer agents. Entecavir and tenofovir (see 
below) are potent antivirals with a high barrier to genetic 
resistance, and so are the most appropriate first-line 
agents.
Lamivudine.  Although effective, long-term therapy is 
often complicated by the development of HBV-DNA 
polymerase mutants (e.g. the ‘YMDD variant’), which 
may occur after 9 months and are characterised by a 
rise in viral load during treatment. Telbivudine is 
more potent but is also susceptible to viral resistance. 
Adefovir is associated with development of HBV-DNA 
mutants at a lower rate than with lamivudine; 2% are 
identified after 2 years of treatment but this figure 
increases to 18% after 3 years.
Entecavir and tenofovir.  Monotherapy with entecavir 
or tenofovir is more effective than either lamivudine or 
adefovir in reducing viral load in HBeAg-positive 
and HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis (Boxes 23.43  
and 23.44). Antiviral resistance mutations occur in only 
‘Among patients with chronic HBV infection, tenofovir at a daily 
dose of 300 mg had superior antiviral efficacy with a similar 
safety profile as compared with adefovir 10 mg daily. In 
HBeAg-positive patients, tenofovir suppressed HBV-DNA to  
< 400 copies/mL in 76% of patients, compared with 13% 
of those given adefovir (p < 0.001).’
•	 Marcellin P, et al. NEJM 2008; 359:2442–2445.
23.44  Tenofovir for chronic hepatitis B
‘In HBeAg-positive patients, 48 weeks of treatment with 
entecavir suppresses HBV-DNA levels in 67%, compared to  
36% with lamivudine and 60% with telbivudine. Anti-HBe 
seroconversion occurs in 21% following a year of entecavir, 
lamivudine or telbivudine. In HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis, 
HBV-DNA negativity is achieved in 90% with entecavir, 
compared to 72% with lamivudine and 88% with telbivudine  
at 1 year. Treatment also improves histology and liver 
biochemistry.’
•	 Chang T-T. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:1001–1010.
•	 Lai C-L. N Engl J Med 2007; 357:2576–2588.
•	 Lai C-L. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:1011–1020.
For further information: 
www.easl.eu/_clinical-practice-guideline/
23.43  Entecavir and telbivudine in chronic 
hepatitis B infection
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
954
Prevention
Individuals are most infectious when markers of con-
tinuing viral replication, such as HBeAg, and high levels 
of HBV-DNA are present in the blood. HBV-DNA can 
be found in saliva, urine, semen and vaginal secretions. 
The virus is about ten times more infectious than hepa-
titis C, which in turn is about ten times more infectious 
than HIV.
A recombinant hepatitis B vaccine containing HBsAg 
is available (Engerix) and is capable of producing active 
immunisation in 95% of normal individuals. The vaccine 
should be offered to those at special risk of infection who 
are not already immune, as evidenced by anti-HBs in the 
blood (Box 23.46). The vaccine is ineffective in those 
already infected by HBV. Infection can also be prevented 
or minimised by the intramuscular injection of hyper­
immune serum globulin prepared from blood contain-
ing anti-HBs. This should be given within 24 hours, or 
at most a week, of exposure to infected blood in circum-
stances likely to cause infection (e.g. needlestick injury, 
contamination of cuts or mucous membranes). Vaccine 
can be given together with hyperimmune globulin 
(active–passive immunisation).
Neonates born to hepatitis B-infected mothers should 
be immunised at birth and given immunoglobulin. 
Hepatitis B serology should then be checked at 
12 months of age.
Hepatitis D (Delta virus)
The hepatitis D virus (HDV) is an RNA-defective virus 
that has no independent existence; it requires HBV for 
replication and has the same sources and modes of 
spread. It can infect individuals simultaneously with 
HBV, or can superinfect those who are already chronic 
carriers of HBV. Simultaneous infections give rise to 
acute hepatitis, which is often severe but is limited by 
recovery from the HBV infection. Infections in individu-
als who are chronic carriers of HBV can cause acute 
•	 Parenteral drug users
•	 Men who have sex with men
•	 Close contacts of infected individuals
Newborn of infected mothers
Regular sexual partners
•	 Patients on chronic haemodialysis
•	 Patients with chronic liver disease
•	 Medical, nursing and laboratory personnel
23.46  At-risk groups meriting hepatitis B 
vaccination in low-endemic areas
‘In HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis, treatment with pegylated 
interferon for 6 months eliminates HBeAg in 35% of patients, 
and normalises liver biochemistry in 25%. In HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis, treatment with pegylated interferon for 12 
months leads to normal liver biochemistry in 60% of patients, 
and sustained suppression of hepatitis B virus load below  
400 copies/mL in 20%.’
•	 Cooksley WG, et al. J Viral Hep 2003; 10:298–302.
•	 Marcellin P. N Engl J Med 2004; 351:1206–1217.
For further information: 
www.easl.eu/_clinical-practice-guideline
23.45  Pegylated interferons in chronic 
hepatitis B infection
hepatitis with spontaneous recovery, and occasionally 
simultaneous cessation of the chronic HBV infection 
occurs. Chronic infection with HBV and HDV can also 
occur, and this frequently causes rapidly progressive 
chronic hepatitis and eventually cirrhosis.
HDV has a worldwide distribution. It is endemic in 
parts of the Mediterranean basin, Africa and South 
America, where transmission is mainly by close per-
sonal contact and occasionally by vertical transmission 
from mothers who also carry HBV. In non-endemic 
areas, transmission is mainly a consequence of parenteral 
drug misuse.
Investigations
HDV contains a single antigen to which infected indi-
viduals make an antibody (anti-HDV). Delta antigen 
appears in the blood only transiently, and in practice 
diagnosis depends on detecting anti-HDV. Simul­
taneous infection with HBV and HDV followed by full 
recovery is associated with the appearance of low titres 
of anti-HDV of IgM type within a few days of the onset 
of the illness. This antibody generally disappears within 
2 months but persists in a few patients. Superinfection 
of patients with chronic HBV infection leads to the pro-
duction of high titres of anti-HDV, initially IgM and 
later IgG. Such patients may then develop chronic infec-
tion with both viruses, in which case anti-HDV titres 
plateau at high levels.
Management
Effective management of hepatitis B prevents hepatitis D.
Hepatitis C
This is caused by an RNA flavivirus. Acute symptomatic 
infection with hepatitis C is rare. Most individuals are 
unaware of when they became infected and are only 
identified when they develop chronic liver disease. 
Eighty per cent of individuals exposed to the virus 
become chronically infected and late spontaneous viral 
clearance is rare.
Hepatitis C is the cause of what used to be known as 
‘non-A, non-B hepatitis’.
Hepatitis C infection is usually identified in asymp-
tomatic individuals screened because they have risk 
factors for infection, such as previous injecting drug use 
(Box 23.47), or have incidentally been found to have 
abnormal liver blood tests. Although most individuals 
remain asymptomatic until progression to cirrhosis 
occurs, fatigue can complicate chronic infection and is 
unrelated to the degree of liver damage.
Investigations
Serology and virology
The HCV protein contains several antigens that give rise 
to antibodies in an infected person and these are used in 
diagnosis. It may take 6–12 weeks for antibodies to 
appear in the blood following acute infection such as 
a needlestick injury. In these cases, hepatitis C RNA 
can be identified in the blood as early as 2–4 weeks 
after infection. Active infection is confirmed by the 
presence of serum hepatitis C RNA in anyone who 
is antibody-positive. Anti-HCV antibodies persist in 
serum even after viral clearance, whether spontaneous 
or post-treatment.
Infections and the liver
23
955
always recurs in the transplanted liver and up to 15% of 
patients will develop cirrhosis in the liver graft within 
5 years of transplantation.
There is no active or passive protection against HCV. 
Progression from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis occurs 
over 20–40 years. Risk factors for progression include 
male gender, immunosuppression (such as co-infection 
with HIV), prothrombotic states and heavy alcohol 
misuse. Not everyone with hepatitis C infection will nec-
essarily develop cirrhosis but approximately 20% do so 
within 20 years. Once cirrhosis has developed, the 5- and 
10-year survival rates are 95% and 81% respectively. 
One-quarter of people with cirrhosis will develop com-
plications within 10 years and, once complications like 
ascites have arisen, the 5-year survival is around 50%. 
Once cirrhosis is present, 2–5% per year will develop 
primary hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatitis E
Hepatitis E is caused by an RNA virus that is endemic 
in India and the Middle East. An increase in prevalence 
has recently been noted in northern Europe and 
infection is no longer seen only in travellers from an 
endemic area.
The clinical presentation and management of hepati-
tis E are similar to that of hepatitis A. Disease is spread 
via the faecal–oral route; in most cases, it presents as a 
self-limiting acute hepatitis and does not usually cause 
chronic liver disease, although some cases have been 
described, usually in immunocompromised patients.
Hepatitis E differs from hepatitis A in that infection 
during pregnancy is associated with the development of 
acute liver failure, which has a high mortality. In acute 
infection, IgM antibodies to HEV are positive.
Other forms of viral hepatitis
Non-A, non-B, non-C (NANBNC) or non-A–E hepatitis 
is the term used to describe hepatitis thought to be due 
to a virus that is not HAV, HBV, HCV or HEV. Other 
viruses that affect the liver probably exist, but the viruses 
described above now account for the majority of hepa-
titis virus infections. Cytomegalovirus and EBV infection 
cause abnormal LFTs in most patients, and occasionally 
jaundice occurs. Herpes simplex is a rare cause of hepa-
titis in adults, and most of these patients are immuno-
compromised. Abnormal LFTs are also common in 
chickenpox, measles, rubella and acute HIV infection.
HIV infection and the liver
Several causes of abnormal LFTs occur in HIV infection, 
as shown in Box 23.49. This topic is discussed in more 
detail on page 400.
Molecular analysis
There are six common viral genotypes, the distribution 
of which varies worldwide. Genotype has no effect 
on progression of liver disease but does affect response 
to treatment. Genotype 1 is most common in northern 
Europe and is less easy to eradicate than genotypes 
2 and 3 with traditional pegylated interferon alfa/
ribavirin-based treatments.
Liver function tests
LFTs may be normal or show fluctuating serum trans­
aminases between 50 and 200 U/L. Jaundice is rare and 
only usually appears in end-stage cirrhosis.
Liver histology
Serum transaminase levels in hepatitis C are a poor 
predictor of the degree of liver fibrosis and so a liver 
biopsy is often required to stage the degree of liver 
damage. The degree of inflammation and fibrosis can be 
scored histologically. The most common scoring system 
used in hepatitis C is the Metavir system, which scores 
fibrosis from 1 to 4, the latter equating to cirrhosis.
Management
The aim of treatment is to eradicate infection. Until 
recently, the treatment of choice was dual therapy with 
pegylated interferon-alfa given as a weekly subcuta­
neous injection, together with oral ribavirin, a synthetic 
nucleotide analogue (Box 23.48). The main side-effects 
of ribavirin are haemolytic anaemia and teratogenicity. 
Side-effects of interferon are significant and include 
flu-like symptoms, irritability and depression, all of 
which can affect quality of life. Virological relapse can 
occur in the first 3 months after stopping treatment, and 
cure is defined as loss of virus from serum 6 months 
after completing therapy (sustained virological response, 
or SVR). The length of treatment and efficacy depend 
on viral genotype (12 months’ treatment for genotype 
1 results in a 40% SVR, whereas 6 months’ treatment 
for genotype 2 or 3 leads to an SVR in > 70%). Response 
to treatment is better in patients who have an early 
virological response, as defined by negativity of HCV- 
RNA in serum 1 month after starting therapy, and it may 
be possible to shorten the duration of therapy in this 
patient group.
The recent availability of triple therapy with the 
addition of protease inhibitors such as telaprevir and 
boceprevir to standard pegylated interferon/ribavirin 
has provided a significant advance in therapy, with SVR 
rates for genotype 1 individuals comparable to those 
previously only achieved in genotypes 2 and 3.
Liver transplantation should be considered when 
complications of cirrhosis occur, such as diuretic-
resistant ascites. Unfortunately, hepatitis C almost 
•	 Intravenous drug misuse (95% of new cases in the UK)
•	 Unscreened blood products
•	 Vertical transmission (3% risk)
•	 Needlestick injury (3% risk)
•	 Iatrogenic parenteral transmission (i.e. contaminated 
vaccination needles)
•	 Sharing toothbrushes/razors
23.47  Risk factors for the acquisition of chronic 
hepatitis C infection
‘The addition of ribavirin to pegylated interferon-alfa therapy 
improves the overall sustained virological response from  
33% to 55%.’
•	 Manns MP, et al. Lancet 2001; 358:958–965.
•	 Hadziyannis SJ, et al. Ann Intern Med 2004; 140:346–553.
For further information: 
www.easl.eu/_clinical-practice-guideline/
23.48  Treatment of hepatitis C
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
956
aspiration under ultrasound guidance confirms the 
diagnosis and provides pus for culture. A leucocytosis 
is frequently found, plasma ALP activity is usually 
increased, and the serum albumin is often low. The chest 
X-ray may show a raised right diaphragm and lung col-
lapse, or an effusion at the base of the right lung. Blood 
cultures are positive in 50–80%. Abscesses caused by 
gut-derived organisms require active exclusion of sig-
nificant colonic pathology, such as a colonoscopy to 
exclude colorectal carcinoma.
Management
This includes prolonged antibiotic therapy and drainage 
of the abscess. Associated biliary obstruction and cholan-
gitis require biliary drainage (preferably endoscopi-
cally). Pending the results of culture of blood and pus 
from the abscess, treatment should be commenced with 
a combination of antibiotics such as ampicillin, gen-
tamicin and metronidazole. Aspiration or drainage with 
a catheter placed in the abscess under ultrasound guid-
ance is required if the abscess is large or if it does not 
respond to antibiotics. Surgical drainage is rarely under-
taken, although hepatic resection may be indicated for a 
chronic persistent abscess or ‘pseudotumour’.
Hydatid cysts
Hydatid cysts are caused by Echinococcus granulosus 
infection (p. 380). They have an outer layer derived from 
the host, an intermediate laminated layer and an 
inner germinal layer. They can be single (Fig. 23.27) or 
multiple. Chronic cysts become calcified. The cysts may 
Liver abscess
Liver abscesses are classified as pyogenic, hydatid or 
amoebic.
Pyogenic liver abscess
Pyogenic liver abscesses are uncommon but important 
because they are potentially curable, carry significant 
morbidity and mortality if untreated, and are easily 
overlooked. The mortality of liver abscesses is 20–40%; 
failure to make the diagnosis is the most common cause 
of death. Older patients and those with multiple 
abscesses also have a higher mortality.
Pathophysiology
Infection can reach the liver in several ways (Box 23.50). 
Pyogenic abscesses are most common in older patients 
and usually result from ascending infection due to 
biliary obstruction (cholangitis) or contiguous spread 
from an empyema of the gallbladder. They can also com-
plicate dental sepsis. Abscesses complicating suppura-
tive appendicitis used to be common in young adults but 
are now rare. Immunocompromised patients are par-
ticularly likely to develop liver abscesses. Single lesions 
are more common in the right liver; multiple abscesses 
are usually due to infection secondary to biliary obstruc-
tion. E. coli and various streptococci, particularly Strep. 
milleri, are the most common organisms; anaerobes, 
including streptococci and Bacteroides, can often be 
found when infection has been transmitted from large 
bowel pathology via the portal vein, and multiple organ-
isms are present in one-third of patients.
Clinical features
Patients are generally ill with fever, and sometimes 
rigors and weight loss. Abdominal pain is the most 
common symptom and is usually in the right upper 
quadrant, sometimes with radiation to the right shoul-
der. The pain may be pleuritic in nature. Tender 
hepatomegaly is found in more than 50% of patients. 
Mild jaundice may be present, becoming severe if large 
abscesses cause biliary obstruction. Atypical presenta-
tions are common and explain the frequency with which 
the diagnosis is made only at postmortem. This is a 
particular problem in patients with gradually develop-
ing illnesses or pyrexia of unknown origin without local-
ising features. Necrotic colorectal metastases can be 
misdiagnosed as hepatic abscess.
Investigations
Liver imaging is the most revealing investigation and 
shows 90% or more of symptomatic abscesses. Needle 
Fig. 23.27  Hydatid cyst of the liver on CT (arrows). 
•	 Biliary obstruction (cholangitis)
•	 Haematogenous
Portal vein (mesenteric infections)
Hepatic artery (bacteraemia)
•	 Direct extension
•	 Trauma
Penetrating or non-penetrating
•	 Infection of liver tumour or cyst
23.50  Causes of pyogenic liver abscesses
Hepatitic blood tests
•	 Chronic hepatitis C
•	 Chronic hepatitis B
•	 Antiretroviral drugs
•	 Cytomegalovirus
Cholestatic blood tests
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Atypical mycobacterium
•	 Sclerosing cholangitis due to 
cryptosporidia
23.49  Causes of abnormal liver blood tests 
in HIV infection
Alcoholic liver disease
23
957
be asymptomatic but may present with abdominal pain 
or a mass. Peripheral blood eosinophilia is present in 
20% of cases, whilst X-rays may show calcification of 
the rim of the abscess. CT reliably shows the cyst(s), 
and Echinococcus enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) has 90% sensitivity for hepatic hydatid cysts. 
Rupture or secondary infection of cysts can occur, and a 
communication with the intrahepatic biliary tree can 
then result, with associated biliary obstruction.
All patients should be treated medically with alben-
dazole or mebendazole prior to definitive therapy. In the 
absence of communications with the biliary tree, treat-
ment consists of percutaneous aspiration of the cyst fol-
lowed by the injection of 100% ethanol into the cysts and 
then re-aspiration of the cyst contents (PAIR). Where 
there is communication between the cyst and biliary 
system, surgical removal of the intact cyst is the pre-
ferred treatment.
Amoebic liver abscesses
Amoebic liver abscesses are caused by Entamoeba 
histolytica infection (p. 367). Up to 50% of cases do not 
have a previous history of intestinal disease. Although 
amoebic liver abscesses are most often found in endemic 
areas, patients can present with no history of travel to 
these places. Abscesses are usually large, single and 
located in the right lobe; multiple abscesses may occur 
in advanced disease. Fever and abdominal pain or swell-
ing are the most common symptoms. Diagnosis may 
depend on cyst aspiration revealing the classic anchovy 
sauce appearance of the cyst fluid. Analysis of serum for 
Entamoeba antibodies by immunoassay carries 99% sen-
sitivity and over 90% specificity, and is more accurate 
than stool analysis in amoebic liver disease. Treatment 
is described on page 368.
ALCOHOLIC LIVER DISEASE
Alcohol is one of the most common causes of chronic 
liver disease worldwide, with consumption continuing 
to increase in many countries. Patients with alcoholic 
liver disease (ALD) may also have risk factors for other 
liver diseases (e.g. coexisting NAFLD or chronic viral 
hepatitis infection), and these may interact to increase 
disease severity.
In the UK, a unit of alcohol contains 8 g of ethanol 
(Box 23.51). A threshold of 14 units/week in women and 
21 units/week in men is generally considered safe. The 
risk threshold for developing ALD is variable but begins 
at 30 g/day of ethanol. However, there is no clear linear 
relationship between dose and liver damage. For many, 
consumption of more than 80 g/day, for more than 
5 years, is required to confer significant risk of advanced 
liver disease. The average alcohol consumption of a man 
with cirrhosis is 160 g/day for over 8 years. Some of the 
risk factors for ALD are:
•	 Drinking pattern. ALD and alcohol dependence are 
not synonymous; many of those who develop ALD 
are not alcohol-dependent and most dependent 
drinkers have normal liver function. Liver damage 
is more likely to occur in continuous rather than 
intermittent or ‘binge’ drinkers, as this pattern gives 
the liver a chance to recover. It is therefore 
recommended that people should have at least two 
Alcohol type
% alcohol 
by volume
Amount
Units*
Beer
3.5
440 mL (1 pint)
2
9
440 mL (1 pint)
4
Wine
10
125 mL
1
12
750 mL
9
‘Alcopops’
6
330 mL
2
Sherry
17.5
750 mL
13
Vodka/rum/gin
37.5
25 mL
1
Whisky/brandy
40
700 mL
28
*1 unit = 8 g.
23.51  Amount of alcohol in an average drink
alcohol-free days each week. The type of beverage 
does not affect risk.
•	 Gender. The incidence of alcoholic liver disease is 
increasing in women, who have higher blood 
ethanol levels than men after consuming the same 
amount of alcohol. This may be related to the 
reduced volume of distribution of alcohol.
•	 Genetics. Alcoholism is more concordant in 
monozygotic than dizygotic twins. Whilst 
polymorphisms in the genes involved in alcohol 
metabolism, such as aldehyde dehydrogenase, may 
alter drinking behaviour, they have not been linked 
to ALD. Recently, the patatin-like phospholipase 
domain-containing 3 (PNPLA3) gene, also known 
as adiponutrin, has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of both ALD and NAFLD (p. 959).
•	 Nutrition. Obesity increases the incidence of 
liver-related mortality by over fivefold in heavy 
drinkers. Ethanol itself produces 7 kcal/g  
(29.3 kJ/g) and many alcoholic drinks also contain 
sugar, which further increases the calorific value 
and may contribute to weight gain. Excess alcohol 
consumption is frequently associated with 
nutritional deficiencies that contribute to morbidity.
Pathophysiology
Alcohol reaches peak blood concentrations after about 
20 minutes, although this may be influenced by stomach 
contents. It is metabolised almost exclusively by the liver 
via one of two pathways (Fig. 23.28).
Approximately 80% of alcohol is metabolised to 
acetaldehyde by the mitochondrial enzyme, alcohol 
dehydrogenase (ADH). Acetaldehyde is then metabo-
lised to acetyl-CoA and acetate by aldehyde dehydro­
genase. This generates NADH from NAD (nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide), which changes the redox poten-
tial of the cell. Acetaldehyde forms adducts with cellular 
proteins in hepatocytes that activate the immune system, 
contributing to cell injury.
The remaining 20% of alcohol is metabolised by the 
microsomal ethanol-oxidising system (MEOS) pathway. 
Cytochrome CYP2E1 is an enzyme that oxidises ethanol 
to acetate. It is induced by alcohol, and during metabo-
lism of ethanol it releases oxygen free radicals, leading 
to lipid peroxidation and mitochondrial damage. The 
CYP2E1 enzyme also metabolises acetaminophen, and 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
958
liver disease, such as palmar erythema, are more 
common in alcoholic cirrhosis than in cirrhosis of other 
aetiologies. Alcohol misuse may also cause damage of 
other organs and this should be specifically looked for 
(see Box 10.35, p. 253). Three types of ALD are recog-
nised (Box 23.53) but these overlap considerably, as do 
the pathological changes seen in the liver.
Alcoholic fatty liver disease
Alcoholic fatty liver disease (AFLD) usually presents 
with elevated transaminases in the absence of hepato­
megaly. It has a good prognosis and steatosis usually 
disappears after 3 months of abstinence.
Alcoholic hepatitis
This presents with jaundice and hepatomegaly; compli-
cations of portal hypertension may also be present. It has 
a significantly worse prognosis than AFLD. About one-
third of patients die in the acute episode, particularly 
those with hepatic encephalopathy or a prolonged PT. 
Cirrhosis often coexists; if not present, it is the likely 
outcome if drinking continues. Patients with acute 
alcoholic hepatitis often deteriorate during the first 
1–3 weeks in hospital. Even if they abstain, it may take 
up to 6 months for jaundice to resolve. In patients pre-
senting with jaundice who subsequently abstain, the 3- 
and 5-year survival is 70%. In contrast, those who 
continue to drink have 3- and 5-year survival rates of 
60% and 34% respectively.
Alcoholic cirrhosis
Alcoholic cirrhosis often presents with a serious compli-
cation, such as variceal haemorrhage or ascites, and only 
half of such patients will survive 5 years from presenta-
tion. However, most who survive the initial illness and 
who become abstinent will survive beyond 5 years.
Investigations
Investigations aim to establish alcohol misuse, to exclude 
alternative or additional coexistent causes of liver 
disease and to assess the severity of liver damage. The 
clinical history from patient, relatives and friends is 
important to establish alcohol misuse duration and 
severity. Biological markers, particularly macrocytosis 
in the absence of anaemia, may suggest and support a 
history of alcohol misuse. A raised GGT is not specific 
for alcohol misuse and may also be elevated in the 
hence chronic alcoholics are more susceptible to hepato-
toxicity from low doses of paracetamol.
It is thought that pro-inflammatory cytokines may 
also be involved in inducing hepatic damage in alcoholic 
hepatitis, since endotoxin is released into the blood 
because of increased gut permeability, leading to release 
of tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 
(IL)-1, IL-2 and IL-8 from immune cells. All of these 
cytokines have been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
liver fibrosis (see Fig. 23.4, p. 925).
The pathological features of alcoholic liver disease 
are shown in Box 23.52. In about 80% of patients with 
severe alcoholic hepatitis, cirrhosis will coexist at pres-
entation. Iron deposition is common and does not 
necessarily indicate haemochromatosis. Figure 23.30  
(p. 960) shows the histological features of alcoholic liver 
disease, which are identical to those of non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis.
Clinical features
ALD has a wide clinical spectrum ranging from 
mild abnormalities of LFTs on biochemical testing to 
advanced cirrhosis. The liver is often enlarged in ALD, 
even in the presence of cirrhosis. Stigmata of chronic 
Fig. 23.28  Factors involved in the pathogenesis of 
alcoholic liver disease. 
Alcohol
Genetic
susceptibility
Alcoholic
liver disease
Acetaldehyde
Adducts
Gut permeability
CYP2E1
Immune
system
Endotoxin
Kupffer
cells
Inflammation
Coexistent
disorders
e.g. viral hepatitis
haemochromatosis
Tumour necrosis
factor-α
Interleukin-6
↑Oxidative stress
• Lipid peroxidation
• Low glutathione
•	 Alcoholic hepatitis
Lipogranuloma
Neutrophil infiltration
Mallory’s hyaline
Pericellular fibrosis
•	 Macrovesicular steatosis
•	 Fibrosis and cirrhosis
•	 Central hyaline sclerosis
23.52  Pathological features of 
alcoholic liver disease
Fatty liver
•	 Asymptomatic abnormal 
liver biochemistry
•	 Normal/large liver
Alcoholic hepatitis
•	 Jaundice
•	 Malnutrition
•	 Hepatomegaly
•	 Features of portal 
hypertension (e.g. ascites, 
encephalopathy)
Cirrhosis
•	 Stigmata of chronic liver 
disease
•	 Ascites/varices/
encephalopathy
•	 Large, normal or small liver
•	 Hepatocellular carcinoma
23.53  Clinical syndromes of 
alcoholic liver disease
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
23
959
contraindications to their use. If the bilirubin has not 
fallen 7 days after starting steroids, the drugs are unlikely 
to reduce mortality and should be stopped.
Pentoxifylline
Pentoxifylline, which has a weak anti-TNF action, may 
be beneficial in severe alcoholic hepatitis. It reduces the 
incidence of hepatorenal failure and its use is not com-
plicated by sepsis (Box 23.56). It is not known whether 
corticosteroids, pentoxifylline or a combination is supe-
rior in the treatment of alcoholic hepatitis.
Liver transplantation
The role of liver transplantation in the management 
of ALD remains controversial. In many centres, ALD 
is a common indication for liver transplantation. The 
challenge is to identify patients with an unacceptable 
risk of returning to harmful alcohol consumption. 
Many programmes require a 6-month period of absti-
nence from alcohol before a patient is considered for 
transplantation. Although this relates poorly to the 
incidence of alcohol relapse after transplantation, liver 
function may improve to the extent that transplanta­
tion is no longer necessary. The outcome of trans­
plantation for ALD is good and, if the patient remains 
abstinent, there is no risk of disease recurrence. Trans-
plantation for alcoholic hepatitis has a poorer outcome 
and is seldom performed.
NON-ALCOHOLIC FATTY LIVER DISEASE
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) represents 
a spectrum of liver disease encompassing simple 
fatty infiltration (steatosis), fat and inflammation (non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis, NASH) and cirrhosis, in the 
absence of excessive alcohol consumption (typically a 
threshold of < 20 g/day for women and < 30 g/day for 
men is adopted) (Fig. 23.29). While simple steatosis has 
not been associated with liver-related morbidity, NASH 
is linked with progressive liver fibrosis, cirrhosis and 
liver cancer, as well as increased cardiovascular risk. The 
true extent of associated morbidity is not well defined; 
presence of other conditions, including NAFLD. The 
level may not therefore return to normal with abstinence 
if chronic liver disease is present, and GGT should not 
be relied on as an indicator of ongoing alcohol consump-
tion. The presence of jaundice may suggest alcoholic 
hepatitis. Determining the extent of liver damage often 
requires a liver biopsy.
In alcoholic hepatitis, PT and bilirubin are used to 
calculate a ‘discriminant function’ (DF), also known as 
the Maddrey score, which enables the clinician to assess 
prognosis (PT = prothrombin time; serum bilirubin in 
µmol/L is divided by 17 to convert to mg/dL):
DF
Increase in PT (sec)
Bilirubin mg/dL
=
+
[ .
]
(
)
4 6 ¥
A value over 32 implies severe liver disease with a poor 
prognosis and is used to guide treatment decisions 
(see below). A second scoring system, the Glasgow 
score, uses the age, white cell count and renal function, 
in addition to PT and bilirubin, to assess prognosis with 
a cutoff of 9 (Box 23.54).
Management
Cessation of alcohol consumption is the single most 
important treatment and prognostic factor. Life-long 
abstinence is the best advice. General health and life 
expectancy are improved when this occurs, irrespective 
of the stage of liver disease. Abstinence is even effective 
at preventing progression, hepatic decompensation and 
death once cirrhosis is present. Treatment of alcohol 
dependency is discussed on page 253. In the acute 
presentation of ALD it is important to identify and 
anticipate alcohol withdrawal and Wernicke’s encephalo­
pathy, which need treating in parallel with the liver 
disease and any complications of cirrhosis.
Nutrition
Good nutrition is very important, and enteral feeding 
via a fine-bore nasogastric tube may be needed in 
severely ill patients.
Corticosteroids
These are of value in patients with severe alcoholic 
hepatitis (Maddrey’s discriminative score > 32) and 
increase survival (Box 23.55). A similar improvement 
in 28-day survival from 52% to 78% is seen when ster-
oids are given to those with a Glasgow score of more 
than 9. Sepsis is the main side-effect of steroids, and 
existing sepsis and variceal haemorrhage are the main 
Score
1
2
3
Age
< 50
> 50
WCC (× 109/L)
< 15
> 15
Urea (mmol/L)
< 5
> 5
PT ratio
< 1.5
1.5–2.0
> 2.0
Bilirubin (µmol/L)
< 125
125–250
> 250
A score ≥ 9 is associated with a 40% 28-day survival, compared 
to 80% for patients with a score < 9.
(PT = prothrombin time; WCC = white cell count)
23.54  How to assess prognosis using the 
Glasgow alcoholic hepatitis score
‘In severe alcoholic hepatitis, oral pentoxifylline reduces inpatient 
mortality, particularly from hepatorenal failure, from 46% to 25% 
(NNTB 5).’
•	 Akriviadis E, et al. Gastroenterology 2000; 119:1637–1648.
For further information: 
www.easl.eu/_clinical-practice-guideline/
23.56  Pentoxifylline in alcoholic hepatitis
‘In severe alcoholic hepatitis, corticosteroids improve survival at 
28 days from 65% to 85% (NNTB 5).’
•	 Mathurin R, et al. J Hepatol 2002; 36:480–487.
For further information: 
EASL Guidelines: http://www.easl.eu/_clinical-
practice-guideline/issue-9-june-2012-clinical-practice-guidelines-on-the- 
management-of-alcoholic-liver-disease
23.55  Corticosteroids in alcoholic hepatitis
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
960
however, in one study NASH was associated with a 
greater than tenfold increased risk of liver-related death 
(2.8% vs 0.2%) and a doubling of cardiovascular risk 
over a mean follow-up of 13.7 years.
NAFLD is strongly associated with obesity, dyslipid­
aemia, insulin resistance and type 2 (non-insulin 
dependent) diabetes mellitus, and so may be considered 
to be the hepatic manifestation of the ‘metabolic syn-
drome’ (p. 805). Increasingly sedentary lifestyles and 
changing dietary patterns mean that the prevalence of 
obesity and insulin resistance has increased, making 
NAFLD the leading cause of liver dysfunction in the 
non-alcoholic, viral hepatitis-negative population in 
Europe and North America. Estimates vary between 
populations; however, one large European study found 
NAFLD to be present in 94% of obese patients (body 
mass index (BMI) > 30 kg/m2), 67% of overweight 
Fig. 23.29  The spectrum of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Metabolic syndrome
NAFLD/steatosis
NASH
patients (BMI > 25 kg/m2) and 25% of normal-weight 
patients. The overall prevalence of NAFLD in patients 
with type 2 diabetes ranges from 40% to 70%. Histologi-
cal NASH was found in 3–16% of apparently healthy 
potential living liver-donors in Europe and 6–15% 
in USA.
Pathophysiology
Whilst the majority of patients with the metabolic syn-
drome develop steatosis, only a minority exhibit NASH 
or fibrosis. The initiating events in NAFLD are based on 
the development of obesity and insulin resistance, 
leading to increased hepatic free fatty acid flux. This 
imbalance between the rate of import/synthesis and the 
rate of export/catabolism of fatty acids in the liver leads 
to the development of steatosis. This may be an adaptive 
response through which hepatocytes store potentially 
toxic lipids as relatively inert triglyceride. A ‘two-hit’ 
hypothesis has been proposed to describe the pathogen-
esis of NAFLD, the ‘first hit’ causing steatosis that then 
progresses to steatohepatitis if a ‘second hit’ occurs. 
In reality, progression probably follows hepatocellular 
injury caused by a combination of several different ‘hits’, 
including:
•	 oxidative stress due to free radicals produced 
during fatty acid oxidation
•	 direct lipotoxicity
•	 gut-derived endotoxin
•	 cytokine release (TNF-α etc.)
•	 endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Cellular damage triggers a mixture of immune-mediated 
hepatocellular injury and cell death, which leads to stel-
late cell activation and hepatic fibrosis (Fig. 23.30).
Fig. 23.30  Features of non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease and non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis. Rate of progression is 
determined by environmental (dietary) and 
genetic factors. (FA = fatty acids; TGF-β = 
transforming growth factor beta; TNF-α = 
tumour necrosis factor alpha; VLDL = very 
low-density lipoproteins) 
Fat infiltration > 5%
with or without
mild inflammation
Steatosis +
necroinflammation
(balloning, Mallory
bodies,
megamitochondria)
Increasing fibrosis,
eventually leading
to cirrhosis
Steatosis
NASH
Cirrhosis
TNF-α
Oxidant stress
Endotoxin
Immune factors
TGF-β
Stellate cell activation
↑FA influx
↓FA oxidation
↑FA synthesis
↓VLDL assembly
Insulin resistance
Autoimmune liver and biliary disease 
23
961
As with many other liver diseases, subtle inter-patient 
genetic variations and environmental factors interact to 
determine disease progression. PNPLA3 and its product, 
adiponutrin, may influence disease severity.
Clinical features
NAFLD is frequently asymptomatic, although it may be 
associated with fatigue and mild right upper quadrant 
discomfort. It is commonly identified as an incidental 
biochemical abnormality during routine blood tests. 
Alternatively, patients with progressive NASH may 
present late in the natural history of the disease with 
complications of cirrhosis and portal hypertension, such 
as variceal haemorrhage, or HCC.
The average age of NASH patients is 40–50 years 
(50–60 years for NASH–cirrhosis); however, the emerg-
ing epidemic of childhood obesity means that NASH is 
present in increasing numbers of younger patients. Most 
patients with NAFLD have insulin resistance and exhibit 
features of the metabolic syndrome (p. 805). Recognised 
independent risk factors for disease progression are age 
over 45 years, presence of diabetes (or severity of insulin 
resistance), obesity (BMI > 30 kg/m2) and hypertension. 
These factors help with identification of ‘high-risk’ 
patient groups. NAFLD is also associ­ated with poly-
cystic ovary syndrome, obstructive sleep apnoea and 
small-bowel bacterial overgrowth.
Investigations
Investigation of patients with suspected NAFLD should 
be directed first towards exclusion of excess alcohol 
consumption and other liver diseases (including viral, 
autoimmune and other metabolic causes), and then 
at confirming the presence of NAFLD, discriminating 
simple steatosis from NASH and determining the extent 
of any hepatic fibrosis that is present.
Biochemical tests
There is no single diagnostic blood test for NAFLD. 
Elevations of serum ALT and AST are modest, and 
usually less than twice the upper limit of normal. ALT 
levels fall as hepatic fibrosis increases and the character-
istic AST : ALT ratio of less than 1 seen in NASH reverses 
(AST : ALT > 1) as disease progresses towards cirrhosis, 
meaning that steatohepatitis with advanced disease may 
be present even in those with normal-range ALT levels. 
Other laboratory abnormalities that may be present 
include non-specific elevations of GGT, low-titre ANA 
in 20–30% of patients and elevated ferritin levels.
Imaging
Ultrasound is most often used and provides a qualitative 
assessment of hepatic fat content, as the liver appears 
‘bright’ due to increased echogenicity; however, sensi-
tivity is limited when fewer than 33% of hepatocytes 
are steatotic. Alternatives include CT, MRI or MR spec-
troscopy, which offer greater sensitivity for detecting 
lesser degrees of steatosis, but these are resource-
intensive and not widely used in routine practice. Cur-
rently, no routine imaging modality can distinguish 
simple steatosis from steatohepatitis or accurately quan-
tify hepatic fibrosis short of cirrhosis.
Liver biopsy
Liver biopsy remains the ‘gold standard’ investigation 
for diagnosis and assessment of degree of inflammation 
and extent of liver fibrosis. The histological definition of 
NASH is based on a combination of three lesions (stea-
tosis, hepatocellular injury and inflammation; see Fig. 
23.30) with a mainly centrilobular, acinar zone 3, distri-
bution. Specific features include hepatocyte ballooning 
degeneration with or without acidophil bodies or spotty 
necrosis and a mild, mixed inflammatory infiltrate. 
These may be accompanied by Mallory–Denk bodies. 
Perisinusoidal fibrosis is a characteristic feature of 
NASH. Histological scoring systems are widely used to 
assess disease severity semi-quantitatively.
It is important to note that hepatic fat content tends 
to diminish as cirrhosis develops and so NASH is likely 
to be under-diagnosed in the setting of advanced liver 
disease, where it is thought to be the underlying cause 
of 30–75% of cases in which no specific aetiology is 
readily identified (so-called ‘cryptogenic cirrhosis’).
Management
As a marker of the metabolic syndrome, identification of 
NAFLD should prompt screening for and treatment of 
cardiovascular risk factors in all patients. However, in 
recognition of the greater morbidity associated with 
NASH as opposed to simple steatosis, liver-targeted 
treatment should be focused particularly on those 
patients with NASH.
Non-pharmacological treatment
Current treatment comprises lifestyle interventions to 
promote weight loss and improve insulin sensitivity 
through dietary changes and physical exercise. Sus-
tained weight reduction of 7–10% is associated with sig-
nificant improvement in histological and biochemical 
NASH severity.
Pharmacological treatment
No pharmacological agents are currently licensed spe-
cifically for NASH therapy. Treatment directed at 
coexisting metabolic disorders, such as dyslipidaemia 
and hypertension, should be given. Although use of 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) does not amel-
iorate NAFLD, there does not appear to be any increased 
risk of hepatotoxicity or other side-effects from these 
agents, and so they may be used to treat dyslipidaemia. 
Specific insulin-sensitising agents, in particular glita-
zones, may help selected patients, while positive results 
with high-dose vitamin E (800 U/day) have been tem-
pered by evidence that high doses may be associated 
with an increased risk of prostate cancer and all-cause 
mortality, which has limited its use.
AUTOIMMUNE LIVER AND  
BILIARY DISEASE
The liver is an important target for autoimmune injury. 
The clinical picture is dictated by the nature of the 
autoimmune process and, in particular, the target cell 
for immune injury. The disease patterns are quite dis-
tinctive for primary hepatocellular injury (in the context 
of autoimmune hepatitis) and biliary epithelial cell 
injury (primary biliary cirrhosis and primary sclerosing 
cholangitis).
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
962
to treatment than ANA-positive disease. Adult onset of 
anti-LKM can be seen in chronic HCV infection. This 
was classified as type II disease in the old system. More 
recently, a pattern of antibody reactivity with anti-
soluble liver antigen has been described in typically 
adult patients, often with aggressive disease and usually 
lacking autoantibodies of other specificities.
Clinical features
The onset is usually insidious, with fatigue, anorexia 
and jaundice. In about one-quarter of patients, the onset 
is acute, resembling viral hepatitis, but resolution does 
not occur. This acute presentation can lead to extensive 
liver necrosis and liver failure. Other features include 
fever, arthralgia, vitiligo and epistaxis. Amenorrhoea 
can occur. Jaundice is mild to moderate or occasionally 
absent, but signs of chronic liver disease, especially 
spider naevi and hepatosplenomegaly, can be present. 
Associated autoimmune disease, such as Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis or rheumatoid arthritis, is often present and 
can modulate the clinical presentation.
Investigations
Serological tests for autoantibodies are often positive 
(Box 23.58), but low titres of these antibodies occur in 
some healthy people and in patients with other inflam-
matory liver diseases. ANA also occur in connective 
tissue diseases and other autoimmune diseases (with 
an identical pattern of homogenous nuclear staining) 
while anti-smooth muscle antibody has been reported 
in infectious mononucleosis and a variety of malignant 
diseases. Anti-microsomal antibodies (anti-LKM) occur 
particularly in children and adolescents. Elevated serum 
IgG levels are an important diagnostic and treatment 
response feature if present, but the diagnosis is still pos-
sible in the presence of normal IgG levels. If the diagno-
sis of autoimmune hepatitis is suspected, liver biopsy 
should be performed. It typically shows interface hepa-
titis, with or without cirrhosis.
Management
Treatment with corticosteroids is life-saving in auto­
immune hepatitis, particularly during exacerbations of 
active and symptomatic disease. Initially, prednisolone 
40 mg/day is given orally; the dose is then gradually 
reduced as the patient and LFTs improve. Maintenance 
therapy should only be instituted once LFTs are normal 
(as well as IgG if elevated). Approaches to maintenance 
include reduced-dose prednisolone (ideally below 
5–10 mg/day), usually in the context of azathioprine 
1.0–1.5 mg/kg/day (Box 23.59). Azathioprine can also 
be used as the sole maintenance immunosuppressive 
Autoimmune hepatitis
Autoimmune hepatitis is a disease of immune-mediated 
liver injury characterised by the presence of serum 
antibodies and peripheral blood T lymphocytes reac­
tive with self-proteins, a strong association with other 
autoimmune diseases (Box 23.57), and high levels of 
serum immunoglobulins – in particular, elevation of 
IgG. Although most commonly seen in women, particu-
larly in the second and third decades of life, it can 
develop in either sex at any age. The reasons for the 
breakdown in immune tolerance in autoimmune 
hepatitis remain unclear, although cross-reactivity with 
viruses such as HAV and EBV in immunogenetically 
susceptible individuals (typically those with human 
leucocyte antigen (HLA)-DR3 and DR4, particularly 
HLA-DRB3*0101 and HLA-DRB1*0401) has been sug-
gested as a mechanism.
Pathophysiology
Several subtypes of this disorder have been proposed 
that have differing immunological markers. Although 
the different patterns can be associated with variation in 
disease aspects such as response to immunosuppressive 
therapy, histological patterns are similar in the different 
settings and the basic approach to treatment (complete 
control of liver injury using immunosuppressive drugs 
and maintained with appropriate therapy) is the same. 
The formal classification into disease types has fallen out 
of favour in recent years.
The most frequently seen autoantibody pattern is 
high titre of antinuclear and anti-smooth muscle anti-
bodies, typically associated with IgG hyperglobulin­
aemia (type I autoimmune hepatitis in the old classifica- 
tion), frequently seen in young adult females. Disease 
characterised by the presence of anti-LKM (liver–kidney 
microsomal) antibodies, recognising cytochrome P450-
IID6 expressed on the hepatocyte membrane, is typically 
seen in paediatric populations and can be more resistant 
•	 Migrating polyarthritis
•	 Urticarial rashes
•	 Lymphadenopathy
•	 Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
•	 Thyrotoxicosis
•	 Myxoedema
•	 Pleurisy
•	 Coombs-positive haemolytic 
anaemia
•	 Transient pulmonary 
infiltrates
•	 Ulcerative colitis
•	 Glomerulonephritis
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
23.57  Conditions associated with 
autoimmune hepatitis
Disease
Antinuclear antibody (%)
Anti-smooth muscle antibody (%)
Antimitochondrial antibody*
Healthy controls
5
1.5
0.01
Autoimmune hepatitis
80
70
15
Primary biliary cirrhosis
25
35
95
Cryptogenic cirrhosis
40
30
15
*Patients with antimitochondrial antibody frequently have cholestatic LFTs and may have primary biliary cirrhosis (see text).
23.58  Frequency of autoantibodies in chronic non-viral liver diseases and in healthy people
Autoimmune liver and biliary disease 
23
963
agent in patients with low-activity disease. Newer 
agents such as mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) are 
increasingly being used but formal evidence to inform 
practice in this area is lacking. Patients should be moni-
tored for acute exacerbations (LFT and IgG screening 
with patients alerted to the possible symptoms) and 
such exacerbations should be treated with cortico­
steroids. Although treatment can significantly reduce 
the rate of progression to cirrhosis, end-stage disease can 
be seen in patients despite treatment.
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic, progressive 
cholestatic liver disease that predominantly affects 
middle-aged women. It is strongly associated with the 
presence of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA), which 
are diagnostic, and is characterised by a granulomatous 
inflammation of the portal tracts, leading to progressive 
damage and eventually loss of the small and middle-
sized bile ducts. This in turn leads to fibrosis and cir-
rhosis of the liver. The condition typically presents with 
an insidious onset of itching and/or tiredness; it may 
also be found incidentally as the result of routine 
blood tests.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of PBC varies across the world. It is rela-
tively common in northern Europe and North America 
but is rare in Africa and Asia. There is a strong female-
to-male predominance of 9 : 1; it is also more common 
amongst cigarette smokers. Clustering of cases has 
been reported, suggesting an environmental trigger in 
susceptible individuals.
Pathophysiology
Immune mechanisms are clearly involved. The condi-
tion is closely associated with other autoimmune non-
hepatic diseases, such as thyroid disease, and there is a 
genetic association with HLA-DR8, together with poly-
morphisms in a number of other genes regulating the 
nature of the immune response (e.g. IL-12 and its recep-
tor). AMA are directed at pyruvate dehydrogenase 
complex, a mitochondrial enzyme complex that plays a 
key role in cellular energy generation. PBC-specific 
ANA (such as those directed at the nuclear pore antigen 
gp210) have a characteristic staining pattern in immuno­
fluorescence assays (selectively binding to the nuclear 
rim or nuclear dots), which means that they should 
‘In autoimmune hepatitis, treatment with prednisolone  
± azathioprine improves serum biochemistry and hepatic 
histology. It also improves survival at 10 years from 27%  
to 63% (NNTB 2.7).’
‘In patients who have been in remission for more than 1 year, 
increasing the dose of azathioprine (from 1 to 2 mg/kg) and 
withdrawing prednisolone reduces steroid side-effects and  
does not increase the risk of relapse.’
•	 Kirk AP, et al. Gut 1980; 21:78–83.
•	 Johnson PJ, et al. N Engl J Med 1995; 333:958–963.
23.59  Immunosuppression in 
autoimmune hepatitis
not be mistaken for the homogenously staining ANA 
seen in autoimmune hepatitis. Elevations in serum 
immunoglobulin levels are frequent but, unlike in 
autoimmune hepatitis, elevation is typically of IgM.
Pathologically, chronic granulomatous inflamma­
tion destroys the interlobular bile ducts; progressive 
lymphocyte-mediated inflammatory damage causes 
fibrosis, which spreads from the portal tracts to the liver 
parenchyma and eventually leads to cirrhosis. A model 
of the natural history of the disease process is shown in 
Figure 23.31.
Clinical features
Systemic symptoms such as fatigue are common and 
may precede diagnosis for years. Pruritus, which can 
be a feature of any cholestatic disease, is a common 
presenting complaint and may precede jaundice by 
months or years. Jaundice is rarely a presenting feature. 
The itching is usually worse on the limbs. Although 
there may be right upper abdominal discomfort, fever 
and rigors do not occur. Bone pain or fractures can 
rarely result from osteomalacia (fat-soluble vitamin 
malabsorption) or, more commonly, from osteoporosis 
(hepatic osteodystrophy).
Initially, patients are well nourished but weight 
loss can occur as the disease progresses. Scratch 
marks may be found in patients with severe pruritus. 
Fig. 23.31  Natural history of primary biliary cirrhosis. 
Genetic
susceptibility
Latent disease
(antimitochondrial Ab-⊕ Ke,
normal LFTs)
Environmental
trigger factor(s)
Early disease
AMA-⊕      
(abnormal LFTs)
Late disease
(liver scarring/cirrhosis)
Liver decompensation
Genetic
factors
Genetic
factors
Death
Liver
transplant
30% disease
recurrence
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
964
UDCA non-responding patients requiring second-line 
approaches to treatment is not clear.
Liver transplantation should be considered once liver 
failure has developed and may be indicated in patients 
with intractable pruritus. Serum bilirubin remains the 
most reliable marker of declining liver function. Trans-
plantation is associated with an excellent 5-year survival 
of over 80%, although the disease will recur in over one-
third of patients at 10 years.
Pruritus
This is the main symptom requiring treatment. The 
cause is unknown but up-regulation of opioid receptors 
and increased levels of endogenous opioids may play a 
role. First-line treatment is with the anion-binding resin 
colestyramine, which probably acts by binding poten-
tial pruritogens in the intestine and increasing their 
excretion in the stool. A dose of 4–16 g/day orally is 
used. The powder is mixed in orange juice and the 
main dose (8 g) taken before and after breakfast, when 
maximal duodenal bile acid concentrations occur. 
Colestyramine may bind other drugs in the gut (most 
obviously UDCA), and adequate spacing should be 
used between drugs. Colestyramine is sometimes inef-
fective, especially in complete biliary obstruction, and 
can be difficult for some patients to tolerate. Alternative 
treatments include rifampicin (150 mg/day, titrated 
up to a maximum of 600 mg/day as required and 
contingent on there being no deterioration in LFTs), 
naltrexone (an opioid antagonist; 25 mg/day initially, 
increasing up to 300 mg/day), plasmapheresis and a 
liver support device (e.g. a molecular adsorbent recircu-
lating system (MARS)).
Fatigue
Fatigue affects about one-third of patients with PBC. 
The cause is unknown but it may reflect intracerebral 
changes due to cholestasis. Unfortunately, once depres-
sion, hypothyroidism and coeliac disease have been 
excluded, there is currently no specific treatment. The 
impact on patients’ lives can be substantial.
Malabsorption
Prolonged cholestasis is associated with steatorrhoea 
and malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins, which should 
be replaced as necessary. Coeliac disease should be 
excluded since its incidence is increased in PBC.
Bone disease
Osteopenia and osteoporosis are common, and normal 
post-menopausal bone loss is accelerated. Baseline bone 
density should be measured (p. 1122) and treatment 
started with replacement calcium and vitamin D3. 
Bisphosphonates should be used if there is evidence of 
osteoporosis. Osteomalacia is rare.
Overlap syndromes
AMA-negative PBC (‘autoimmune cholangitis’)
A few patients demonstrate the clinical, biochemical and 
histological features of PBC but do not have detectable 
AMA in the serum. Serum transaminases, serum Ig 
levels and titres of ANA tend to be higher than in AMA-
positive PBC. However, the clinical course mirrors clas-
sical PBC and these patients should be considered to 
have a variant of PBC.
Jaundice is only prominent late in the disease and can 
become intense. Xanthomatous deposits occur in a 
minority, especially around the eyes. Mild hepatomeg-
aly is common and splenomegaly becomes increasingly 
common as portal hypertension develops. Liver failure 
may supervene.
Associated diseases
Autoimmune and connective tissue diseases occur with 
increased frequency in PBC, particularly the sicca 
syndrome (p. 1114), systemic sclerosis, coeliac disease 
(p. 879) and thyroid diseases. Hypothyroidism should 
always be considered in patients with fatigue.
Diagnosis and investigations
The LFTs show a pattern of cholestasis (see Box 23.2, 
p. 929). Hypercholesterolaemia is common and worsens 
as disease progresses; however, it is of no diagnostic 
value. AMA is present in over 95% of patients, and when 
it is absent the diagnosis should not be made without 
obtaining histological evidence and considering cholan-
giography (MRCP or ERCP) to exclude other biliary 
disease. ANA and anti-smooth muscle antibodies are 
present in around 15% of patients (see Box 23.58); auto­
antibodies found in associated diseases may also be 
present. Ultrasound examination shows no sign of 
biliary obstruction. Liver biopsy is only necessary if there 
is diagnostic uncertainty. The histological features of 
PBC correlate poorly with the clinical features; portal 
hypertension can develop before the histological onset 
of cirrhosis.
Management
The hydrophilic bile acid, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), 
at a dose of 13–15 mg/kg/day improves bile flow, 
replaces toxic hydrophobic bile acids in the bile acid 
pool, and reduces apoptosis of the biliary epithelium. 
Clinically, UDCA improves LFTs, may slow down his-
tological progression and has few side-effects (Box 
23.60); it is therefore widely used in the treatment of PBC 
and should be regarded as the optimal first-line treat-
ment. A significant minority of patients either fail to 
normalise their LFTs with UDCA or show an inadequate 
response, and such patients have an increased risk of 
developing end-stage liver disease compared to patients 
showing a full response. There is currently no consensus 
as to how to treat such patients. Immunosuppressants, 
such as corticosteroids, azathioprine, penicillamine and 
ciclosporin, have all been trialled in PBC. None shows 
overall benefit when given to unselected patients. 
Whether they offer benefit to the specific subgroup of 
‘In primary biliary cirrhosis, UDCA therapy (13–15 mg/kg/day) 
improves biochemical markers of cholestasis and jaundice. 
Some randomised trials have shown that UDCA treatment 
significantly slows disease progression, but whether it affects 
mortality or transplantation rates remains controversial.’
•	 Poupon RE, et al. Gastroenterology 1997; 113:884–890.
•	 Corpechot C, et al. Hepatology 2000; 32:1196–1199.
•	 Goulis J, et al. Lancet 1999; 354:1053–1060.
For further information: 
www.easl.eu/_clinical-practice-guideline/
23.60  Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in 
primary biliary cirrhosis
Autoimmune liver and biliary disease 
23
965
Fig. 23.32  A percutaneous cholangiogram in sclerosing 
cholangitis, showing characteristic irregularity of the biliary tree. 
Pathophysiology
The cause of PSC is unknown but there is a close 
association with inflammatory bowel disease, particu-
larly ulcerative colitis (Box 23.62). About two-thirds of 
patients have coexisting ulcerative colitis, and PSC is 
the most common form of chronic liver disease in 
ulcerative colitis. Between 3% and 10% of patients with 
ulcerative colitis develop PSC, particularly those with 
extensive colitis or pancolitis. The prevalence of primary 
sclerosing cholangitis is lower in patients with Crohn’s 
colitis (about 1%). Patients with PSC and ulcerative 
colitis are at greater risk of colorectal neoplasia than 
those with ulcerative colitis alone, and those who 
develop colorectal neoplasia are at greater risk of 
cholangiocarcinoma.
It is currently believed that PSC is an immunologi-
cally mediated disease, triggered in genetically suscep-
tible individuals by toxic or infectious agents, which 
may gain access to the biliary tract through a leaky, 
diseased colon. A close link with HLA haplotype A1 B8 
DR3 DRW52A has been identified. This haplotype is 
commonly found in association with other organ-specific 
autoimmune diseases (e.g. autoimmune hepatitis).
The importance of immunological factors has been 
emphasised by reports showing humoral and cellular 
abnormalities in PSC. Perinuclear antineutrophil cyto-
plasmic antibodies (ANCA) have been detected in the 
sera of 60–80% of patients with PSC with or without 
ulcerative colitis, and in 30–40% of patients with ulcera-
tive colitis alone. The antibody is not specific for PSC 
and is found in other chronic liver diseases (e.g. 50% of 
patients with autoimmune hepatitis).
Clinical features
The diagnosis is often made incidentally when persist-
ently raised serum ALP is discovered in an individual 
with ulcerative colitis. Common symptoms include 
PBC/autoimmune hepatitis overlap
A few patients with AMA and cholestatic LFTs have 
elevated transaminases, high serum immunoglobulins 
and interface hepatitis on liver histology; in such 
individuals a trial of corticosteroid therapy may be 
beneficial.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a cholestatic 
liver disease caused by diffuse inflammation and fibro-
sis; it can involve the entire biliary tree and leads to 
the gradual obliteration of intrahepatic and extra­
hepatic bile ducts, and ultimately biliary cirrhosis, portal 
hypertension and hepatic failure. Although considered 
as an autoimmune disease, evidence for an auto­
immune pathophysiology is weaker than is the case 
for PBC and autoimmune hepatitis. The incidence is 
about 6.3/100 000 in Caucasians. Cholangiocarcinoma 
develops in about 10–30% of patients during the course 
of the disease.
PSC is twice as common in young men. Most patients 
present at age 25–40 years, although the condition may 
be diagnosed at any age and is an important cause of 
chronic liver disease in children. The generally accepted 
diagnostic criteria are:
•	 generalised beading and stenosis of the biliary 
system on cholangiography (Fig. 23.32)
•	 absence of choledocholithiasis (or history of bile 
duct surgery)
•	 exclusion of bile duct cancer, by prolonged 
follow-up.
The term ‘secondary sclerosing cholangitis’ is used to 
describe the typical bile duct changes described above 
when a clear predisposing factor for duct fibrosis can be 
identified. The causes of secondary sclerosing cholan­
gitis are shown in Box 23.61.
•	 Previous bile duct surgery with stricturing and cholangitis
•	 Bile duct stones causing cholangitis
•	 Intrahepatic infusion of 5-fluorodeoxyuridine
•	 Insertion of formalin into hepatic hydatid cysts
•	 Insertion of alcohol into hepatic tumours
•	 Parasitic infections (e.g. Clonorchis)
•	 Autoimmune pancreatitis/IgG4-associated cholangitis
•	 Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS; probably 
infective as a result of cytomegalovirus or Cryptosporidium)
23.61  Causes of secondary sclerosing cholangitis
•	 Ulcerative colitis
•	 Crohn’s colitis
•	 Chronic pancreatitis
•	 Retroperitoneal fibrosis
•	 Riedel’s thyroiditis
•	 Retro-orbital tumours
•	 Immune deficiency states
•	 Sjögren’s syndrome
•	 Angio-immunoplastic 
lymphadenopathy
•	 Histiocytosis X
•	 Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia
•	 Autoimmune pancreatitis/
IgG4-associated cholangitis
23.62  Diseases associated with 
primary sclerosing cholangitis
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
966
patients die from liver failure, about 30% die from bile 
duct carcinoma, and the remainder die from colonic 
cancer or complications of colitis. Immunosuppressive 
agents, including prednisolone, azathioprine, metho­
trexate and ciclosporin, have been tried; generally, 
results have been disappointing.
Symptomatic patients often have pruritus. Manage-
ment is as for PBC. Fatigue appears to be less prominent 
than in PBC, although it is still present in some patients.
Management of complications
Broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g. ciprofloxacin) should be 
given for acute attacks of cholangitis but have no proven 
value in preventing attacks. If cholangiography shows a 
well-defined obstruction to the extrahepatic bile ducts 
(‘dominant stricture’), mechanical relief can be obtained 
by placement of a plastic stent or by balloon dilatation 
performed at ERCP. It is important, in this situation, 
actively to consider the possibility of cholangiocarci-
noma (the differential diagnosis for dominant extra­
hepatic stricture). Fat-soluble vitamin replacement is 
necessary in jaundiced patients. Metabolic bone disease 
(usually osteoporosis) is a common complication that 
requires treatment (p. 1120).
Surgical treatment
Surgical resection of the extrahepatic bile duct and 
biliary reconstruction have a limited role in the man-
agement of non-cirrhotic patients with dominant extra­
hepatic disease. Orthotopic transplantation is the only 
surgical option in patients with advanced liver disease; 
5-year survival is 80–90% in most centres. Unfortu-
nately, the condition may recur in the graft and there 
are no identified therapies able to prevent this. Cholan-
giocarcinoma is a contraindication to transplantation. 
Colon carcinoma risk can be increased in patients fol-
lowing transplant because of the effects of immune 
suppression and enhanced surveillance should be 
instituted.
IgG4-associated cholangitis
This recently reported disease (as well as its nomencla-
ture) is closely related to autoimmune pancreatitis 
(which is present in more than 90% of the patients; 
p. 894). IgG4-associated cholangitis (IAC) often presents 
with obstructive jaundice (due to either hilar stricturing/
intrahepatic sclerosing cholangitis or a low bile duct 
stricture), and cholangiographic appearances suggest 
PSC with or without hilar cholangiocarcinoma. The 
serum IgG4 is often raised and liver biopsy shows a 
lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, with IgG4-positive plasma 
cells. An important observation is that, compared to 
PSC, IAC appears to respond well to steroid therapy.
LIVER TUMOURS AND OTHER FOCAL 
LIVER LESIONS
Identification of a hepatic mass lesion is common, both 
in patients with known pre-existing liver disease and 
as a primary presentation. Although primary and 
secondary malignant tumours are important potential 
fatigue, intermittent jaundice, weight loss, right upper 
quadrant abdominal pain and pruritus. Attacks of acute 
cholangitis are uncommon and usually follow biliary 
instrumentation. Physical examination is abnormal in 
about 50% of symptomatic patients; the most common 
findings are jaundice and hepatomegaly/splenomegaly. 
The condition may be associated with many other dis-
eases (see Box 23.62).
Investigations
Biochemical screening usually reveals a cholestatic 
pattern of LFTs but ALP and bilirubin levels may vary 
widely in individual patients during the course of the 
disease. For example, ALP and bilirubin values increase 
during acute cholangitis, decrease after therapy, and 
sometimes fluctuate for no apparent reason. Modest 
elevations in serum transaminases are usually seen, 
whereas hypoalbuminaemia and clotting abnormalities 
are found only at a late stage. In addition to ANCA, low 
titres of serum ANA and anti-smooth muscle antibodies 
may be found in PSC but have no diagnostic signifi-
cance; serum AMA is absent.
The key investigation is now MRCP, which is usually 
diagnostic, revealing multiple irregular stricturing and 
dilatation (see Fig. 23.32). ERCP should be reserved for 
patients in whom therapeutic intervention is likely to be 
necessary and should follow MRCP.
On liver biopsy the characteristic early features of 
PSC are periductal ‘onion-skin’ fibrosis and inflamma-
tion, with portal oedema and bile ductular proliferation 
resulting in expansion of the portal tracts (Fig. 23.33). 
Later, fibrosis spreads, progressing inevitably to biliary 
cirrhosis; obliterative cholangitis leads to the so-called 
‘vanishing bile duct syndrome’.
Management
There is no cure for PSC, but management of cholestasis 
and its complications and specific treatment of the 
disease process are indicated. UDCA is widely used, 
although the evidence to support this is limited. 
UDCA may have benefit in terms of reducing colon 
carcinoma risk.
The course of PSC is variable. In symptomatic 
patients, median survival from presentation to death or 
liver transplantation is about 12 years. About 75% of 
asymptomatic patients survive 15 years or more. Most 
Fig. 23.33  Primary sclerosing cholangitis. Note onion-skin scarring 
(arrows) surrounding a bile duct. 
Liver tumours and other focal liver lesions
23
967
diagnoses, benign disease is frequent. The finding of a 
liver mass, with its association in the minds of patients 
with metastatic malignant disease, creates a high level 
of anxiety, a factor that should always be borne in mind. 
The critical steps to be taken in diagnosing hepatic mass 
lesions are:
•	 determining the presence, nature and severity of 
any underlying chronic liver disease, as the 
differential diagnosis is very different in patients 
with and without chronic liver disease
•	 use of optimal (usually multiple) imaging 
modalities.
Primary malignant tumours
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common 
primary liver tumour, and the sixth most common 
cause of cancer worldwide. Cirrhosis is present in 75–
90% of individuals with HCC and is an important risk 
factor for the disease. The risk is between 1% and 5% in 
cirrhosis caused by hepatitis B and C. There is also an 
increased risk in cirrhosis due to haemochromatosis, 
alcohol, NASH and α1-antitrypsin deficiency. In north-
ern Europe, 90% of those with HCC have underlying 
cirrhosis, compared with 30% in Taiwan, where hepati-
tis B is the main risk factor. The age-adjusted incidence 
rates vary from 28 per 100 000 in South-east Asia (reflect-
ing the prevalence of hepatitis B) to 10 per 100 000 in 
southern Europe and 5 per 100 000 in northern Europe. 
Chronic hepatitis B infection increases the risk of HCC 
100-fold and is the major risk factor worldwide. The 
risk of HCC is 0.4% per year in the absence of cirrhosis 
and 2–6% in cirrhosis. The risk is four times higher in 
HBeAg-positive individuals than in those who are 
HBeAg-negative. Hepatitis B vaccination has led to a 
fall in HCC in countries with a high prevalence of 
hepatitis B. The incidence in Europe and North America 
has risen recently, probably related to the increased 
prevalence of hepatitis C and NASH cirrhosis. The risk 
is higher in men and rises with age.
Macroscopically, the tumour usually appears as a 
single mass in the absence of cirrhosis, or as a single 
nodule or multiple nodules in the presence of cirrhosis. 
It takes its blood supply from the hepatic artery and 
tends to spread by invasion into the portal vein and its 
radicals. Lymph node metastases are common, while 
lung and bone metastases are rare. Well-differentiated 
tumours can resemble normal hepatocytes and can be 
difficult to distinguish from normal liver.
Clinical features
Patients typically present with HCC in one of two ways. 
Commonly, those with underlying cirrhosis develop a 
deterioration in their liver function, with worsening 
ascites and/or jaundice or variceal haemorrhage. Other 
characteristic symptoms can include weight loss, ano-
rexia and abdominal pain. This often-rapid deterioration 
can, however, be the event that leads to previously 
occult cirrhosis becoming clinically apparent, meaning 
that absence of an established diagnosis of cirrhosis does 
not preclude a diagnosis of HCC complicating cirrhosis. 
Examination may reveal hepatomegaly or a right 
hypochondrial mass. Tumour vascularity can lead to 
an abdominal bruit, and hepatic rupture with intra-
abdominal bleeding may occur. The advanced nature of 
the disease that presents in this way makes curative 
therapy unlikely.
The second presentation is through screening of 
patients at risk of HCC. The disease is typically detected 
much earlier in its natural history, significantly increas-
ing the treatment options.
Investigations
Serum markers
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is produced by 60% of HCCs. 
Levels increase with the size of the tumour and are often 
normal or only minimally elevated in small tumours 
detected by ultrasound screening. Serum AFP can also 
rise in the presence of active hepatitis B and C viral 
replication; very high levels are seen in acute hepatic 
necrosis, such as that following paracetamol toxicity. 
AFP is used in conjunction with ultrasound in screening 
but, in view of low sensitivity and specificity, levels 
need to be interpreted with caution. Nevertheless, in the 
absence of a marked hepatic flare of disease, a progres-
sively rising AFP, or AFP over 400 ng/mL (normal is 
< 10 ng/mL), warrants an aggressive search for HCC. In 
HCC patients with elevated AFP levels, serial measure-
ments can be a useful biomarker of disease progression/
response to treatment.
Imaging
Ultrasound will detect focal liver lesions as small as 
2–3 cm. The use of ultrasound contrast agents has 
increased sensitivity and specificity, but is highly user-
dependent. Ultrasound may also show evidence of 
portal vein involvement and features of coexistent cir-
rhosis. Multidetector row CT, following intravenous 
contrast, identifies HCC by its classical hypervascular 
appearance (Fig. 23.34). Small lesions of less than 2 cm 
can be difficult to differentiate from hyperplastic nodules 
in cirrhosis. MRI can be used instead of CT. Angiogra-
phy is now seldom performed and has been superseded 
by the above techniques. Combination of imaging 
modalities more accurately diagnoses and stages the 
extent of disease, and using at least two modalities 
Fig. 23.34  CT showing a large hepatocellular carcinoma 
(arrows). 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
968
Hepatic resection
This is the treatment of choice for non-cirrhotic patients. 
The 5-year survival in this group is about 50%. However, 
there is a 50% recurrence rate at 5 years; this may be due 
to a second de novo tumour or recurrence of the original 
tumour. Few patients with cirrhosis are suitable for 
hepatic resection because of the high risk of hepatic 
failure; nevertheless, surgery is offered, particularly in 
the Far East, to some cirrhotic patients with small 
tumours and good liver function (Child–Pugh A with no 
portal hypertension).
Liver transplantation
Transplantation has the benefit of curing underlying cir-
rhosis and removing the risk of a second, de novo 
tumour in an at-risk patient. The requirement for 
immunosuppression creates its own risks of reactiva-
tion, however, if residual or metastatic disease is present, 
and assessment of patients for suitability for liver trans-
plantation focuses on the exclusion of extrahepatic and 
vascular-invading disease. The 5-year survival follow-
ing liver transplantation is 75% for patients with single 
tumours less than 5 cm in size or three tumours smaller 
than 3 cm (the Milan criteria). Unfortunately, the under-
lying liver disease, in particular hepatitis C, may recur 
in the transplanted liver and can result in recurrent cir-
rhosis giving rise to de novo HCC risk, now complicated 
by the presence of immunosuppression.
Percutaneous therapy
Percutaneous ethanol injection into the tumour under 
ultrasound guidance is efficacious (80% cure rate) for 
tumours of 3 cm or smaller. Recurrence rates (50% at 
3 years) are similar to those following surgical resec­
tion. Radiofrequency ablation, using a single electrode 
inserted into the tumour under radiological guidance, is 
an alternative that takes longer to perform but may 
cause more complete tumour necrosis. Improvements in 
percutaneous therapy, with the combination of low 
patient impact, relative efficacy and capacity for repeat 
treatment, are making these approaches attractive, par-
ticularly in patients in whom major surgery would be 
inappropriate. Their role in primary therapy as an alter-
native to curative resection or transplantation remains 
to be established.
Trans-arterial chemo-embolisation
Hepatocellular cancers are not radiosensitive and the 
response rate to chemotherapy with drugs such as doxo-
rubicin is only around 30%. In contrast, hepatic artery 
embolisation with Gelfoam and doxorubicin is more 
effective, with survival rates of 60% in cirrhotic patients 
with unresectable HCC and good liver function (com-
pared with 20% in untreated patients) at 2 years. 
Unfortunately, any survival benefit is lost at 4 years. 
Trans-arterial chemo-embolisation (TACE) is contra­
indicated in decompensated cirrhosis and multifocal 
HCC. TACE is now most frequently used as a holding 
first intervention whilst the tumour is being assessed 
and the definitive management plan is being developed.
Chemotherapy
Sorafenib improves survival from 7.9 to 10.7 months in 
cirrhotic patients. The drug is a multikinase inhibitor 
with activity against Raf, vascular endothelial growth 
(typically, CT or MRI following initial screening ultra-
sound identification of a mass lesion) is recommended.
Liver biopsy
Histological confirmation is advisable in patients with 
large tumours who do not have cirrhosis or hepatitis B, 
in order to confirm the diagnosis and exclude metastatic 
tumour. Biopsy should be avoided in patients who may 
be eligible for transplantation or surgical resection 
because there is a small (< 2%) risk of tumour seeding 
along the needle tract. In all cases of potential HCC 
where biopsy is being considered, the impact that a con-
firmed diagnosis will have on therapy must be weighed 
against the risks of bleeding. If biopsy will not change 
management, then its appropriateness should be consid-
ered carefully.
Role of screening
Screening for HCC, by ultrasound scanning and AFP 
measurements at 6-month intervals, is indicated in high-
risk patients, such as those with cirrhosis due to hepati-
tis B and C, haemochromatosis, alcohol, NASH and 
α1-antitrypsin deficiency. It may also be indicated in 
individuals with chronic hepatitis B (who carry an 
increased risk of HCC, even in the absence of cirrhosis). 
Although no randomised controlled studies of outcome 
have been undertaken, screening identifies smaller 
tumours, often less than 3 cm in size, which are more 
likely to be cured by surgical resection, local ablative 
therapy or transplantation (Box 23.63). The role of 
screening in other forms of chronic liver disease, such as 
autoimmune hepatitis and PBC, is unclear. This is com-
pounded by the fact that disease staging by biopsy is 
no longer standard practice in conditions such as PBC, 
so formal documentation of the presence of cirrhosis, 
which might be the trigger for commencement of HCC 
screening, rarely takes place.
Management
This is different for patients with cirrhosis and those 
without (see Box 23.63). In the presence of cirrhosis, 
tumour size, multicentricity, extent of liver disease 
(Child–Pugh score) and performance status dictate 
appropriate therapy. An algorithm for managing those 
with cirrhosis is shown in Figure 23.35.
Prognosis depends on tumour size, the presence of 
vascular invasion, and liver function in those with cir-
rhosis. Screening has improved the outlook through 
early detection.
‘Cirrhotic patients who would be suitable for curative therapy if 
diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma should be offered 
screening with 6-monthly ultrasound and AFP testing.’
‘Curative therapies for hepatocellular carcinoma include liver 
transplantation, hepatic resection and ablative therapy. 
Treatment depends on the presence/absence of cirrhosis, 
underlying liver function, tumour size and tumour multicentricity.’
•	 European Association for the Study of the Liver Clinical Guidelines. J Hepatol 
2012; 56:908–943.
For further information: 
www.aasld.org/practiceguidelines/
23.63  Guidelines for screening and management 
of hepatocellular carcinoma
Liver tumours and other focal liver lesions
23
969
be single or multiple. Peritoneal dissemination fre-
quently results in ascites.
Clinical features
The primary neoplasm is asymptomatic in 50% of 
patients, being detected on either radiological, endo-
scopic or blood biochemistry screening. There is liver 
enlargement and weight loss; jaundice may be present.
Investigations
A raised ALP activity is the most common biochemical 
abnormality but LFTs may be normal. Ascitic fluid, if 
present, has a high protein content and may be blood-
stained; cytology sometimes reveals malignant cells. 
Imaging shows filling defects (Fig. 23.36); laparoscopy 
may reveal the tumour and facilitates liver biopsy.
Management
Hepatic resection can improve survival for slow-growing 
tumours such as colonic carcinomas, and is an approach 
that should be actively explored in patients who are fit 
for liver resection, have had the primary tumour resected 
and in whom extrahepatic disease has been excluded. 
Patients with neuro-endocrine tumours, such as gastri-
nomas, insulinomas and glucagonomas, and those with 
lymphomas may benefit from surgery, hormonal treat-
ment or chemotherapy. Unfortunately, palliative treat-
ment to relieve pain is all that is available for most 
patients; this may include arterial embolisation of the 
tumour masses.
factor (VEGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) 
signalling, and is the first systemic therapy to prolong 
survival in HCC. The ultimate role of sorafenib in HCC 
– in particular, when and how best to use it – remains 
to be established.
Fibrolamellar hepatocellular 
carcinoma
This rare variant differs from HCC in that it occurs in 
young adults, equally in males and females, in the 
absence of hepatitis B infection and cirrhosis. The 
tumours are often large at presentation and the AFP 
is usually normal. Histology of the tumour reveals 
malignant hepatocytes surrounded by a dense fibrous 
stroma. The treatment of choice is surgical resection. 
This variant of HCC has a better prognosis following 
surgery than an equivalent-sized HCC, two-thirds of 
patients surviving beyond 5 years.
Other primary malignant tumours
These are rare but include haemangio-endothelial sarco-
mas. Cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer) typically 
presents with bile duct obstruction rather than as a 
hepatic mass lesion, although the latter occasionally 
occurs.
Secondary malignant tumours
These are common and usually originate from carcino-
mas in the lung, breast, abdomen or pelvis. They may 
Fig. 23.35  Management of hepatocellular carcinoma complicating cirrhosis. Performance status (PST; see Box 11.3, p. 268): 0 = fully active, 
no symptoms; > 2 = limited self-care, confined to bed or chair for 50% of waking hours. Child–Pugh score: see Box 23.30, p. 944. N1, M1: lymph node 
involvement and metastases (for TNM classification, see Box 11.4, p. 268) (OS = overall survival; PEI = percutaneous ethanol injection; RFA = 
radiofrequency ablation; TACE = trans-arterial chemo-embolisation). Based on EASL–EORTC Clinical Practice Guidelines 2012 – see p. 988. 
Intermediate stage
Multinodular; PST 0
PST 0–2, Child—Pugh A–B
PST 0, Child—Pugh A
Single
Portal pressure
Normal
Resection
RFA/PEI
Liver transplantation
Curative treatment (30–40%)
Median OS > 60 mths; 5-yr survival: 40–70%
Target: 20%
OS: 20 mths (45–14)
Target: 40%
OS: 11 mths (6–14)
Target: 10%
OS: < 3 mths
Sorafenib
Best supportive
care
TACE
No
Yes
Increased
Associated diseases
3 nodules < 3 cm
PST > 2, Child—Pugh C
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Advanced stage
Portal vein invasion;
N1, M1; PST 1–2
Very early stage
Single < 2 cm
Early stage
Single or 3 nodules < 3 cm
Terminal stage
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
970
surgical debulking can be attempted but recurrence 
is typical. Liver abscesses are discussed on page 956.
DRUGS AND THE LIVER
The liver is the primary site of drug metabolism and an 
important target for drug-induced injury. Pre-existing 
liver disease may affect the capacity of the liver to 
metabolise drugs, and unexpected toxicity may occur 
when patients with liver disease are given drugs in 
normal doses. Box 23.64 also shows drugs that should 
be avoided in patients with cirrhosis, as they can exac-
erbate known complications of cirrhosis. The possibility 
of undiagnosed underlying liver injury should always 
be considered in patients exhibiting unexpected effects 
following drug exposure.
Drug-induced liver injury
Drug toxicity should always be considered in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of patients presenting with acute 
liver failure, jaundice or abnormal liver biochemistry. 
Some typical patterns of drug toxicity are listed in Box 
23.65; the most common picture is of a mixed cholestatic 
hepatitis. The presence of jaundice indicates more severe 
liver damage. Although acute liver failure can occur, 
most drug reactions are self-limiting and chronic liver 
damage is rare. Abnormal LFTs often take weeks to 
Benign tumours
The increasing use of ultrasound scanning has led to 
more frequent identification of incidental benign focal 
liver lesions.
Hepatic adenomas
These are rare vascular tumours that may present as an 
abdominal mass, or with abdominal pain or intraperito-
neal bleeding. They are more common in women and 
may be caused by oral contraceptives, androgens and 
anabolic steroids. Resection is indicated for the relief 
of symptoms. Hepatic adenomas can increase in size 
during pregnancy. Large or rapidly growing adenomas 
can, rarely, rupture, causing intraperitoneal bleeding.
Haemangiomas
These are the most common benign liver tumours and 
are present in 1–20% of the population. Most are smaller 
than 5 cm and rarely cause symptoms (Fig. 23.37). The 
diagnosis is usually made by ultrasound, but CT may 
show a low-density lesion with delayed arterial filling. 
Surgery is only needed for very large symptomatic 
lesions or where the diagnosis is in doubt.
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is common in women 
under the age of 40. The lesions are usually asympto-
matic but can be up to 10 cm in diameter; they can be 
differentiated from adenoma because of a focal central 
scar seen on CT or MRI. Histologically, they consist 
of nodular regeneration of hepatocytes but without 
fibrosis. They may be multiple but only rarely need 
resection.
Cystic liver disease and  
liver abscess
Isolated or multiple simple cysts are common in the 
liver and are a relatively frequent finding on ultrasound 
screening. They can be associated with polycystic 
renal disease (Fig. 23.38). They are intrinsically benign 
and require no therapy, other than in rare cases where 
the mass effect of very large or multiple cysts causes 
abdominal discomfort. In such cases, percutaneous or 
Fig. 23.36  CT showing multiple liver metastases (arrows). 
Fig. 23.37  MRI showing a haemangioma (arrows) in the liver. 
Fig. 23.38  CT showing multiple cysts in the liver and kidneys in 
polycystic disease. 
Drugs and the liver
23
971
normalise following a drug-induced hepatitis, and it 
may take months for them to normalise following a 
cholestatic hepatitis. Occasionally, permanent bile duct 
loss (ductopenia) follows a cholestatic drug reaction, 
such as that due to co-amoxiclav, resulting in chronic 
cholestasis with persistent symptoms such as itching.
The key to diagnosing acute drug-induced liver 
disease is to take a detailed drug history (Box 23.66), 
looking for temporal relationships between drug expo-
sure and onset of liver abnormality (bearing in mind the 
fact that liver injury can frequently take weeks or even 
months to develop following exposure). A liver biopsy 
should be considered if there is suspicion of pre-existing 
liver disease or if blood tests fail to improve when the 
suspect drug is withdrawn.
Where drug-induced liver injury is suspected or 
cannot be excluded, the potential culprit drug should be 
discontinued unless it is impossible to do so safely.
Types of liver injury
Different histological patterns of liver injury may occur 
with drug injury.
Cholestasis
Pure cholestasis (selective interference with bile flow in 
the absence of liver injury) can occur with oestrogens; 
this was common when high concentrations of 
Drug
Problem
Toxicity
NSAIDs
Reduced renal 
blood flow
Mucosal ulceration
Hepatorenal failure
Bleeding varices
ACE inhibitors
Reduced renal 
blood flow
Hepatorenal failure
Codeine
Constipation
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
Narcotics
Constipation, drug 
accumulation
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
Anxiolytics
Drug accumulation
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme)
23.64  Drugs to be avoided in cirrhosis
Pattern
Drug
Cholestasis
Chlorpromazine
High-dose oestrogens
Cholestatic hepatitis
NSAIDs
Co-amoxiclav
Statins
Acute hepatitis
Rifampicin
Isoniazid
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
Amiodarone
Venous outflow obstruction
Busulfan
Azathioprine
Fibrosis
Methotrexate
23.65  Examples of common causes of 
drug-induced hepatotoxicity
•	 Tabulate the drugs taken
Prescribed
Self-administered
•	 Establish whether hepatotoxicity is reported in the literature
•	 Relate the time at which the drugs were taken to the onset 
of illness
4 days to 8 weeks (usual)
•	 Establish the effect of stopping the drugs on normalisation of 
liver biochemistry
Hepatitic LFTs (2 months)
Cholestatic/mixed LFTs (6 months)
•	 Exclude other causes
Viral hepatitis
Biliary disease
•	 Consider liver biopsy
23.66  The diagnosis of acute drug-induced 
liver disease
N.B. Challenge tests with drugs should be avoided.
oestrogens (50 µg/day) were used as contraceptives. 
Both the current oral contraceptive pill and hormone 
replacement therapy can be safely used in chronic liver 
disease.
Chlorpromazine and antibiotics such as flucloxacillin 
are examples of drugs that cause cholestatic hepatitis, 
which is characterised by inflammation and canalicular 
injury. Co-amoxiclav is the most common antibiotic to 
cause abnormal LFTs but, unlike other antibiotics, it may 
not produce symptoms until 10–42 days after it is 
stopped. Anabolic steroids used by body-builders may 
also cause a cholestatic hepatitis. In some cases (e.g. 
NSAIDs and cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors) there 
is overlap with acute hepatocellular injury.
Hepatocyte necrosis
Many drugs cause an acute hepatocellular necrosis with 
high serum transaminase concentrations; paracetamol is 
the best known. Inflammation is not always present but 
does accompany necrosis in liver injury due to diclofenac 
(an NSAID) and isoniazid (an anti-tuberculous drug). 
Granulomas may be seen in liver injury following the 
use of allopurinol. Acute hepatocellular necrosis has also 
been described following the use of several herbal rem-
edies, including germander, comfrey and jin bu huan. 
Recreational drugs, including cocaine and ecstasy, can 
also cause severe acute hepatitis.
Steatosis
Microvesicular hepatocyte fat deposition, due to direct 
effects on mitochondrial beta-oxidation, can follow 
exposure to tetracyclines and sodium valproate (see 
Box 23.69, p. 978). Macrovesicular hepatocyte fat 
deposition has been described with tamoxifen, and ami-
odarone toxicity can produce a similar histological 
picture to NASH.
Vascular/sinusoidal lesions
Drugs such as the alkylating agents used in oncology 
can damage the vascular endothelium and lead to 
hepatic venous outflow obstruction. Chronic overdose 
of vitamin A can damage the sinusoids and trigger local 
fibrosis that can result in portal hypertension.
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
972
Hepatic fibrosis
Most drugs cause reversible liver injury and hepatic 
fibrosis is very uncommon. Methotrexate, however, as 
well as causing acute liver injury when it is started, can 
lead to cirrhosis when used in high doses over a long 
period of time. Risk factors for drug-induced hepatic 
fibrosis include pre-existing liver disease and a high 
alcohol intake.
INHERITED LIVER DISEASES
The inherited diseases are an important and probably 
under-diagnosed group of liver diseases. In addition to 
the ‘classical’ conditions such as haemochromatosis and 
Wilson’s disease, the important role played by the liver 
in the expression of the inborn errors of metabolism 
should be remembered, as should the potential for 
genetic underpinning for intrahepatic cholestasis.
Haemochromatosis
Haemochromatosis is a condition in which the amount 
of total body iron is increased; the excess iron is depos-
ited in, and causes damage to, several organs, including 
the liver. It may be primary or secondary to other dis-
eases (Box 23.67).
Hereditary haemochromatosis
In hereditary haemochromatosis (HHC), iron is depos-
ited throughout the body and total body iron may reach 
20–60 g (normally 4 g). The important organs involved 
are the liver, pancreatic islets, endocrine glands and 
heart. In the liver, iron deposition occurs first in the 
periportal hepatocytes, extending later to all hepato-
cytes. The gradual development of fibrous septa leads to 
the formation of irregular nodules, and finally regenera-
tion results in macronodular cirrhosis. An excess of liver 
iron can occur in alcoholic cirrhosis but this is mild by 
comparison with haemochromatosis.
Primary haemochromatosis
•	 Hereditary haemochromatosis
•	 Congenital acaeruloplasminaemia
•	 Congenital atransferrinaemia
Secondary iron overload
•	 Parenteral iron-loading (e.g. repeated blood transfusion)
•	 Iron-loading anaemia (thalassaemia, sideroblastic anaemia, 
pyruvate kinase deficiency)
•	 Liver disease
Complex iron overload
•	 Juvenile haemochromatosis
•	 Neonatal haemochromatosis
•	 Alcoholic liver disease
•	 Porphyria cutanea tarda
•	 African iron overload (Bantu siderosis)
23.67  Causes of haemochromatosis
Pathophysiology
The disease is caused by increased absorption of dietary 
iron and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. 
Approximately 90% of patients are homozygous for a 
single-point mutation resulting in a cysteine to tyrosine 
substitution at position 282 (C282Y) in the HFE protein, 
which has structural and functional similarity to the 
HLA proteins. The mechanisms by which HFE regulates 
iron absorption are unclear. However, it is believed that 
HFE normally interacts with the transferrin receptor in 
the basolateral membrane of intestinal epithelial cells. In 
HHC, it is thought that the lack of functional HFE causes 
a defect in uptake of transferrin-associated iron, leading 
to up-regulation of enterocyte iron-specific divalent 
metal transporters and excessive iron absorption. A his-
tidine to aspartic acid mutation at position 63 (H63D) in 
HFE causes a less severe form of haemochromatosis that 
is most commonly found in patients who are compound 
heterozygotes also carrying a C282Y mutated allele. 
Fewer than 50% of C282Y homozygotes will develop 
clinical features of haemochromatosis; therefore other 
factors must also be important. HHC may promote 
accelerated liver disease in patients with alcohol excess 
or hepatitis C infection. Iron loss in menstruation and 
pregnancy can delay the onset of HHC in females.
Clinical features
Symptomatic disease usually presents in men over 
40 years with features of liver disease (often with hepato­
megaly), diabetes mellitus or heart failure. Fatigue and 
arthropathy are early symptoms but are frequently 
absent. Leaden-grey skin pigmentation due to excess 
melanin occurs, especially in exposed parts, axillae, 
groins and genitalia: hence the term ‘bronzed diabetes’. 
Once again, absence of this feature does not preclude the 
diagnosis. Impotence, loss of libido, testicular atrophy 
and arthritis with chondrocalcinosis secondary to 
calcium pyrophosphate deposition are also common. 
Cardiac failure or cardiac dysrhythmia may occur due 
to iron deposition in the heart.
Investigations
Serum iron studies show a greatly increased ferritin, a 
raised plasma iron and saturated plasma iron-binding 
capacity. Transferrin saturation of more than 45% is 
suggestive of iron overload. Significant liver disease is 
unusual in patients with ferritin lower than 1000 µg/L. 
The differential diagnoses for elevated ferritin are 
inflammatory disease or excess ethanol consumption 
for modest elevations (< 1000 µg/L). Very significant 
ferritin elevation can be seen in adult Still’s disease. In 
terms of imaging techniques, MRI has high specificity 
for iron overload, but poor sensitivity. Liver biopsy 
allows assessment of fibrosis and distribution of iron 
(hepatocyte iron characteristic of haemochromatosis). 
The Hepatic Iron Index (HII) provides quantification of 
liver iron (µmol of iron per g dry weight of liver/age in 
years). HII of more than 1.9 suggests genetic haemochro-
matosis (Fig. 23.39). Both the C282Y and the H63D muta-
tions can be identified by genetic testing, which is now 
in routine clinical use.
Management
Treatment consists of weekly venesection of 500 mL 
blood (250 mg iron) until the serum iron is normal; 
Inherited liver diseases
23
973
Wilson’s disease
Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) is a 
rare but important autosomal recessive disorder of 
copper metabolism caused by a variety of mutations in 
the ATP7B gene on chromosome 13. Total body copper 
is increased, with excess copper deposited in, and 
causing damage to, several organs.
Pathophysiology
Normally, dietary copper is absorbed from the stomach 
and proximal small intestine, and is rapidly taken into 
the liver, where it is stored and incorporated into 
caeruloplasmin, which is secreted into the blood. The 
accumulation of excessive copper in the body is ulti-
mately prevented by its excretion, the most important 
route being via bile. In Wilson’s disease, there is almost 
always a failure of synthesis of caeruloplasmin; however, 
some 5% of patients have a normal circulating caerulo-
plasmin concentration and this is not the primary patho-
genic defect. The amount of copper in the body at birth 
is normal, but thereafter it increases steadily; the organs 
most affected are the liver, basal ganglia of the brain, 
eyes, kidneys and skeleton.
The ATP7B gene encodes a member of the copper-
transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase family, 
which functions to export copper from various cell 
types. At least 200 different mutations have been 
described. Most cases are compound heterozygotes with 
two different mutations in ATP7B. Attempts to correlate 
the genotype with the mode of presentation and clinical 
course have not shown any consistent patterns. The 
large number of culprit mutations means that, in con-
trast to haemochromatosis, genetic diagnosis is not 
routine in Wilson’s disease, although it may have a role 
in screening families following identification of the 
geno­type in an index patient.
Clinical features
Symptoms usually arise between the ages of 5 and 45 
years. Hepatic disease occurs predominantly in child-
hood and early adolescence, although it can present in 
adults in their fifties. Neurological damage causes basal 
ganglion syndromes and dementia, which tends to 
present in later adolescence. These features can occur 
alone or simultaneously. Other manifestations include 
renal tubular damage and osteoporosis, but these are 
rarely presenting features.
Liver disease
Episodes of acute hepatitis, sometimes recurrent, can 
occur, especially in children, and may progress to 
fulminant liver failure. The latter is characterised by 
the liberation of free copper into the blood stream, 
causing massive haemolysis and renal tubulopathy. 
Chronic hepatitis can also develop insidiously and 
eventually present with established cirrhosis; liver 
failure and portal hypertension may supervene. The 
possibility of Wilson’s disease should be considered 
in any patient under the age of 40 presenting with 
recurrent acute hepatitis or chronic liver disease of 
unknown cause, especially when accompanied by 
haemolysis.
this may take 2 years or more. The aim is to reduce 
ferritin to under 50 µg/L. Thereafter, venesection is 
continued as required to keep the serum ferritin 
normal. Liver and cardiac problems improve after iron 
removal, but joint pain is less predictable and can 
improve or worsen after iron removal. Diabetes mellitus 
does not resolve after venesection. Other therapy 
includes that for cirrhosis and diabetes mellitus. First-
degree family members should be investigated, prefer-
ably by genetic screening and also by checking the 
plasma ferritin and iron-binding saturation. Liver biopsy 
is only indicated in asymptomatic relatives if the LFTs 
are abnormal and/or the serum ferritin is greater than 
1000 µg/L because these features are associated with 
significant fibrosis or cirrhosis. Asymptomatic disease 
should also be treated by venesection until the serum 
ferritin is normal.
Pre-cirrhotic patients with HHC have a normal life 
expectancy, and even cirrhotic patients have a good 
prognosis compared with other forms of cirrhosis 
(three-quarters of patients are alive 5 years after diag-
nosis). This is probably because liver function is well 
preserved at diagnosis and improves with therapy. 
Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma (p. 967) is man-
datory because this is the main cause of death, affect-
ing one-third of patients with cirrhosis irrespective of 
therapy. Venesection reduces but does not abolish the 
risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in the presence of 
cirrhosis.
Secondary haemochromatosis
Many conditions, including chronic haemolytic disor-
ders, sideroblastic anaemia, other conditions requiring 
multiple blood transfusion (generally over 50 L), 
porphyria cutanea tarda, dietary iron overload and 
occasionally alcoholic cirrhosis, are associated with 
widespread secondary siderosis. The features are similar 
to primary haemochromatosis, but the history and clini-
cal findings point to the true diagnosis. Some patients 
are heterozygotes for the HFE gene and this may con-
tribute to the development of iron overload.
Fig. 23.39  Liver histology: haemochromatosis. This Perls stain 
shows accumulating iron within hepatocytes, which is stained blue.  
There is also accumulation of large fat globules in some hepatocytes 
(macrovesicular steatosis). Iron also accumulates in Kupffer cells and  
biliary epithelial cells. 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
974
(PiZ) cannot be secreted into the blood by liver cells 
because it is retained within the endoplasmic reticulum 
of the hepatocyte. Homozygous individuals (PiZZ) have 
low plasma α1-AT concentrations, although globules 
containing α1-AT are found in the liver, and these people 
may develop hepatic and pulmonary disease. Liver 
manifestations include cholestatic jaundice in the neo­
natal period (neonatal hepatitis), which can resolve 
spontaneously, chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis in adults, 
and, in the long term, HCC. Alpha1-AT deficiency is a 
not uncommon exacerbating factor for liver disease of 
other aetiologies, and the possibility of dual pathology 
should be considered in patients in whom severity of 
disease, such as ALD, appears disproportionate to the 
level of underlying insult.
There are no clinical features distinguishing liver 
disease due to α1-AT deficiency from liver disease due 
to other causes, and the diagnosis is made from the low 
plasma α1-AT concentration and genotyping for the 
presence of the mutation. Alpha1-AT-containing glob-
ules can be demonstrated in the liver (Fig. 23.40) but this 
is not necessary to make the diagnosis. Occasionally, 
patients with liver disease and minor reductions of 
plasma α1-AT concentrations have α1-AT variants other 
than PiZZ, but the relationship of these to liver disease 
is uncertain.
There is no specific treatment; the risk of severe and 
early-onset emphysema means that all patients should 
be advised to stop smoking.
Gilbert’s syndrome
Gilbert’s syndrome is by far the most common inherited 
disorder of bilirubin metabolism (see Box 23.17, p. 937). 
It is an autosomal dominant trait caused by a mutation 
in the promoter region of the UDP-glucuronyl trans-
ferase enzyme, which leads to reduced enzyme expres-
sion. This results in decreased conjugation of bilirubin, 
which accumulates as unconjugated bilirubin in the 
blood. The levels of unconjugated bilirubin increase 
during fasting, as fasting reduces levels of UDP-
glucuronyl transferase.
Neurological disease
Clinical features include a variety of extrapyramidal 
features, particularly tremor, choreoathetosis, dystonia, 
parkinsonism and dementia (Ch. 26). Unusual clumsi-
ness for age may be an early symptom. Neurological 
disease typically develops after the onset of liver disease 
and can be prevented by effective treatment started fol-
lowing diagnosis in the liver disease phase. This increases 
the importance of diagnosis in the liver phase beyond 
just allowing effective management of liver disease.
Kayser–Fleischer rings
These constitute the most important single clinical clue 
to the diagnosis and can be seen in 60% of adults with 
Wilson’s disease (less often in children but almost 
always in neurological Wilson’s disease), albeit some-
times only by slit-lamp examination. Kayser–Fleischer 
rings are characterised by greenish-brown discoloration 
of the corneal margin appearing first at the upper 
periphery (see p. 922). They disappear with treatment.
Investigations
A low serum caeruloplasmin is the best single laboratory 
clue to the diagnosis. However, advanced liver failure 
from any cause can reduce the serum caeruloplasmin, 
and occasionally it is normal in Wilson’s disease. Other 
features of disordered copper metabolism should there-
fore be sought; these include a high free serum copper 
concentration, a high urine copper excretion of greater 
than 0.6 µmol/24 hrs (38 µg/24 hrs) and a very high 
hepatic copper content. Measuring 24-hour urinary 
copper excretion whilst giving D-penicillamine is a 
useful confirmatory test; more than 25 µmol/24 hrs is 
considered diagnostic of Wilson’s disease.
Management
The copper-binding agent, penicillamine, is the drug of 
choice. The dose given must be sufficient to produce 
cupriuresis and most patients require 1.5 g/day (range 
1–4 g). The dose can be reduced once the disease is in 
remission but treatment must continue for life, even 
through pregnancy. Care must be taken to ensure that 
re-accumulation of copper does not occur. Abrupt dis-
continuation of treatment must be avoided because this 
may precipitate acute liver failure. Toxic effects occur in 
one-third of patients and include rashes, protein-losing 
nephropathy, lupus-like syndrome and bone marrow 
depression. If these do occur, trientine dihydrochloride 
(1.2–2.4 g/day) and zinc (50 mg 3 times daily) are poten-
tial alternatives.
Liver transplantation is indicated for fulminant liver 
failure or for advanced cirrhosis with liver failure. The 
value of liver transplantation in severe neurological 
Wilson’s disease is unclear. Prognosis is excellent, pro-
vided treatment is started before there is irreversible 
damage. Siblings and children of patients with Wilson’s 
disease must be investigated and treatment should be 
given to all affected individuals, even if they are 
asymptomatic.
Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency
Alpha1-antitrypsin (α1-AT) is a serine protease inhibitor 
(Pi) produced by the liver. The mutated form of α1-AT 
Fig. 23.40  Liver histology in α1-antitrypsin deficiency. 
Accumulation of periodic acid–Schiff-positive granules (arrows) within 
individual hepatocytes is shown in this section from a patient with α1-AT 
deficiency. 
Vascular liver disease
23
975
nodosa, blunt trauma or radiation. It usually causes 
severe upper abdominal pain with or without signs of 
circulatory shock. LFTs show raised transaminases (AST 
or ALT usually > 1000 U/L), as in other causes of acute 
liver damage. Patients usually survive if the liver and 
portal blood supply are otherwise normal.
Hepatic artery aneurysms are extrahepatic in three-
quarters of cases and intrahepatic in one-quarter. 
Atheroma, vasculitis, bacterial endocarditis and surgical 
or biopsy trauma are the main causes. They usually lead 
to bleeding into the biliary tree, peritoneum or intestine, 
and are best diagnosed by angiography. Treatment is 
radiological or surgical. Any of the vasculitides can 
affect the hepatic artery but this rarely causes 
symptoms.
Hepatic artery thrombosis is a recognised complica-
tion of liver transplantation and typically occurs in the 
early post-transplant period. Clinical features are often 
related to bile duct rather than liver ischaemia because 
of the dominant role of the hepatic artery in extrahepatic 
bile duct perfusion. Manifestations can include bile duct 
anastomotic failure with bile leak or the development of 
late bile duct strictures. Diagnosis and initial interven-
tion are radiological in the first instance, with ERCP and 
biliary stenting being the principal approaches to the 
treatment of bile duct injury.
Portal venous disease
Portal hypertension
See page 945.
Portal vein thrombosis
Portal venous thrombosis as a primary event is rare, but 
can occur in any condition predisposing to thrombosis. 
It may also complicate intra-abdominal inflammatory or 
neoplastic disease, and is a recognised cause of portal 
hypertension. Acute portal venous thrombosis causes 
abdominal pain and diarrhoea, and may rarely lead to 
bowel infarction, requiring surgery. Treatment is other-
wise based on anticoagulation, although there are no 
randomised data on efficacy. An underlying throm-
bophilia needs to be excluded. Subacute thrombosis can 
be asymptomatic but may subsequently lead to extra­
hepatic portal hypertension (p. 945). Ascites is unusual 
in non-cirrhotic portal hypertension, unless the albumin 
is particularly low.
Portal vein thrombosis can arise as a secondary event 
in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension, and 
is a recognised cause of decompen­sation in patients with 
previously stable cirrhosis. In patients showing such 
decompensation, portal vein patency should be assessed 
by ultrasound with Doppler flow studies.
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
This condition is characterised by resistant hypoxaemia 
(PaO2 < 9.3 kPa or 70 mm Hg), intrapulmonary vascular 
dilatation in patients with cirrhosis, and portal hyper-
tension. Clinical features include finger clubbing, cyano-
sis, spider naevi and a characteristic reduction in arterial 
oxygen saturation on standing. The hypoxia is due to 
intrapulmonary shunting through direct arteriovenous 
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with isolated elevation of 
bilirubin, typically, although not exclusively, in the 
setting of physical stress or illness. There are no stigmata 
of chronic liver disease other than jaundice. Increased 
excretion of bilirubin and hence stercobilinogen leads to 
normal-coloured or dark stools, and increased urobilino-
gen excretion causes the urine to turn dark on standing 
as urobilin is formed. In the presence of haemolysis, 
pallor due to anaemia and splenomegaly due to exces-
sive reticulo-endothelial activity are usually present.
Investigations
The plasma bilirubin is usually less than 100 µmol/L 
(~6 mg/dL) and the LFTs are otherwise normal. There 
is no bilirubinuria because the hyperbilirubinaemia is 
predominantly unconjugated. Hepatic histology is 
normal and liver biopsy is not recommended for the 
investigation of patients with possible Gilbert’s syn-
drome. The condition is not associated with liver injury 
and thus has an excellent prognosis, needs no treatment, 
and is clinically important only because it may be mis-
taken for more serious liver disease.
VASCULAR LIVER DISEASE
Metabolically, the liver is highly active and has large 
oxygen requirements. This places it at risk of ischaemic 
injury in settings of impaired perfusion. The risk is miti-
gated, however, by the dual perfusion of the liver (via 
portal vein as well as hepatic artery), with the former 
representing a low-pressure perfusion system that offers 
protection against the potential effects of arterial hypo-
tension. The single outflow through the hepatic vein and 
the low-pressure perfusion system of the portal vein 
make the liver vulnerable to venous thrombotic ischae-
mia in the context of Budd–Chiari syndrome and portal 
vein thrombosis, respectively.
Hepatic arterial disease
Liver ischaemia
Liver ischaemic injury is relatively common during 
hypotensive or hypoxic events and is under-diagnosed. 
The characteristic pattern is one of rising transaminase 
values in the days following such an event (e.g. pro-
longed seizures). Liver synthetic dysfunction and 
encephalopathy are uncommon but can occur. Liver 
failure is very rare. Diagnosis typically rests on clinical 
suspicion and exclusion of other potential aetiologies. 
Treatment is aimed at optimising liver perfusion and 
oxygen delivery. Outcome is dictated by the morbidity 
and mortality associated with the underlying disease, 
given that liver ischaemia frequently occurs in the 
context of other organ ischaemia in high-risk patients.
Liver arterial disease
Hepatic arterial disease is rare outside the setting of liver 
transplantation and is difficult to diagnose. It can cause 
significant liver damage. Hepatic artery occlusion may 
result from inadvertent injury during biliary surgery 
or may be caused by emboli, neoplasms, polyarteritis 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
976
Ascitic fluid analysis shows a protein concentration 
above 25 g/L (exudate) in the early stages; however, this 
often falls later in the disease. Doppler ultrasound may 
reveal obliteration of the hepatic veins and reversed flow 
or associated thrombosis in the portal vein. CT may 
show enlargement of the caudate lobe, as it often has a 
separate venous drainage system that is not involved in 
the disease. CT and MRI may also demonstrate occlu-
sion of the hepatic veins and inferior vena cava. Liver 
biopsy demonstrates centrilobular congestion with 
fibrosis, depending on the duration of the illness. Veno­
graphy is only needed if CT and MRI are unable to 
demonstrate the hepatic venous anatomy clearly.
Management
Predisposing causes should be treated as far as possible; 
where recent thrombosis is suspected, thrombolysis 
with streptokinase, followed by heparin and oral anti­
coagulation, should be considered. Ascites is initially 
treated medically but often with only limited success. 
Short hepatic venous strictures can be treated with angio­
plasty. In the case of more extensive hepatic vein occlu-
sion, many patients can be managed successfully by 
insertion of a covered TIPSS, followed by anticoagula-
tion. Surgical shunts, such as portacaval shunts, are less 
commonly performed now that TIPSS is available. Occa-
sionally, a web can be resected or an inferior vena caval 
stenosis dilated. Progressive liver failure is an indication 
for liver transplantation and life-long anticoagulation.
Prognosis without transplantation or shunting is 
poor, particularly following an acute presentation with 
liver failure. A 3-year survival of 50% is reported in 
those who survive the initial event. The 1- and 10-year 
survival following liver transplantation is 85% and 69% 
respectively, and this compares with a 5- and 10-year 
survival of 87% and 37% following surgical shunting.
Veno-occlusive disease
Veno-occlusive disease (VOD) is a rare condition char-
acterised by widespread occlusion of the small central 
hepatic veins. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids in Senecio and 
Heliotropium plants used to make teas, as well as cyto-
toxic drugs and hepatic irradiation, are all recognised 
causes. VOD may develop in 10–20% of patients follow-
ing haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (usually 
within the first 20 days), and carries a 90% mortality in 
severe cases. Pathogenesis involves obliteration and 
fibrosis of terminal hepatic venules due to deposition of 
red cells, haemosiderin-laden macrophages and coagu-
lation factors. In this setting, VOD is thought to relate to 
preconditioning therapy with irradiation and cytotoxic 
chemotherapy. The clinical features are similar to those 
of the Budd–Chiari syndrome (see above). Investiga-
tions show evidence of venous outflow obstruction 
histologically but, in contrast to Budd–Chiari, the large 
hepatic veins appear patent radiologically. Transjugular 
liver biopsy (with portal pressure measurements) may 
make the diagnosis. Traditionally, treatment has been 
supportive, but defibrotide shows promise (the drug 
binds to vascular endothelial cells, promoting fibrino­
lysis and suppressing coagulation).
Cardiac disease
Hepatic damage, due primarily to congestion, may 
develop in all forms of right heart failure (p. 548); 
communications. Nitric oxide (NO) overproduction may 
be important in pathogenesis. The hepatopulmonary 
syndrome can be treated by liver transplantation but, if 
severe (PaO2 < 6.7 kPa or 50 mm Hg), is associated with 
an increased operative risk.
Portopulmonary hypertension
This unusual complication of portal hypertension is 
similar to ‘primary pulmonary hypertension’ (p. 724). It 
is defined as pulmonary hypertension with increased 
pulmonary vascular resistance and a normal pulmonary 
artery wedge pressure in a patient with portal hyperten-
sion. The condition is caused by vasoconstriction and 
obliteration of the pulmonary arterial system, and leads 
to breathlessness and fatigue.
Hepatic venous disease
Obstruction to hepatic venous blood flow can occur in 
the small central hepatic veins, the large hepatic veins, 
the inferior vena cava or the heart (see Fig. 23.19, p. 945). 
The clinical features depend on the cause and on the 
speed with which obstruction develops, and can mimic 
many other forms of chronic liver disease, sometimes 
leading to delayed diagnosis. Congestive hepatomegaly 
and ascites are, however, the most consistent features. 
The possibility of hepatic venous obstruction should 
always be considered in patients with an atypical liver 
presentation.
Budd–Chiari syndrome
This uncommon condition is caused by thrombosis 
of the larger hepatic veins and sometimes the inferior 
vena cava. Many patients have haematological dis­
orders such as myelofibrosis, primary proliferative poly-
cythaemia, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, or 
antithrombin III, protein C or protein S deficiencies 
(Ch. 24). Pregnancy and oral contraceptive use, obstruc-
tion due to tumours (particularly carcinomas of the 
liver, kidneys or adrenals), congenital venous webs 
and occasionally inferior vena caval stenosis are the 
other main causes. The underlying cause cannot be 
found in about 50% of patients, although this percentage 
is falling as molecular diagnostic tools (such as the 
JAK2 mutation in myelofibrosis) increase our capacity to 
diagnose underlying haematological disorders. Hepatic 
congestion affecting the centrilobular areas is followed 
by centrilobular fibrosis, and eventually cirrhosis super-
venes in those who survive long enough.
Clinical features
Acute venous occlusion causes rapid development of 
upper abdominal pain, marked ascites and occasionally 
acute liver failure. More gradual occlusion causes 
gross ascites and, often, upper abdominal discomfort. 
Hepatomegaly, frequently with tenderness over the 
liver, is almost always present. Peripheral oedema 
occurs only when there is inferior vena cava obstruction. 
Features of cirrhosis and portal hypertension develop in 
those who survive the acute event.
Investigations
The LFTs vary considerably, depending on the presenta-
tion, and can show the features of acute hepatitis. 
Pregnancy and the liver
23
977
identification in pregnancy because of long-term health 
implications for the mother and the effectiveness of peri-
natal vaccination (with or without pre-delivery maternal 
antiviral therapy) in reducing neonatal acquisition of 
chronic hepatitis B. Maternal transmission of hepatitis C 
occurs in 1% of cases, and there is no convincing evi-
dence that the mode of delivery affects this. Hepatitis E 
is reported to progress to acute liver failure much more 
commonly in pregnancy, with a 20% maternal mortality. 
Pregnancy may be associated with either worsening 
or improvement of autoimmune hepatitis, although 
improvement during pregnancy and rebound post-
partum is the most common pattern seen. Complications 
of portal hypertension may be a particular issue in the 
second and third trimesters.
Gallstones (p. 981) are more common during preg-
nancy, and may present with cholecystitis or biliary 
obstruction. The diagnosis can usually be made with 
ultrasound. In biliary obstruction due to gallstones, 
therapeutic ERCP can be safely performed, but lead pro-
tection for the fetus is essential and X-ray screening must 
be kept to a minimum.
Pregnancy-associated liver disease
The following conditions occur only during pregnancy, 
may recur in subsequent pregnancies and resolve after 
delivery of the baby. The causes of abnormal LFTs in 
pregnancy, which include pregnancy-associated liver 
disease, are shown in Box 23.68.
Acute cholestasis of pregnancy
This accounts for 20% of cases of jaundice in pregnancy; 
it usually occurs in the third trimester of pregnancy but 
can arise earlier. It may be linked with intrauterine 
growth retardation and premature birth, but is most 
usually, the clinical features are predominantly cardiac. 
Very rarely, long-standing cardiac failure and hepatic 
congestion give rise to cardiac cirrhosis. Cardiac causes 
of acute and chronic liver disease are under-diagnosed. 
Treatment is that of the underlying heart disease.
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia  
of the liver
This is the most common cause of non-cirrhotic portal 
hypertension in developed countries; it is characterised 
by small hepatocyte nodules throughout the liver 
without fibrosis, which can result in sinusoidal compres-
sion. It is believed to be due to damage to small hepatic 
arterioles and portal venules. It occurs in older people 
and is associated with many conditions, including 
connective tissue disease, haematological diseases and 
immunosuppressive drugs, such as azathioprine. The 
condition is usually asymptomatic, but occasionally 
presents with portal hypertension or with an abdominal 
mass. The diagnosis is made by liver biopsy, which, in 
contrast to cirrhosis, shows nodule formation in the 
absence of fibrous septa. Liver function is good and the 
prognosis is very favourable. Management is based on 
treatment of the portal hypertension.
PREGNANCY AND THE LIVER
The inter-relationship between liver disease and preg-
nancy can be a complex one and a source of real anxiety 
for both patient and clinicians. Three possibilities need 
to be borne in mind when faced with a pregnant woman 
with a liver abnormality:
•	 that this represents a worsening of pre-existing 
chronic liver or biliary disease (although pregnancy 
may be the first time a woman’s liver biochemistry 
has been tested, so this may not have previously 
been diagnosed)
•	 that this represents a genuine first presentation of 
liver disease that is not intrinsically related to 
pregnancy
•	 that this represents a genuine pregnancy-associated 
liver injury process.
It is critical to obtain information relating to liver disease 
risk factors and pre-pregnancy liver status to establish 
whether any abnormality was present before pregnancy. 
In general, the earlier in pregnancy that liver abnormal-
ity presents, the more likely it is to represent either pre-
existing liver disease or non-pregnancy-related acute 
liver disease. Equally, the best outcome for both mother 
and baby results from optimising the physical condition 
of the mother, and in situations of deteriorating liver 
function (which can be steep in late pregnancy) consid-
eration should always be given to early delivery if the 
fetus is viable. Joint management between hepatologists 
and obstetricians is essential.
Intercurrent and pre-existing  
liver disease
Acute hepatitis A can occur during pregnancy but has 
no effect on the fetus. Chronic hepatitis B requires 
•	 Liver function tests: ALT levels and albumin normally fall in 
pregnancy. ALP levels can rise due to the contribution of 
placental ALP.
•	 Pre-existing liver disease: pregnancy is uncommon in 
cirrhosis because cirrhosis causes relative infertility. Variceal 
bleeding can occur if varices present prior to conception, and 
ascites or polyhydramnios should be treated with amiloride 
rather than spironolactone. Penicillamine for Wilson’s disease 
and azathioprine for autoimmune liver disease should be 
continued during pregnancy. Autoimmune liver disease can 
flare up post-partum.
•	 Unrelated liver disease: viral- and drug-induced hepatitis 
must be excluded in the presence of an elevated ALT. 
Immunoglobulin/vaccination given to the fetus at birth 
prevents transmission of hepatitis B to the fetus if the mother 
is infected. Gallstones are more common in pregnancy and 
post-partum, and are a cause of a raised ALP level. Biliary 
imaging with ultrasound and MRCP is safe. ERCP to remove 
stones can be performed safely with shielding of the fetus 
from radiation.
•	 Pregnancy-related liver diseases: occur predominantly in 
the third trimester and resolve post-partum. Maternal and 
fetal mortality and morbidity are prevented by early delivery.
23.68  Abnormal liver function tests in pregnancy
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
978
cases. Blood tests may show low haemoglobin, with 
fragmented red cells, markedly elevated serum trans­
aminases and raised D-dimers. The condition can be 
complicated by hepatic infarction and rupture. Maternal 
complications also include disseminated intravascular 
coagulation and placental abruption. Maternal mortality 
is 1% and perinatal mortality can be up to 30%. Delivery 
usually leads to prompt resolution, and disease recurs 
in fewer than 5% of subsequent pregnancies.
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
The outcome following liver transplantation has 
improved significantly over the last decade so that elec-
tive transplantation in low-risk individuals now has a 
1-year survival rate of more than 90% and is an effective 
treatment for end-stage liver disease. The number of 
procedures is limited by cadaveric donor availability, 
and in many parts of the world this has led to living 
donor transplant programmes. Despite this, 10% of 
those listed for liver transplantation will die while 
awaiting a donor liver. The main complications of 
liver transplantation relate to rejection, complications 
of long-term immunosuppression and disease recur-
rence in the liver graft.
Indications and contraindications
Currently, around 9500 liver transplants are under-
taken in Europe and the USA annually. About 10% are 
performed for acute liver failure, 6% for metabolic dis-
eases, 71% for cirrhosis and 11% for hepatocellular car-
cinoma. Most patients are under 60 years of age, and 
only 10% are aged between 60 and 70 years. Indications 
for elective transplant assessment are listed in Box 
23.70. In North America the most common indication 
is hepatitis C cirrhosis, about 10–20% of transplants 
being for alcoholic cirrhosis (Fig. 23.41). Patients with 
alcoholic liver disease need to show a capacity for 
abstinence.
The main contraindications to transplantation are 
sepsis, extrahepatic malignancy, active alcohol or 
other substance misuse, and marked cardiorespiratory 
dysfunction.
Patients are matched for ABO blood group and size, 
but do not require HLA-matching with donors, as the 
characteristically associated with intrauterine fetal death 
if the pregnancy goes beyond 36 weeks of gestation. The 
condition characteristically presents with itching and 
cholestatic LFTs. A normal bilirubin and hepatitic LFTs 
do not, however, preclude the diagnosis. Bile salts are 
elevated in the serum and this represents a useful clini-
cal test. Delivery leads to resolution and should be con-
sidered from 36 weeks onwards. Pregnancy should not 
be allowed to continue beyond term because of a steep 
rise in the risk of intrauterine death. UDCA (15 mg/kg 
daily) effectively controls itching and probably prevents 
premature birth. The major issue with UDCA in acute 
cholestasis of pregnancy is the relatively long time 
required to achieve effective levels within the bile pool, 
which renders it of little use in patients presenting in the 
very end stages of pregnancy. Cholestasis recurs in 60% 
of future pregnancies and the opportunities available for 
screening based on previous risk make UDCA a much 
more viable therapy in this setting.
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
This is more common in twin and first pregnancies, 
and may arise more frequently when the fetus is 
male. It occurs in 1 in 14 000 pregnancies in the USA. 
It typically presents between 31 and 38 weeks of preg-
nancy with vomiting and abdominal pain followed 
by jaundice. In severe cases, this may be followed by 
lactic acidosis, coagulopathy, encephalopathy and renal 
failure. Hypoglycaemia can also occur. The features 
are characteristic of a defect in beta-oxidation of fatty 
acids in the mitochondria that leads to the formation 
of small fat droplets in liver cells (known as micro­
vesicular fatty liver). Some women are heterozygous 
for loss-of-function mutations in the long-chain 3- 
hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) gene. Other 
causes of microvesicular steatosis that have a similar 
clinical presentation outside pregnancy are shown in 
Box 23.69. Differentiation from toxaemia of pregnancy 
(which is more common) can be achieved by the finding 
of high serum uric acid levels and the absence of haemo-
lysis. Overlap between acute fatty liver of pregnancy, 
HELLP (see below) and toxaemia of pregnancy can 
occur. Early diagnosis, specialist care and delivery of the 
fetus have led to a fall in maternal and perinatal mortal-
ity to 1% and 7% respectively.
•	 Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
•	 Drugs: sodium valproate, tetracyclines
•	 Reye’s syndrome (aspirin toxicity in childhood)
•	 Toxins: Bacillus cereus
23.69  Hepatic mitochondrial cytopathies
Complications
•	 First episode of bacterial peritonitis
•	 Diuretic-resistant ascites
•	 Recurrent variceal haemorrhage
•	 Hepatocellular carcinoma < 5 cm
•	 Persistent hepatic encephalopathy
Poor liver function
•	 Bilirubin > 100 µmol/L (5.8 mg/dL) in primary biliary 
cirrhosis
•	 MELD score > 12
•	 Child–Pugh grade C
23.70  Indications for liver transplant assessment 
for cirrhosis
Toxaemia of pregnancy and HELLP
The HELLP syndrome (haemolysis, elevated liver 
enzymes and low platelets) is a variant of pre-eclampsia 
that tends to affect multiparous women. It usually 
presents at 27–36 weeks of pregnancy with hyperten-
sion, proteinuria and fluid retention, although, as with 
all liver diseases of pregnancy, the presentation can be 
highly variable and all potential diagnoses should be 
considered in all patients. Jaundice only occurs in 5% of 
Liver transplantation
23
979
liver is a relatively immune-privileged organ compared 
with heart or kidney.
In many parts of the world, the MELD score (see Box 
23.32, p. 944) is used to identify and prioritise patients 
for transplantation. In the UK, a similar score that also 
incorporates serum sodium, the United Kingdom End-
Stage Liver Disease score (UKELD), is used to guide 
recipient selection. To be listed for elective (non-super-
urgent) transplantation in the UK, patients must have a 
greater than 50% projected post-transplant 5-year sur-
vival and fall into one of three categories:
•	 Category 1: estimated 1-year mortality without 
transplantation of more than 9% (equivalent to a 
UKELD score of more than 49 points)
•	 Category 2: HCC diagnosed radiologically by 
two concordant modalities; based on CT, a single 
lesion of less than 5 cm maximum diameter or 
fewer than three lesions each less than 3 cm in 
diameter without macrovascular invasion or 
metastases.
•	 Category 3: ‘variant syndromes’, including diuretic-
resistant ascites, hepatopulmonary syndrome, 
chronic hepatic encephalopathy, intractable 
pruritus, familial amyloidosis, primary 
hyperlipidaemia, polycystic liver disease and 
recurrent cholangitis.
Super-urgent listing is reserved for patients with acute 
liver failure according to specific criteria.
Two types of transplant are increasingly used because 
of insufficient cadaveric donors:
•	 Split liver transplantation. A cadaveric donor liver 
can be split into two, with the larger right lobe used 
in an adult and the smaller left lobe used in a child. 
This practice has led to an increase in procedures 
despite a shortage of donor organs.
•	 Living donor transplantation. This is normally 
performed using the left lateral segment or the right 
lobe. The donor mortality is significant at 0.5–1%. 
Pre-operative assessment includes looking at donor 
liver size and psychological status.
Fig. 23.41  Indications for liver transplantation in the UK between 
2001 and 2005. 
Hepatitis C
Alcohol
Hepatitis B
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Autoimmune liver disease
Cryptogenic
Other
2%
17%
11%
9%
12%
10%
16%
8%
Complications
Early complications
Primary graft non-function
This is a state of hepatocellular dysfunction arising as 
a consequence of liver paresis that results from ischae-
mia following removal from the donor and prior to 
reperfusion in the recipient. Factors that increase the 
likelihood of primary non-function include increasing 
donor age, degree of steatosis in the liver, and the 
length of ischaemia. Treatment is supportive until recov-
ery of function. Occasionally, recovery is not seen and 
re-transplant is necessary.
Technical complications
These include hepatic artery thrombosis, which may 
necessitate re-transplantation. Anastomotic biliary stric-
tures can also occur; these may respond to endoscopic 
balloon dilatation and stenting, or require surgical 
reconstruction. Portal vein thrombosis is rare.
Rejection
Less immunosuppression is needed following liver 
transplantation than with kidney or heart/lung grafting. 
Initial immunosuppression is usually with tacrolimus or 
ciclosporin, prednisolone and azathioprine or myco­
phenolate. Some patients can eventually be maintained 
on a single agent. Acute cellular rejection occurs in 60–
80% of patients, commonly at 5–10 days post transplant 
and usually within the first 6 weeks, but can arise at any 
point. This normally responds to 3 days of high-dose 
intravenous methylprednisolone.
Infections
Bacterial infections, such as pneumonia and wound 
infections, can occur in the first few weeks after trans-
plantation. Cytomegalovirus (primary infection or 
reactivation) is a common infection in the 3 months 
after transplantation and can cause hepatitis. Patients 
who have never had cytomegalovirus infection but who 
receive a liver from a donor who has been exposed are 
at greatest risk of infection, and are usually given pro-
phylactic antiviral therapy such as valganciclovir. 
Herpes simplex virus reactivation or, rarely, primary 
infection may occur. Prophylaxis is given to recipients 
who have had previous exposure to tuberculosis for 
the first 6 months after transplantation to prevent 
reactivation.
Late complications
These include recurrence of the initial disease in the 
graft and complications due to the immunosuppressive 
therapy, such as renal impairment from ciclosporin. 
Metabolic syndrome is common, being described in 
about 50% of transplant recipients within 6 months in 
the USA. Chronic vascular rejection is rare, occurring 
in only 5% of cases.
Prognosis
The outcome following transplantation for acute liver 
failure is worse than for chronic liver disease because 
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
980
biliary disease in childhood, characterised by raised 
ALP levels and progression to a biliary cirrhosis. It is 
also becoming increasingly clear that these proteins con-
tribute to intrahepatic biliary disease in adulthood.
Benign recurrent intrahepatic 
cholestasis
This rare condition usually presents in adolescence and 
is characterised by recurrent episodes of cholestasis, 
lasting 1–6 months. It is now known to be mediated by 
mutations in the ATP8B1 gene, which lies on chromo-
some 18 and encodes FIC1.
Episodes start with pruritus, while painless jaundice 
develops later. LFTs show a cholestatic pattern. Liver 
biopsy shows cholestasis during an episode but is 
normal between episodes. Treatment is required to 
relieve the symptoms of cholestasis, such as pruritus, 
and the long-term prognosis is good.
Intrahepatic biliary disease
Inflammatory and immune disease
The small intrahepatic bile ducts appear to be specifi-
cally vulnerable to immune injury, and ductopenic 
injury (‘vanishing bile duct syndrome’) can be a feature 
of a number of chronic conditions, including graft-
versus-host disease (GVHD), sarcoidosis and, in the 
setting of liver transplantation, ductopenic rejection. 
Intrahepatic small bile duct injury occurs most fre-
quently in PBC, an autoimmune cholestatic disease, and 
less frequently in PSC (Box 23.72).
Caroli’s disease
This is very rare and is characterised by segmental sac-
cular dilatations of the intrahepatic biliary tree. The 
most patients have multi-organ failure at the time of 
transplantation. The 1-year survival is 65% and falls 
only a little to 59% at 5 years. The 1-year survival 
for patients with cirrhosis is over 90%, falling to 70–75% 
at 5 years. 
CHOLESTATIC AND BILIARY DISEASE
The concepts of biliary and cholestatic disease, and the 
important distinctions between them, can be a source of 
confusion. ‘Cholestasis’ relates to a biochemical abnor-
mality (typically elevation of ALP and, if the process 
is significant, elevation in serum bile acid levels and 
bilirubin) resulting from an abnormality in bile flow. 
The cause can range from inherited or acquired dysfunc-
tion of transporter molecules responsible for the produc-
tion of canalicular bile to physical obstruction of the 
extrahepatic bile duct. ‘Biliary disease’ relates to pathol-
ogy at any level from the small intrahepatic bile ducts 
to the sphincter of Oddi. Although there is very signifi-
cant overlap between cholestatic and biliary disease, 
there are scenarios where cholestasis can exist without 
biliary disease (transporter disease or pure drug-induced 
cholestasis) and where biliary disease can exist without 
cholestasis (when disease of the bile duct does not 
impact on bile flow). These anomalies should always be 
borne in mind, and cholestasis and biliary disease 
always effectively distinguished.
Chemical cholestasis
Pure cholestasis can occur as an inherited condition (see 
p. 972), as a consequence of cholestatic drug reactions 
(p. 971) or as acute cholestasis of pregnancy (p. 977). A 
more frequent, but less recognised, acquired biochemi-
cal cholestasis occurs in sepsis (‘cholangitis lente’). This 
biochemical phenomenon is one of the causes of LFT 
abnormality in sepsis, does not require specific treat-
ment, and has a prognostic significance conferred by the 
underlying septic process.
Mutations in the biliary transporter proteins on the 
hepatocyte canalicular membrane (familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis 1, FIC1), illustrated in Figure 23.7 (p. 927), 
have been shown to cause an inherited intrahepatic 
•	 Alcoholic liver disease: 10% of cases present over the age 
of 70 years, when disease is more likely to be severe and 
has a worse prognosis.
•	 Hepatitis A: causes more severe illness and runs a more 
protracted course.
•	 Primary biliary cirrhosis: one-third of cases are over 
65 years.
•	 Liver abscess: more than 50% of all cases in the UK are 
over 60 years.
•	 Hepatocellular carcinoma: approximately 50% of cases 
present over the age of 65 years in the UK.
•	 Surgery: older people are less likely to survive liver surgery 
(including transplantation) because comorbidity is more 
prevalent.
23.71  Liver disease in old age
PBC
PSC
Gender (F : M)
10 : 1
1 : 3
Age
Older: median age 
50–55 yrs
Younger: median 
age 20–40 yrs
Disease 
associations
Non-organ-specific 
autoimmune 
disease (e.g. 
Sjögren’s 
syndrome) and 
autoimmune  
thyroid disease
Ulcerative colitis
Autoantibody 
profile
90% AMA +ve
65–85% pANCA 
+ve (but this is 
non-specific and 
not diagnostic)
Predominant 
bile-duct injury
Intrahepatic
Extrahepatic > 
intrahepatic
(AMA = antimitochondrial antibodies; pANCA = perinuclear antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibodies)
23.72  Comparison of primary biliary cirrhosis 
and primary sclerosing cholangitis
Cholestatic and biliary disease
23
981
Liver abscess and biliary cirrhosis may develop, and 
there is an increased incidence of cholangiocarcinoma. 
Excision of the cyst with hepatico-jejunostomy is the 
treatment of choice.
Secondary biliary cirrhosis
Secondary biliary cirrhosis develops after prolonged 
large duct biliary obstruction due to gallstones, benign 
bile duct strictures or sclerosing cholangitis (see below). 
Carcinomas rarely cause secondary biliary cirrhosis 
because few patients survive long enough. The clinical 
features are those of chronic cholestasis with episodes of 
ascending cholangitis or even liver abscess (p. 956). Cir-
rhosis, ascites and portal hypertension are late features. 
Relief of biliary obstruction may require endoscopic or 
surgical intervention. Cholangitis requires treatment 
with antibiotics, which can be given continuously if 
attacks recur frequently.
Gallstones
Gallstone formation is the most common disorder of the 
biliary tree and it is unusual for the gallbladder to be 
diseased in the absence of gallstones. In developed coun-
tries, gallstones occur in 7% of males and 15% of females 
aged 18–65 years, with an overall prevalence of 11%. In 
individuals under 40 years there is a 3 : 1 female prepon-
derance, whereas in the elderly the sex ratio is about 
equal. In developed countries, the incidence of sympto-
matic gallstones appears to be increasing and they occur 
at an earlier age. Gallstones are less frequent in India, 
the Far East and Africa. There has been much debate 
over the role of diet in cholesterol gallstone disease; an 
increase in dietary cholesterol, fat, total calories and 
refined carbohydrate or lack of dietary fibre has been 
implicated. At present, the best data support an associa-
tion between simple refined sugar in the diet and 
gallstones.
Pathophysiology
Gallstones are conveniently classified into cholesterol 
or pigment stones, although the majority are of mixed 
composition. Cholesterol stones are most common in 
developed countries, whereas pigment stones are more 
frequent in developing countries. Gallstones contain 
varying quantities of calcium salts, including calcium 
bilirubinate, carbonate, phosphate and palmitate, which 
whole liver is usually affected, and extrahepatic biliary 
dilatation occurs in about one-quarter of patients. Recur-
rent attacks of cholangitis (see Box 23.18, p. 937) may 
cause hepatic abscesses. Complications include biliary 
stones and cholangiocarcinoma. Antibiotics are required 
for episodes of cholangitis. Occasionally, localised 
disease can be treated by segmental liver resection, and 
liver transplantation may sometimes be required.
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
This is characterised by broad bands of fibrous tissue 
linking the portal tracts in the liver, abnormalities of the 
interlobular bile ducts, and sometimes a lack of portal 
venules. The renal tubules may show cystic dilatation 
(medullary sponge kidney, p. 506), and eventually renal 
cysts may develop. The condition can be inherited as 
an autosomal recessive trait. Liver involvement causes 
portal hypertension with splenomegaly and bleeding 
from oesophageal varices that usually presents in ado-
lescence or in early adult life. The prognosis is good 
because liver function is preserved. Treatment may be 
required for variceal bleeding and occasionally cholan-
gitis. Patients can present during childhood with renal 
failure if the kidneys are severely affected.
Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis (p. 680) is associated with a biliary cir-
rhosis in about 5% of individuals. Splenomegaly and an 
elevated ALP are characteristic. Complications do not 
normally arise until late adolescence or early adulthood, 
when bleeding due to variceal haemorrhage may occur. 
UDCA improves liver blood tests but it is not known 
whether the drug can prevent progression of liver 
disease. Deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and 
K) may need to be treated in view of both biliary and 
pancreatic disease.
Extrahepatic biliary disease
Diseases of the extrahepatic biliary tree typically present 
with the clinical features of impaired bile flow (obstruc-
tive jaundice and fat malabsorption). Obstructive disease 
is frequently a consequence of stricturing following 
gallstone passage and associated infection and inflam-
mation or post-surgical intervention. PSC frequently 
involves the extrahepatic biliary tree, and its differential, 
IgG4 disease, is an important and potentially treatable 
cause of disease (p. 966). Malignant diseases (cholangio­
carcinoma or carcinoma of the head of pancreas should 
be considered in all patients with extrahepatic biliary 
obstruction.
Choledochal cysts
This term applies to cysts anywhere in the biliary tree 
(Fig. 23.42). The great majority cause diffuse dilatation 
of the common bile duct (type I), but others take the 
form of biliary diverticula (type II), dilatation of the 
intraduodenal bile duct (type III) and multiple biliary 
cysts (type IV). The last type merges with Caroli’s 
disease (see above). In the neonate, they may present 
with jaundice or biliary peritonitis. Recurrent jaundice, 
abdominal pain and cholangitis may arise in the adult. 
Type I
(87%)
Type II
(7%)
Type III
(3%)
Type IV
(3%)
Fig. 23.42  Classification and frequency of choledochal cysts. 
From Shearman and Finlayson 1989 – see p. 988.
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
982
Pigment stones
Brown crumbly pigment stones are almost always the 
consequence of bacterial or parasitic biliary infection. 
They are common in the Far East, where infection 
allows bacterial β-glucuronidase to hydrolyse conju-
gated bilirubin to its free form, which then precipitates 
as calcium bilirubinate. The mechanism of black pigment 
gallstone formation in developed countries is not satis-
factorily explained. Haemolysis is important, as these 
stones occur in chronic haemolytic disease.
Biliary sludge
This describes gelatinous bile that contains numerous 
microspheroliths of calcium bilirubinate granules and 
cholesterol crystals, as well as glycoproteins; it is an 
important precursor to the formation of gallstones in the 
majority of patients. Biliary sludge is frequently formed 
under normal conditions, but then either dissolves or 
is cleared by the gallbladder; only in about 15% of 
patients does it persist to form cholesterol stones. 
Fasting, parenteral nutrition and pregnancy are also 
associated with sludge formation.
Clinical features
Only 10% of individuals with gallstones develop clinical 
evidence of gallstone disease. Symptomatic stones 
within the gallbladder (Box 23.76) manifest as either 
biliary pain (‘biliary colic’) or cholecystitis (see below). 
If a gallstone becomes acutely impacted in the cystic 
duct, the patient will experience pain. The term ‘biliary 
colic’ is a misnomer because the pain does not rhythmi-
cally increase and decrease in intensity like other forms 
of colic. Typically, the pain occurs suddenly and persists 
for about 2 hours; if it continues for more than 6 hours, 
a complication such as cholecystitis or pancreatitis may 
be present. Pain is usually felt in the epigastrium (70% 
of patients) or right upper quadrant (20%), and radiates 
to the interscapular region or the tip of the right scapula, 
but other sites include the left upper quadrant and 
the lower chest. The pain can mimic intrathoracic 
disease, oesophagitis, myocardial infarction or dissect-
ing aneurysm.
Combinations of fatty food intolerance, dyspepsia 
and flatulence not attributable to other causes have 
been referred to as ‘gallstone dyspepsia’. These symp-
toms are not now recognised as being caused by 
are radio-opaque. Gallstone formation is multifactorial, 
and the factors involved are related to the type of gall-
stone (Boxes 23.73 and 23.74).
Cholesterol gallstones
Cholesterol is held in solution in bile by its associa­
tion with bile acids and phospholipids in the form of 
micelles and vesicles. Biliary lipoproteins may also have 
a role in solubilising cholesterol. In gallstone disease 
the liver produces bile that contains an excess of choles-
terol, because there is either a relative deficiency of 
bile salts or a relative excess of cholesterol (‘litho­
genic’ bile). Disorders with the potential to induce litho-
genic bile are shown in Box 23.75. Factors initiating 
crystallisation of cholesterol in lithogenic bile (nuclea-
tion factors) are also important in determining the rate 
at which crystals form from saturated bile. Factors 
favouring nucleation (mucus, calcium, fatty acids, other 
proteins) and antinucleating factors (apolipoproteins) 
have been described.
•	 Defective bile salt synthesis
•	 Excessive intestinal loss of bile salts
•	 Over-sensitive bile salt feedback
•	 Excessive cholesterol secretion
•	 Abnormal gallbladder function
23.75  Pathogenic factors leading to the 
production of lithogenic bile
Black
Brown
Composition
Polymerised calcium 
bilirubinates*
Calcium bilirubinate 
crystals*
Mucin glycoprotein
Mucin glycoprotein
Calcium phosphate
Cholesterol
Calcium carbonate
Cholesterol
Calcium palmitate/
stearate
Risk factors
Haemolysis
Infected bile
Age
Stasis
Hepatic cirrhosis
Ileal resection/disease
*Major component.
23.74  Composition of and risk factors for 
pigment stones
↑ Cholesterol secretion
•	 Old age
•	 Female gender
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Obesity
•	 Rapid weight loss
Impaired gallbladder emptying
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Gallbladder stasis
•	 Fasting
•	 Total parenteral nutrition
•	 Spinal cord injury
↓ Bile salt secretion
•	 Pregnancy
23.73  Risk factors and mechanisms for 
cholesterol gallstones
Clinical features
•	 Asymptomatic (80%)
•	 Biliary colic
•	 Acute cholecystitis
•	 Chronic cholecystitis
Complications
•	 Empyema of the 
gallbladder
•	 Porcelain gallbladder
•	 Choledocholithiasis
•	 Acute pancreatitis
•	 Fistulae from  
gallbladder to  
duodenum/colon
•	 Pressure on/inflammation  
of the common bile duct  
by a gallstone in the  
cystic duct (Mirizzi’s 
syndrome)
•	 Gallstone ileus
•	 Cancer of the gallbladder
23.76  Clinical features and complications 
of gallstones
Cholestatic and biliary disease
23
983
Various techniques can be used to treat common bile 
duct stones (Box 23.77).
Cholecystitis
Acute cholecystitis
Pathophysiology
Acute cholecystitis is almost always associated with 
obstruction of the gallbladder neck or cystic duct by a 
gallstone. Occasionally, obstruction may be by mucus, 
parasitic worms or a bile tumour, or may follow endo-
scopic bile duct stenting. The pathogenesis is unclear 
but the initial inflammation is possibly chemically 
induced. This leads to gallbladder mucosal damage, 
which releases phospholipase, converting biliary leci-
thin to lysolecithin, a recognised mucosal toxin. At the 
time of surgery, approximately 50% of cultures of the 
gallbladder contents are sterile. Infection occurs eventu-
ally, and in elderly patients or those with diabetes mel-
litus a severe infection with gas-forming organisms can 
cause emphysematous cholecystitis. Acalculous chole-
cystitis can occur in the intensive care setting and in 
association with parenteral nutrition, sickle cell disease 
and diabetes mellitus.
Clinical features
The cardinal feature is pain in the right upper quadrant 
but also in the epigastrium, the right shoulder tip or 
the interscapular region. Differentiation between biliary 
colic (p. 982) and acute cholecystitis may be difficult; 
gallstones and are best regarded as functional dyspepsia 
(p. 852).
Acute and chronic cholecystitis is described below.
A mucocele may develop if there is slow distension 
of the gallbladder from continuous secretion of mucus; 
if this material becomes infected, an empyema super-
venes. Calcium may be secreted into the lumen of the 
hydropic gallbladder, causing ‘limey’ bile, and if calcium 
salts are precipitated in the gallbladder wall, the radio-
logical appearance of ‘porcelain’ gallbladder results.
Gallstones in the gallbladder (cholecystolithiasis) 
migrate to the common bile duct (choledocholithiasis, 
p. 984) in approximately 15% of patients and cause 
biliary colic. Rarely, fistulae develop between the gall-
bladder and the duodenum, colon or stomach. If this 
occurs, air will be seen in the biliary tree on plain 
abdominal X-rays. If a stone larger than 2.5 cm in diam-
eter has migrated into the gut, it may impact either at 
the terminal ileum or occasionally in the duodenum or 
sigmoid colon. The resultant intestinal obstruction may 
be followed by ‘gallstone ileus’. Gallstones impacted in 
the cystic duct may cause stricturing of the common 
hepatic duct and the clinical picture of extrahepatic 
biliary diseases (with its important differential of malig-
nant bile duct stricture). The more common cause of 
jaundice due to gallstones is a stone passing from the 
cystic duct into the common bile duct (choledocholithi-
asis), which may also result in cholangitis or acute pan-
creatitis. It is usually very small stones that precipitate 
acute pancreatitis, due (it is thought) to oedema at the 
ampulla as the stone passes into the duodenum (no 
stone is seen within the bile duct in 80% of cases of 
presumed gallstone pancreatitis, suggesting stone 
passage). Previous stone passage is also the likely cause 
of most cases of benign papillary fibrosis, which is most 
commonly seen in patients with previous or present 
gallstone disease (it may present with jaundice, obstruc-
tive LFTs with biliary dilatation, post-cholecystectomy 
pain or acute pancreatitis).
Cancer of the gallbladder is uncommon (p. 985) but 
in over 95% of cases is associated with gallstones. The 
diagnosis is usually made as an incidental histological 
finding following cholecystectomy for gallstone disease.
Investigations
Ultrasound is the investigation of choice for diagnosing 
gallstones. Most stones are diagnosed by transabdomi-
nal ultrasound, which has a greater than 92% sensitivity 
and 99% specificity for gallbladder stones (see Fig. 23.8, 
p. 930). CT (Fig. 23.43) and MRCP are excellent modali-
ties for detecting complications of gallstones (distal bile 
duct stone or gallbladder empyema), but are inferior to 
ultrasound in defining their presence in the gallbladder. 
When recurrent attacks of otherwise unexplained acute 
pancreatitis occur, this may result from ‘microlithiasis’ 
in the gallbladder or common bile duct, and this is best 
assessed by endoscopic ultrasound (EUS).
Management
Asymptomatic gallstones found incidentally should not 
be treated because the majority will never cause symp-
toms. Symptomatic gallstones are best treated surgically 
by laparoscopic cholecystectomy, with the severity of 
symptoms being balanced against the individual patient 
surgical risk in deciding whether surgery is warranted. 
Fig. 23.43  CT showing gallstones within the gallbladder (arrow). 
Gallbladder stones
•	 Cholecystectomy: open or laparoscopic
•	 Oral bile acids: chenodeoxycholic or ursodeoxycholic (low 
rate of stone dissolution)
Bile duct stones
•	 Lithotripsy (endoscopic or extracorporeal shock wave, ESWL)
•	 Endoscopic sphincterotomy and balloon trawl
•	 Surgical bile duct exploration
23.77  Treatment of gallstones
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
984
cholecystitis but milder. The patient may recover 
spontaneously or following analgesia and antibiotics. 
Patients are usually advised to undergo elective laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy.
Acute cholangitis
Acute cholangitis is caused by bacterial infection of bile 
ducts and occurs in patients with other biliary problems, 
such as choledocholithiasis (see below), biliary strictures 
or tumours, or after ERCP. Jaundice, fever (with or 
without rigors) and right upper quadrant pain are the 
main presenting features (‘Charcot’s triad’). Treatment 
is with antibiotics, relief of biliary obstruction and 
removal (if possible) of the underlying cause.
Choledocholithiasis
Stones in the common bile duct (choledocholithiasis) 
occur in 10–15% of patients with gallstones (Fig. 23.44), 
which have usually migrated from the gallbladder. 
Primary bile duct stones are rare but can develop within 
the common bile duct many years after a cholecystec-
tomy, and are sometimes related to biliary sludge arising 
from dysfunction of the sphincter of Oddi. In Far Eastern 
countries, primary common bile duct stones are thought 
to follow bacterial infection secondary to parasitic infec-
tions with Clonorchis sinensis, Ascaris lumbricoides or Fas-
ciola hepatica (pp. 377, 371 and 379). Common bile duct 
stones can cause bile duct obstruction and may be com-
plicated by cholangitis due to secondary bacterial infec-
tion, septicaemia, liver abscess and biliary stricture.
Clinical features
Choledocholithiasis may be asymptomatic, may be 
found incidentally by operative cholangiography at 
features suggesting cholecystitis include severe and pro-
longed pain, fever and leucocytosis.
Examination shows right hypochondrial tenderness, 
rigidity worse on inspiration (Murphy’s sign) and occa-
sionally a gallbladder mass (30% of cases). Fever is 
present but rigors are unusual. Jaundice occurs in less 
than 10% of patients and is usually due to passage of 
stones into the common bile duct, or compression or 
even stricturing of the common bile duct following stone 
impaction in the cystic duct (Mirizzi’s syndrome). Gall-
bladder perforation occurs in 10–15% of cases, and gall-
bladder empyema may arise.
Investigations
Peripheral blood leucocytosis is common, except in the 
elderly patient, in whom the signs of inflammation may 
be minimal. Minor increases of transaminases and 
amylase may be encountered. Amylase should be meas-
ured to detect acute pancreatitis (p. 889), which may be 
a potentially serious complication of gallstones. Only 
when the amylase is higher than 1000 U/L can pain be 
confidently attributed to acute pancreatitis, since mod-
erately elevated levels of amylase can occur in many 
other causes of abdominal pain. Plain X-rays of the 
abdomen and chest may show radio-opaque gallstones, 
and rarely intrabiliary gas due to fistulation of a gall-
stone into the intestine; they are important in excluding 
lower lobe pneumonia and a perforated viscus. Ultra-
sonography detects gallstones and gallbladder thicken-
ing due to cholecystitis, but gallbladder empyema or 
perforation is best assessed by CT.
Management
Medical
This consists of bed rest, pain relief, antibiotics and intra-
venous fluids. Moderate pain can be treated with 
NSAIDs but more severe pain should be managed with 
opiates. A cephalosporin (such as cefuroxime) or 
piperacillin/tazobactam is the usual antibiotic of choice, 
but metronidazole is normally added in severely ill 
patients and local prescribing practice may vary. 
Nasogastric aspiration is only needed for persistent 
vomiting. Cholecystitis usually resolves with medical 
treatment, but the inflammation may progress to an 
empyema or perforation and peritonitis.
Surgical
Urgent surgery is the optimal treatment when cholecys-
titis progresses in spite of medical therapy and when 
complications such as empyema or perforation develop. 
Operation should be carried out within 5 days of the 
onset of symptoms. Delayed surgery after 2–3 months is 
no longer favoured. When cholecystectomy may be 
difficult due to extensive inflammatory change, percu­
taneous gallbladder drainage can be performed, with 
subsequent cholecystectomy 4–6 weeks later. Recurrent 
biliary colic or cholecystitis is frequent if the gallbladder 
is not removed.
Chronic cholecystitis
Chronic inflammation of the gallbladder is almost invar-
iably associated with gallstones. The usual symptoms 
are those of recurrent attacks of upper abdominal 
pain, often at night and following a heavy meal. The 
clinical features are similar to those of acute calculous 
Fig. 23.44  ERCP showing common duct stones (arrows). 
Cholestatic and biliary disease
23
985
duct is explored, the diagnosis of choledocholithiasis 
should be confirmed by intraoperative cholangiogra-
phy. If gallstones are found, the bile duct is explored, 
all stones are removed, stone clearance is checked by 
cholangiography or choledochoscopy, and a T-tube is 
inserted into the common bile duct. It is now possible 
to achieve these goals laparoscopically in specialist 
centres.
Recurrent pyogenic cholangitis
This disease occurs predominantly in South-east Asia. 
Biliary sludge, calcium bilirubinate concretions and 
stones accumulate in the intrahepatic bile ducts, with 
secondary bacterial infection. Patients present with 
recurrent attacks of upper abdominal pain, fever and 
cholestatic jaundice. Investigation of the biliary tree 
demonstrates that both the intrahepatic and the extra­
hepatic portions are filled with soft biliary mud. Eventu-
ally, the liver becomes scarred and liver abscesses and 
secondary biliary cirrhosis develop. The condition is 
difficult to manage, and requires drainage of the 
biliary tract with extraction of stones, antibiotics and, in 
certain patients, partial resection of damaged areas of 
the liver.
Tumours of the gallbladder  
and bile duct
Carcinoma of the gallbladder
This is an uncommon tumour, occurring more often in 
females and usually in those over the age of 70 years. 
More than 90% are adenocarcinomas; the remainder are 
anaplastic or, rarely, squamous tumours. Gallstones are 
present in 70–80% of cases and are thought to be impor-
tant in the aetiology of the tumour. Individuals with a 
calcified gallbladder (‘porcelain gallbladder’, p. 983) are 
at high risk of malignant change, and gallbladder polyps 
over 1 cm in size are associated with increased risk of 
malignancy; preventative cholecystectomy should be 
considered in such patients. Chronic infection with Sal-
monella, especially in areas where typhoid is endemic, is 
also a risk factor.
Carcinoma of the gallbladder may be diagnosed inci-
dentally and is found in 1–3% of gallbladders removed 
at cholecystectomy for gallstone disease. It may manifest 
as repeated attacks of biliary pain and later persistent 
jaundice and weight loss. A gallbladder mass may 
be palpable in the right hypochondrium. LFTs show 
cholestasis, and porcelain gallbladder may be found on 
X-ray. The tumour can be diagnosed by ultrasonogra-
phy and staged by CT. The treatment is surgical exci-
sion, but local extension of the tumour beyond the wall 
of the gallbladder into the liver, lymph nodes and sur-
rounding tissues is invariable and palliative manage-
ment is usually all that can be offered. Survival is 
generally short, death typically occurring within 1 year 
in patients presenting with symptoms.
Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is an uncommon tumour 
that can arise anywhere in the biliary tree, from the 
intrahepatic bile ducts (20–25% of cases) and the con­
fluence of the right and left hepatic ducts at the liver 
cholecystectomy, or may manifest as recurrent abdomi-
nal pain with or without jaundice. The pain is usually in 
the right upper quadrant, and fever, pruritus and dark 
urine may be present. Rigors may be a feature; jaundice 
is common and usually associated with pain. Physical 
examination may show the scar of a previous cholecys-
tectomy; if the gallbladder is present, it is usually small, 
fibrotic and impalpable.
Investigations
The LFTs show a cholestatic pattern and there is 
bilirubinuria. If cholangitis is present, the patient usually 
has a leucocytosis. The most convenient method of dem-
onstrating obstruction to the common bile duct is by 
transabdominal ultrasound. This shows dilated extra­
hepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts, together with gall-
bladder stones (Fig. 23.45), but does not always reveal 
the cause of the obstruction in the common bile duct; 
50% of bile duct stones are missed on ultrasound, par-
ticularly those in the distal common bile duct. EUS is 
extremely accurate at identifying bile duct stones. MRCP 
is non-invasive, and is indicated when intervention is 
not necessarily mandatory (e.g. the patient with possible 
bile duct stones but no jaundice or sepsis).
Management
Cholangitis should be treated with analgesia, intra­
venous fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as 
cefuroxime and metronidazole (local prescribing prac-
tice may vary). Blood cultures should be taken before 
the antibiotics are administered. Patients also require 
urgent decompression of the biliary tree and stone 
removal. ERCP with biliary sphincterotomy and stone 
extraction is the treatment of choice and is successful in 
about 90% of patients. If ERCP fails, other approaches 
include percutaneous transhepatic drainage and com-
bined (‘rendezvous’) endoscopic procedures, extracor-
poreal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) and surgery.
Surgical treatment of choledocholithiasis is per-
formed less frequently than ERCP because it carries 
higher morbidity and mortality. Before the common bile 
Fig. 23.45  Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) image in a patient with 
cholangitis. The dilated common bile duct (CBD) contains a small stone 
(arrow), which causes acoustic shadowing. 
CBD
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
986
Carcinoma at the ampulla of Vater
Nearly 40% of all adenocarcinomas of the small intestine 
arise in relationship to the ampulla of Vater, and present 
with pain, anaemia, vomiting and weight loss. Jaundice 
may be intermittent or persistent. The diagnosis is made 
by duodenal endoscopy and biopsy of the tumour, but 
staging by CT/MRI is essential. Ampullary carcinoma 
must be differentiated from carcinoma of the head of the 
pancreas and a cholangiocarcinoma because these latter 
conditions both have a worse prognosis. Imaging may 
show a ‘double duct sign’ with stricturing of both the 
common bile duct and pancreatic duct at the ampulla 
and upstream dilatation of the ducts. EUS is the most 
sensitive method of assessing and staging ampullary or 
periampullary tumours.
Curative surgical treatment can be undertaken by 
pancreaticoduodenectomy, and the 5-year survival may 
be as high as 50%. If resection is impossible, palliative 
surgical bypass or stenting may be necessary.
Benign gallbladder tumours
These are uncommon, often asymptomatic and usually 
found incidentally at operation or postmortem. Choles-
terol polyps, sometimes associated with cholesterolosis, 
papillomas and adenomas, are the main types.
Miscellaneous biliary disorders
Post-cholecystectomy syndrome
Dyspeptic symptoms following cholecystectomy (post-
cholecystectomy syndrome) occur in about 30% of 
patients, depending on how the condition is defined, 
how actively symptoms are sought and the original indi-
cation for cholecystectomy. The syndrome occurs most 
frequently in women, in patients who have had symp-
toms for more than 5 years before cholecystectomy, and 
when the operation was undertaken for non-calculous 
hilum (50–60%) to the distal common bile duct (20%). 
It accounts for only 1.5% of all cancers but the incidence 
is increasing. The cause is unknown but the tumour 
is associated with gallstones, primary and secondary 
sclerosing cholangitis, Caroli’s disease and choledochal 
cysts (see Fig. 23.42, p. 981). In the Far East, particularly 
northern Thailand, chronic liver fluke infection (Clonor-
chis sinensis) is a major risk factor for the development 
of CCA in men. Primary sclerosing cholangitis carries a 
lifetime risk of CCA of approximately 20%, although 
only 5% of CCAs relate to primary sclerosing chol­
angitis. Chronic biliary inflammation appears to be a 
common factor in the development of biliary dysplasia 
and cancer that is shared by all the predisposing 
causes.
Tumours typically invade the lymphatics and adja-
cent vessels, with a predilection for spread within 
perineural sheaths. The presentation is usually with 
obstructive jaundice. About 50% of patients also have 
upper abdominal pain and weight loss. The diagnosis 
is made by a combination of CT and MRI but can be 
difficult to confirm in patients with sclerosing chol­
angitis. Serum levels of the tumour marker CA19–9 are 
elevated in up to 80% of cases, although this may occur 
in biliary obstruction of any cause. In the setting of 
biliary obstruction, ERCP may result in positive biliary 
cytology. Endoscopic ultrasound-fine needle aspiration 
(EUS-FNA) of bile duct masses is sometimes possible, 
and in specialist centres single-operator cholangioscopy 
with biopsy is now established. CCAs can be treated 
surgically in about 20% of patients, which improves 
5-year survival from less than 5% to 20–40%. Surgery 
involves excision of the extrahepatic biliary tree with or 
without a liver resection and a Roux loop reconstruction. 
However, most patients are treated by stent insertion 
across the malignant biliary stricture, using endoscopic 
or transhepatic techniques (Fig. 23.46). Combination 
chemotherapy is increasingly used and palliation with 
endoscopic photodynamic therapy has provided encour-
aging results.
Fig. 23.46  Cholangiocarcinoma. A ERCP showing malignant biliary stricture (bottom arrow) and dilated intrahepatic bile ducts above (top arrow).
 B Post-ERCP stenting showing plastic endobiliary stent (arrow), which will drain bile from the dilated ducts above the stricture into the duodenum. 
B
A
Cholestatic and biliary disease
23
987
slowly draining bile duct. The gold standard for diagno-
sis is sphincter of Oddi manometry. This is not, however, 
widely available and is associated with a high rate of 
procedure-related pancreatitis.
Management
All biliary SOD patients with type I disease are treated 
with endoscopic sphincterotomy. The results are good 
but patients should be warned that there is a high risk 
of complications, particularly acute pancreatitis. Man-
ometry should ideally be performed in all suspected 
SOD type II and III patients, and ‘speculative’ sphincter-
otomy should be avoided. In type III patients without 
documented evidence of sphincter hypertension, 
medical therapy with nifedipine and/or low-dose 
amitriptyline may be tried. The role of botulinum toxin 
(‘botox’) injection into the sphincter to improve sphinc-
ter function remains unclear.
Pancreatic SOD can be treated with pancreatic stent-
ing followed by pancreatic sphincterotomy, carried out 
in specialised units. Emerging evidence suggests that 
all patients being investigated by ERCP for suspected 
SOD should also undergo prophylactic pancreatic duct 
stenting, because this significantly reduces the rate 
of procedure-related acute pancreatitis.
Cholesterolosis of the gallbladder
In this condition, lipid deposits in the submucosa and 
epithelium appear as multiple yellow spots on the pink 
mucosa, giving rise to the description ‘strawberry gall-
bladder’. Cholesterolosis of the gallbladder is usually 
asymptomatic but may occasionally present with right 
upper quadrant pain. Small, fixed filling defects may be 
visible on ultrasonography; the radiologist can usually 
differentiate between gallstones and cholesterolosis. 
gallbladder disease. An increase in bowel habit resulting 
from bile acid diarrhoea occurs in about 5–10% of 
patients after cholecystectomy, and often responds to 
colestyramine 4–8 g daily. Severe post-cholecystectomy 
syndrome occurs in only 2–5% of patients. The main 
causes are listed in Box 23.78.
The usual symptoms include right upper quadrant 
pain, flatulence, fatty food intolerance, and occasionally 
jaundice and cholangitis. The LFTs may be abnormal 
and sometimes show cholestasis. Ultrasonography is 
used to detect biliary obstruction, and EUS or MRCP is 
used to seek common bile duct stones. If retained bile 
duct stones are excluded, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction 
should be considered (see below). Other investigations 
that may be required include upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy, small bowel radiology and pancreatic func-
tion tests. The possibility of a functional illness should 
also be considered.
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
The sphincter of Oddi is a small smooth muscle sphinc-
ter situated at the junction of the bile duct and pancreatic 
duct in the duodenum. Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction 
(SOD) is characterised by an increase in contractility 
that produces a benign non-calculous obstruction to 
the flow of bile or pancreatic juice. This may cause pan-
creaticobiliary pain, deranged LFTs or recurrent pan-
creatitis. A clinical classification system, based on clinical 
history, laboratory results and ERCP findings, is widely 
used (Boxes 23.79 and 23.80).
Clinical features
Patients with SOD, who are predominantly female, 
present with symptoms and signs suggestive of either 
biliary or pancreatic disease.
•	 Patients with biliary-type SOD experience recurrent, 
episodic biliary-type pain. They have often had a 
cholecystectomy but the gallbladder may be intact.
•	 Patients with pancreatic SOD usually present with 
unexplained recurrent attacks of pancreatitis.
Investigations
The diagnosis is established by excluding gallstones, 
including microlithiasis, and demonstrating a dilated or 
Immediate post-surgical
•	 Bleeding
•	 Biliary peritonitis
•	 Abscess
•	 Bile duct trauma/transection
•	 Fistula
Biliary
•	 Common bile duct stones
•	 Benign stricture
•	 Tumour
•	 Cystic duct stump 
syndrome
•	 Disorders of the ampulla of 
Vater (e.g. benign papillary 
fibrosis; sphincter of Oddi 
dysfunction)
Extrabiliary
•	 Non-ulcer dyspepsia
•	 Peptic ulcer
•	 Pancreatic disease
•	 Gastro-oesophageal reflux
•	 Irritable bowel syndrome
•	 Functional abdominal pain
23.78  Causes of post-cholecystectomy symptoms
Pancreatic type I
•	 Pancreatic-type pain
•	 Twice normal amylase or lipase
•	 Pancreatic duct > 6 mm in the head or 5 mm in the body
Pancreatic type II
•	 Pancreatic-type pain with only one of the above criteria
Pancreatic type III
•	 Pancreatic-type pain with no other abnormalities
23.80  Classification of pancreatic sphincter of 
Oddi dysfunction
Biliary type I
•	 Biliary-type pain
•	 Abnormal liver enzymes (ALT/AST > twice normal on two or 
more occasions)
•	 Dilated common bile duct (> 12 mm diameter)
•	 Delayed drainage of ERCP contrast beyond 45 mins
Biliary type II
•	 Biliary-type pain with one or two of the above criteria
Biliary type III
•	 Biliary-type pain with no other abnormalities
23.79  Classification of biliary sphincter of 
Oddi dysfunction
Liver and biliary tract disease 
23
988
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Books and journal articles
Day CP. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: current  
concepts and management strategies. Clin Med 2008; 
6:19–25.
Neuberger J, Gimson A, Davies M, et al. Selection  
of patients for liver transplantation and allocation  
of donated livers in the UK. Gut 2008;  
57:252–257.
Ratziu V, Bellentani S, Cortez-Pinto H, et al. A position 
statement on NAFLD/NASH based on the EASL 2009 
special conference. J Hepatol 2010; 53:372–384.
Websites
www.aasld.org American Association for the Study of Liver 
Diseases (guidelines available).
www.bsg.org.uk British Society of Gastroenterology (guidelines 
available).
www.easl.ch European Association for the Study of the Liver 
(guidelines available).
www.eltr.org European Liver Transplant Registry.
www.unos.org United Network for Organ Sharing: 
US transplant register.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 922 insets (Spider naevi) Hayes P, Simpson K. 
Gastroenterology and liver disease. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone; 1995; copyright Elsevier; (Aspiration) 
Strachan M. Davidson’s clinical cases. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2008 (Fig. 65.1); (Palmar erythema) 
Martin P. Approach to the patient with liver disease. In: 
Goldman’s Cecil Medicine, Goldman L and Schafter AI. 
24th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2012; Fig. 1148-2,  
p. 954.
Fig. 23.35 Based on EASL–EORTC Clinical Practice 
Guidelines, Management of hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Journal of Hepatology 2012, 56:908–943.
Fig. 23.42 Shearman DC, Finlayson NDC. Diseases 
of the gastrointestinal tract and liver. 2nd edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1989; copyright 
Elsevier.
The condition is usually diagnosed at cholecystectomy; 
if the diagnosis is made radiologically, cholecystectomy 
may be indicated, depending on symptoms.
Adenomyomatosis of  
the gallbladder
In this condition, there is hyperplasia of the muscle and 
mucosa of the gallbladder. The projection of pouches of 
mucous membrane through weak points in the muscle 
coat produces Rokitansky–Aschoff sinuses. There is 
much disagreement over whether adenomyomatosis is 
a cause of right upper quadrant pain or other gastro­
intestinal symptoms. It may be diagnosed by oral chole-
cystography, when a halo or ring of opacified diverticula 
can be seen around the gallbladder. Other appearances 
include deformity of the body of the gallbladder or 
marked irregularity of the outline. Localised adenomyo-
matosis in the region of the gallbladder fundus causes 
the appearance of a ‘Phrygian cap’. Most patients are 
treated by cholecystectomy but only after excluding 
other diseases in the upper gastrointestinal tract.
IgG4-associated cholangitis
This recently reported disease often presents with 
obstructive jaundice and is discussed fully on page 966.
•	 Gallstones: by the age of 70 years, prevalence is around 
30% in women and 19% in men.
•	 Acute cholecystitis: tends to be severe, may have few 
localising signs, and is associated with a high frequency of 
empyema and perforation. If such complications supervene, 
mortality may reach 20%.
•	 Cholecystectomy: mortality after urgent cholecystectomy for 
acute uncomplicated cholecystitis is not significantly higher 
than in younger patients.
•	 Endoscopic sphincterotomy and removal of common 
duct stones: well tolerated by older patients, with lower 
mortality than surgical common bile duct exploration.
•	 Cancer of the gallbladder: a disease of old age, with a 
1-year survival of 10%.
23.81  Gallbladder disease in old age
989
24 
Clinical examination in blood disease 990
Functional anatomy and physiology 992
Haematopoiesis 992
Blood cells and their functions 994
Haemostasis 996
Investigation of diseases of the blood 998
The full blood count 998
Blood film examination 998
Bone marrow examination 998
Investigation of coagulation 999
Presenting problems in blood disease 1001
Anaemia 1001
High haemoglobin 1003
Leucopenia (low white cell count) 1004
Leucocytosis (high white cell count) 1005
Lymphadenopathy 1005
Splenomegaly 1006
Bleeding 1006
Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count) 1007
Thrombocytosis (high platelet count) 1008
Pancytopenia 1008
Infection 1008
Venous thrombosis 1008
Blood disease
Haematological malignancies 1035
Leukaemias 1035
Lymphomas 1041
Paraproteinaemias 1045
Aplastic anaemia 1048
Primary idiopathic acquired aplastic  
anaemia 1048
Secondary aplastic anaemia 1048
Myeloproliferative neoplasms 1048
Bleeding disorders 1049
Disorders of primary haemostasis 1049
Coagulation disorders 1050
Thrombotic disorders 1054
H.G. Watson
J.I.O. Craig
L.M. Manson
Blood products and transfusion 1011
Blood products 1011
Adverse effects of transfusion 1012
Safe transfusion procedures 1015
Haematopoietic stem cell  
transplantation 1017
Anticoagulant and antithrombotic  
therapy 1018
Heparins 1018
Coumarins 1019
Prophylaxis of venous thrombosis 1020
Anaemias 1021
Iron deficiency anaemia 1021
Anaemia of chronic disease 1023
Megaloblastic anaemia 1024
Haemolytic anaemia 1026
Haemoglobinopathies 1031
Blood disease
990
Insets (Glossitis) From Hoffbrand, et al. 2010; (Petechiae) Young, et al. 2006 – see p. 1056.
Observation
Hands
Perfusion
Telangiectasia
Skin crease pallor
Koilonychia
Pulse
Rate
Mouth
Lips: angular stomatitis,
telangiectasia
Gum hypertrophy
Tongue: colour, smoothness
Buccal mucosa: petechiae
Tonsils: size
Conjunctivae
Pallor
Jaundice
Lymph nodes
(see opposite)     
Abdomen
Masses
Ascites
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Inguinal and femoral lymph nodes
Feet
Peripheral circulation
Toes: gangrene
Joints
Deformity
Swelling
Restricted movement
• General well-being
• Colour: pallor, plethora
• Breathlessness
Urinalysis
Blood
Urobilinogen
Hereditary haemorrhagic
telangiectasia
Fundi
Haemorrhage
Hyperviscosity
  Engorged veins
  Papilloedema
  Haemorrhage
Fundal haemorrhage in
thrombocytopenia
Purpura/petechiae in
thrombocytopenia
Gangrenous toe in
thrombocytosis
Swollen joint in haemophilia
Koilonychia in iron
deficiency
6
Skin
Purpura
Bruising
7
5
8
1
9
10
11
2
4
3
Gum hypertrophy in
acute myeloid leukaemia
Glossitis and angular
stomatitis in iron deficiency
CLINICAL EXAMINATION IN BLOOD DISEASE
Clinical examination in blood disease
991
Abnormalities detected in the blood 
are caused not only by primary 
diseases of the blood and lympho­
reticular 
systems, 
but 
also 
by 
diseases affecting other systems 
of the body. The clinical assessment 
of patients with haematological 
History
• Site of bleed
• Duration of bleed
• Precipitating causes, including 
previous surgery or trauma
• Family history
• Drug history
• Age at presentation
• Other medical conditions, e.g. liver 
disease
Examination
There are two main patterns of bleeding:
1. Mucosal bleeding
Reduced number or function of 
platelets (e.g. bone marrow failure or 
aspirin) or von Willebrand factor (e.g. 
von Willebrand disease)
Skin: petechiae, bruises
Gum and mucous membrane 
bleeding
Fundal haemorrhage
Post-surgical bleeding
2. Coagulation factor deficiency 
(e.g. haemophilia or warfarin)
Bleeding into joints (haemarthrosis) 
or muscles
Bleeding into soft tissues
Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
Intracranial haemorrhage
Post-surgical bleeding
Bleeding
Non-specific symptoms
• Tiredness
• Lightheadedness
• Breathlessness
• Development/worsening of ischaemic 
symptoms, e.g. angina or claudication
Non-specific signs
• Mucous membrane pallor
• Tachypnoea
• Raised jugular venous pressure
• Tachycardia
• Flow murmurs
• Ankle oedema
• Postural hypotension
Anaemia
Pre-auricular
Parotid
Submandibular
Submental
Posterior cervical
Supraclavicular
Anterior cervical
Supraclavicular
Axillary
Epitrochlear
Inguinal
Femoral
Popliteal
fossa
6  Lymphadenopathy
Lymphadenopathy can be caused by benign or malignant disease. The clinical points to 
clarify are shown in the box.
History
• Speed of onset, rate of enlargement
• Painful or painless
• Associated symptoms: weight loss, 
night sweats, itch
Examination
• Sites: localised, generalised
• Size (cm)
• Character: hard, soft, rubbery
• Fixed, mobile
• Search area that node drains for 
abnormalities (e.g. dental abscess)
• Other general examination (e.g. joints, 
rashes, finger clubbing)
Lymphadenopathy
abnormalities 
must 
include 
a 
general history and examination, as 
well as a search for symptoms and 
signs of abnormalities of red cells, 
white cells, platelets, haemostatic 
systems, lymph nodes and lympho­
reticular tissues.
Anaemia
Symptoms and signs help to indicate 
the clinical severity of anaemia. A full 
history and examination is needed to 
identify the underlying cause.
Bleeding
Bleeding can be due to congenital 
or acquired abnormalities in the clot­
ting system. History and examina­
tion help to clarify the severity and 
underlying cause of the bleeding.
8  Examination of the spleen
• Move hand up from right iliac fossa, 
towards left upper quadrant on 
expiration.
• Keep hand still and ask patient to take 
a deep breath through the mouth to 
feel spleen edge being displaced 
downwards.
• Place your left hand around patient’s 
lower ribs and approach costal margin 
to pull spleen forwards.
• To help palpate small spleens, roll the 
patient on to the right side and 
examine as before.
• Notch
• Superficial
• Dull to percussion
• Cannot get examining hand between 
ribs and spleen
• Moves well with respiration
Characteristics of the spleen
Blood disease
24
992
Disorders of the blood cover a wide spectrum of ill­
nesses, ranging from some of the most common disor­
ders affecting mankind (anaemias) to relatively rare 
conditions such as leukaemias and congenital coagula­
tion disorders. Although the latter are uncommon, 
advances in cellular and molecular biology have had 
major impacts on their diagnosis, treatment and prog­
nosis. Haematological changes occur as a consequence 
of diseases affecting any system and give important 
information in the diagnosis and monitoring of many 
conditions.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY 
AND PHYSIOLOGY
Blood flows throughout the body in the vascular system, 
and consists of:
•	 red cells, which transport oxygen from the lungs to 
the tissues
•	 white cells, which defend against infection
•	 platelets, which interact with blood vessels and 
clotting factors to maintain vascular integrity and 
prevent bleeding
•	 plasma, which contains proteins with many 
functions, including antibodies and coagulation 
factors.
Haematopoiesis
Haematopoiesis describes the formation of blood cells, 
an active process that must maintain normal numbers of 
circulating cells and be able to respond rapidly to 
increased demands such as bleeding or infection. During 
development, haematopoiesis occurs in the liver and 
spleen, and subsequently in red bone marrow in the 
medullary cavity of all bones. In childhood, red marrow 
is progressively replaced by fat (yellow marrow), so 
that, in adults, normal haematopoiesis is restricted to the 
vertebrae, pelvis, sternum, ribs, clavicles, skull, upper 
Fig. 24.1  Structural organisation of normal bone marrow. 
Megakaryocyte
Bony trabecula
Neutrophil
Erythroid 'nest'
Vascular sinusoid
Fat cell
Myelocyte
Blast cells and
progenitor cells
Lymphocyte
humeri and proximal femora. However, red marrow 
can expand in response to increased demands for 
blood cells.
Bone marrow contains a range of immature haemato­
poietic precursor cells and a storage pool of mature 
cells for release at times of increased demand. Haem­
atopoietic cells interact closely with surrounding 
connective tissue stroma, made up of reticular cells, 
macrophages, fat cells, blood vessels and nerve fibres 
(Fig. 24.1). In normal marrow, nests of red cell precur­
sors cluster around a central macrophage, which pro­
vides iron and also phagocytoses nuclei from red cells 
prior to their release into the circulation. Megakaryo­
cytes are large cells which produce and release platelets 
into vascular sinuses. White cell precursors are clustered 
next to the bone trabeculae; maturing cells migrate into 
the marrow spaces towards the vascular sinuses. Plasma 
cells are antibody-secreting mature B cells which nor­
mally represent less than 5% of the marrow population 
and are scattered throughout the intertrabecular spaces.
Stem cells
All blood cells are derived from pluripotent haemato­
poietic stem cells. These comprise only 0.01% of the 
total marrow cells, but they can self-renew (i.e. make 
more stem cells) or differentiate to produce a hierarchy 
of lineage-committed stem cells. The resulting primi­
tive progenitor cells cannot be identified morphologi­
cally, so they are named according to the types of cell 
(or colony) they form during cell culture experiments. 
CFU–GM (colony-forming unit – granulocyte, mono­
cyte) are stem cells that produce granulocytic and 
monocytic lines, CFU–E produce erythroid cells, and 
CFU–Meg produce megakaryocytes and ultimately 
platelets (Fig. 24.2).
Growth factors, produced in bone marrow stromal 
cells and elsewhere, control the survival, proliferation, 
differentiation and function of stem cells and their 
progeny. Some, such as interleukin-3 (IL-3), stem cell 
factor (SCF) and granulocyte, macrophage–colony-
stimulating factor (GM–CSF), act on a wide number of 
cell types at various stages of differentiation. Others, 
Functional anatomy and physiology
24
993
anaemia and G–CSF to hasten neutrophil recovery 
after chemotherapy.
The bone marrow also contains stem cells which can 
differentiate into non-haematological cells, such as 
nerve, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, liver and blood 
such as erythropoietin (Epo), granulocyte–colony-
stimulating factor (G–CSF) and thrombopoietin (Tpo), 
are lineage-specific. Many of these growth factors are 
now synthesised by recombinant DNA technology and 
used as treatments: for example, Epo to correct renal 
Fig. 24.2  Stem cells and growth factors in haematopoietic cell development. (BFU-E = burst-forming unit – erythroid; CFU–E = colony-forming 
unit – erythroid; CFU–GM = colony-forming unit – granulocyte, monocyte; CFU–Meg = colony-forming unit – megakaryocyte; Epo = erythropoietin; G–CSF 
= granulocyte–colony-stimulating factor; GM–CSF = granulocyte, macrophage–colony-stimulating factor; IL = interleukin; M–CSF = macrophage–colony-
stimulating factor; SCF = stem cell factor; Tpo = thrombopoietin) 
Thymocyte
Thymus
CFU – E
BFU – E
Epo
Megakaryo-
blast
CFU – Meg
Tpo
CFU – GM
IL-3, SCF
G – CSF
GM – CSF, IL-5
GM – CSF, M – CSF
Pre-B
stem cell
IL-4, IL-7
IL-2, IL-4, IL-7
Myeloid
stem cell
Lymphoid
stem cell
IL-3
Pluripotent
stem cell
IL-3
IL-3, GM – CSF, IL-6
IL-3, GM – CSF
IL-3, GM – CSF,
SCF, IL-12
SCF
IL-6
IL-11
SCF
IL-3
SCF
IL-7
T cells
B cells
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Neutrophils
Platelets
Red cells
Fig. 24.3  Maturation pathway of red cells, granulocytes and platelets. The image on the right is normal blood film. 
Myeloblast
Promyelocyte
Myelocyte
Metamyelocyte
Neutrophil
Pronormoblast
Early normoblast
Late normoblast
Megakaryoblast
Megakaryocyte
Platelet
Reticulocyte
Red blood
cell
Blood disease
24
994
vessel endothelium. This is termed stem-cell plasticity 
and may have exciting clinical applications in the future 
(Ch. 3).
Blood cells and their functions
Red cells
Red cell precursors formed in the bone marrow from the 
erythroid (CFU–E) progenitor cells are called erythro­
blasts or normoblasts (Fig. 24.3). These divide and 
acquire haemoglobin, which turns the cytoplasm pink; 
the nucleus condenses and is extruded from the cell. The 
first non-nucleated red cell is a reticulocyte, which still 
contains ribosomal material in the cytoplasm, giving 
these large cells a faint blue tinge (‘polychromasia’). 
Reticulocytes lose their ribosomal material and mature 
over 3 days, during which time they are released into 
the circulation. Increased numbers of circulating retic­
ulocytes (reticulocytosis) reflect increased erythropoie­
sis. Proliferation and differentiation of red cell precursors 
is stimulated by erythropoietin, a polypeptide hormone 
produced by renal interstitial peritubular cells in 
response to hypoxia. Failure of erythropoietin produc­
tion in patients with renal failure (p. 478) causes anaemia, 
which can be treated with exogenous recombinant 
erythropoietin.
Normal mature red cells circulate for about 120 days. 
They are 8 µm biconcave discs lacking a nucleus but 
filled with haemoglobin, which delivers oxygen to the 
tissues. In order to pass through the smallest capillaries, 
the red cell membrane is deformable, with a lipid bilayer 
to which a ‘skeleton’ of filamentous proteins is attached 
via special linkage proteins (Fig. 24.4). Inherited abnor­
malities of any of these proteins result in loss of mem­
brane as cells pass through the spleen, and the formation 
Fig. 24.4  Normal structure of red cell membrane. Red cell membrane flexibility is conferred by attachment of cytoskeletal proteins. Important 
transmembrane proteins include band 3 (an ion transport channel) and glycophorin (involved in cytoskeletal attachment and gas exchange, and a receptor 
for Plasmodium falciparum in malaria). Antigens on the red blood cell determine an individual’s blood group. There are about 22 blood group systems 
(groups of carbohydrate or protein antigens controlled by a single gene or by multiple closely linked loci); the most important clinically are the ABO and 
Rhesus (Rh) systems (p. 1012). The ABO genetic locus has three main allelic forms: A, B and O. The A and B alleles encode glycosyltransferases that 
introduce N-acetylgalactosamine (open circle) and D-galactose (blue circle), respectively, on to antigenic carbohydrate molecules on the membrane surface. 
People with the O allele produce an O antigen, which lacks either of these added sugar groups. Rh antigens are transmembrane proteins. 
RhD antigen
Blood group
O antigen
Blood group
A antigen
Blood group
B antigen
Alpha spectrin
Beta spectrin
Ankyrin
Band 3
Protein 4.1
Adducin
Glycophorin C
Membrane
 40% lipid
 50% protein
 10% carbohydrate
Cytoskeleton
of abnormally shaped red cells called spherocytes or 
elliptocytes (see Fig. 24.8D, p. 999). Red cells are exposed 
to osmotic stress in the pulmonary and renal circulation; 
in order to maintain homeostasis, the membrane con­
tains ion pumps, which control intracellular levels of 
sodium, potassium, chloride and bicarbonate. In the 
absence of mitochondria, the energy for these functions 
is provided by anaerobic glycolysis and the pentose 
phosphate pathway in the cytosol. Membrane glycopro­
teins inserted into the lipid bilayer also form the anti­
gens recognised by blood grouping (see Fig. 24.4). The 
ABO and Rhesus systems are the most commonly rec­
ognised (p. 1012), but over 400 blood group antigens 
have been described.
Haemoglobin
Haemoglobin is a protein specially adapted for oxygen 
transport. It is composed of four globin chains, each sur­
rounding an iron-containing porphyrin pigment mole­
cule termed haem. Globin chains are a combination of 
two alpha and two non-alpha chains; haemoglobin A 
(αα/ββ) represents over 90% of adult haemoglobin, 
whereas haemoglobin F (αα/γγ) is the predominant type 
in the fetus. Each haem molecule contains a ferrous ion 
(Fe2+), to which oxygen reversibly binds; the affinity for 
oxygen increases as successive oxygen molecules bind. 
When oxygen is bound, the beta chains ‘swing’ closer 
together; they move apart as oxygen is lost. In the ‘open’ 
deoxygenated state, 2,3 diphosphoglycerate (DPG), a 
product of red cell metabolism, binds to the haemo­
globin molecule and lowers its oxygen affinity. These 
complex interactions produce the sigmoid shape of the 
oxygen dissociation curve (Fig. 24.5). The position of this 
curve depends upon the concentrations of 2,3 DPG, H+ 
ions and CO2; increased levels shift the curve to the right 
and cause oxygen to be released more readily, e.g. when 
Functional anatomy and physiology
24
995
the production of myeloid cells, and G–CSF can be 
used clinically to hasten recovery of blood neutrophil 
counts after chemotherapy.
Myelocytes or metamyelocytes are normally found 
only in the marrow but may appear in the circulation in 
infection or toxic states. The appearance of more primi­
tive myeloid precursors in the blood is often associated 
with the presence of nucleated red cells and is termed a 
‘leucoerythroblastic’ picture; this indicates a serious dis­
turbance of marrow function.
Neutrophils
Neutrophils, the most common white blood cells in the 
blood of adults, are 10–14 µm in diameter, with a multi­
lobular nucleus containing 2–5 segments and granules 
in their cytoplasm. Their main function is to recognise, 
ingest and destroy foreign particles and microorganisms 
(p. 72). A large storage pool of mature neutrophils exists 
in the bone marrow. Every day, some 1011 neutrophils 
enter the circulation, where cells may be circulating 
freely or attached to endothelium in the marginating 
pool. These two pools are equal in size; factors such as 
exercise or catecholamines increase the number of cells 
flowing in the blood. Neutrophils spend 6–10 hours in 
the circulation before being removed, principally by the 
spleen. Alternatively, they pass into the tissues and 
either are consumed in the inflammatory process or 
undergo apoptotic cell death and phagocytosis by 
macrophages.
Eosinophils
Eosinophils represent 1–6% of the circulating white cells. 
They are a similar size to neutrophils but have a bilobed 
nucleus and prominent orange granules on Romanowsky 
staining. Eosinophils are phagocytic and their granules 
contain a peroxidase capable of generating reactive 
oxygen species and proteins involved in the intracellular 
killing of protozoa and helminths (p. 311). They are also 
involved in allergic reactions (e.g. atopic asthma, p. 666; 
see also p. 89).
Basophils
These cells are less common than eosinophils, represent­
ing less than 1% of circulating white cells. They contain 
dense black granules which obscure the nucleus. Mast 
cells resemble basophils but are found only in the 
tissues. These cells are involved in hypersensitivity 
reactions (p. 75).
Monocytes
Monocytes are the largest of the white cells, with a diam­
eter of 12–20 µm and an irregular nucleus in abundant 
pale blue cytoplasm containing occasional cytoplasmic 
vacuoles. These cells circulate for a few hours and then 
migrate into tissue, where they become macrophages, 
Kupffer cells or antigen-presenting dendritic cells. The 
former phagocytose debris, apoptotic cells and micro­
organisms (see Box 4.1, p. 74).
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes are derived from pluripotent haematopoi­
etic stem cells in the bone marrow. There are two main 
types: T cells (which mediate cellular immunity) and B 
cells (which mediate humoral immunity) (p. 77). Lym­
phoid cells that migrate to the thymus develop into T 
cells, whereas B cells develop in the bone marrow.
red cells reach hypoxic tissues. Haemoglobin F is unable 
to bind 2,3 DPG and has a left-shifted oxygen dissocia­
tion curve, which, together with the low pH of fetal 
blood, ensures fetal oxygenation.
Genetic mutations affecting the haem-binding pockets 
of globin chains or the ‘hinge’ interactions between 
globin chains result in haemoglobinopathies or unstable 
haemoglobins. Alpha globin chains are produced by two 
genes on chromosome 16, and beta globin chains by a 
single gene on chromosome 11; imbalance in the pro­
duction of globin chains results in the thalassaemias 
(p. 1034). Defects in haem synthesis cause the porphyrias 
(p. 458).
Destruction
Red cells at the end of their lifespan of approximately 
120 days are phagocytosed by the reticulo-endothelial 
system. Amino acids from globin chains are recycled 
and iron is removed from haem for re-use in haemo­
globin synthesis. The remnant haem structure is 
degraded to bilirubin and conjugated with glucuronic 
acid before being excreted in bile. In the small bowel, 
bilirubin is converted to stercobilin; most of this is 
excreted, but a small amount is reabsorbed and excreted 
by the kidney as urobilinogen. Increased red cell destruc­
tion due to haemolysis or ineffective haematopoiesis 
results in jaundice and increased urinary urobilinogen. 
Free intravascular haemoglobin is toxic and is normally 
bound by haptoglobins, which are plasma proteins pro­
duced by the liver.
White cells
White cells or leucocytes in the blood consist of granu­
locytes (neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils), mono­
cytes and lymphocytes (see Fig. 24.12, p. 1004). 
Granulocytes and monocytes are formed from bone 
marrow CFU–GM progenitor cells during myelopoie­
sis. The first recognisable granulocyte in the marrow is 
the myeloblast, a large cell with a small amount of 
basophilic cytoplasm and a primitive nucleus with 
open chromatin and nucleoli. As the cells divide and 
mature, the nucleus segments and the cytoplasm 
acquires specific neutrophilic, eosinophilic or basophilic 
granules (see Fig. 24.3). This takes about 14 days. The 
cytokines G–CSF, GM–CSF and M–CSF are involved in 
Fig. 24.5  The haemoglobin oxygen dissociation curve. Factors are 
listed which shift the curve to the right (more oxygen released from blood) 
and to the left (less oxygen released) at given PO2. (To convert kPa to 
mmHg, multiply by 7.5.) 
P O2 (kPa)
Normal
arterial PO2
Normal
venous PO2
Saturation of haemoglobin (%)
0
100
75
50
25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2,3 DPG
H+
CO2
Temperature
Shift to left
2,3 DPG
H+
CO2
Temperature
Shift to right
Blood disease
24
996
Fig. 24.6  The stages of normal 
haemostasis.  
 A Stage 1 Pre-injury conditions encourage flow 
The vascular endothelium produces substances 
(including nitric oxide, prostacyclin and 
heparans) to prevent adhesion of platelets and 
white cells to the vessel wall. Platelets and 
coagulation factors circulate in a non-activated 
state.
 B Stage 2 Early haemostatic response: 
platelets adhere; coagulation is activated. At the 
site of injury, the endothelium is breached, 
exposing subendothelial collagen. Small amounts 
of tissue factor (TF) are released. Platelets bind 
to collagen via a specific receptor, glycoprotein 
Ia (GPIa), causing a change in platelet shape and 
its adhesion to the area of damage by the 
binding of other receptors (GPIb and GPIIb/IIIa) to 
von Willebrand factor and fibrinogen, 
respectively. Coagulation is activated by the 
tissue factor (extrinsic) pathway, generating 
small amounts of thrombin.
 C Stage 3 Fibrin clot formation: platelets 
become activated and aggregate; fibrin formation 
is supported by the platelet membrane; stable 
fibrin clot forms. The adherent platelets are 
activated by many pathways, including binding of 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP), collagen, thrombin 
and adrenaline (epinephrine) to surface 
receptors. The cyclo-oxygenase pathway 
converts arachidonic acid from the platelet 
membrane into thromboxane A2, which causes 
aggregation of platelets. Activation of the 
platelets results in release of the platelet granule 
contents, enhancing coagulation further (see Fig. 
24.7). Thrombin plays a key role in the control 
of coagulation: the small amount generated via 
the TF pathway massively amplifies its own 
production; the ‘intrinsic’ pathway becomes 
A B
Thrombin
Vascular endothelium
Heparans
Red cell
Nitric oxide
Prostacyclin
Platelet
Activated platelet
Tissue
factor
GPIIb/IIIa binds
fibrinogen
GPIa binds collagen
GPIb binds von
Willebrand factor
Coagulation
activation by tissue
factor pathway
Subendothelium collagen
A
B
C
A B
A
B
Thrombin
Thrombin
receptor
Platelet
activation
Inhibition of
fibrinolysis
Clot
stabilisation
Cleavage of
fibrinogen
TAFI
XIII
FPs
XIIIa
TAFIa
Intrinsic pathway
Activation of
protein C pathway
Activation of tissue
factor pathway
Tissue
factor
The majority (about 80%) of lymphocytes in the cir­
culation are T cells. Lymphocytes are heterogeneous, the 
smallest being the size of red cells and the largest the 
size of neutrophils. Small lymphocytes are circular with 
scanty cytoplasm but larger cells are more irregular with 
abundant blue cytoplasm. Lymphocyte subpopulations 
have specific functions and lifespan can vary from a few 
days to many years. Cell surface antigens (‘cluster of 
differentiation’ (CD) antigens), which appear at different 
points of lymphocyte maturation, are used to classify 
lymphomas and lymphoid leukaemias.
Haemostasis
Blood must be maintained in a fluid state in order to 
function as a transport system, but must be able to solid­
ify to form a clot following vascular injury in order to 
prevent excessive bleeding, a process known as haemo­
stasis. Successful haemostasis is localised to the area of 
tissue damage and is followed by removal of the clot and 
tissue repair. This is achieved by complex interactions 
between the vascular endothelium, platelets, coagula­
tion factors, natural anticoagulants and fibrinolytic 
enzymes (Fig. 24.6). Dysfunction of any of these compo­
nents may result in haemorrhage or thrombosis.
Platelets
Platelets are formed in the bone marrow from mega­
karyocytes. Megakaryocytic stem cells (CFU–Meg) 
divide to form megakaryoblasts, which undergo a 
process called ‘endomitotic reduplication’, in which 
there is division of the nucleus but not the cell. This 
creates mature megakaryocytes, large cells with several 
nuclei and cytoplasm containing platelet granules. Large 
numbers of platelets then fragment off from each 
megakaryocyte into the circulation. The formation and 
maturation of megakaryocytes are stimulated by 
thrombopoietin produced in the liver. Platelets circulate 
for 8–10 days before they are destroyed in the 
Functional anatomy and physiology
24
997
X
PT
Xa
Va
VIIIa
−ve
−ve
−ve
−ve
−ve
−ve
Thrombin
Antithrombin
Actions of thrombin
Intrinsic pathway
Activated
protein C
protein S
Plasmin
Inhibitors
of plasmin
Inhibitors of
plasminogen activators
Activators of
plasminogen
Plasminogen
t-PA
Urokinase
Fibrin degradation
products FDP
PAI-1, PAI-2
Tissue
factor pathway
Natural
anticoagulant
actions
Tissue factor pathway
inhibitor TFPI
Tissue factor
D
E
Tissue factor
(extrinsic) pathway
Common
pathway
Tissue
injury
TF
VII
TF
VIIa
X
Xa
Va
V
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Amplification of
coagulation by thrombin
Intrinsic
pathway
XI
XIa
IXa
IX
VIIIa
VIII
–ve
–ve
–ve
TAFI
α2-antiplasmin
α2-macroglobulin
activated and large amounts of thrombin are 
generated. Thrombin directly causes clot 
formation by cleaving fibrinopeptides (FP) from 
fibrinogen to produce fibrin. Fibrin monomers  
are cross-linked by factor XIII, which is also 
activated by thrombin. Having had a key role in 
clot formation and stabilisation, thrombin then 
starts to regulate clot formation in two main 
ways: (a) activation of the protein C (PC) pathway 
(a natural anticoagulant), which reduces further 
coagulation; (b) activation of thrombin-activatable 
fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI), which inhibits 
fibrinolysis (see D and E).
 D Stage 4 Limiting clot formation: natural 
anticoagulants reverse activation of coagulation 
factors. Once haemostasis has been secured, the 
propagation of clot is curtailed by anticoagulants. 
Antithrombin is a serine protease inhibitor 
synthesised by the liver, which destroys activated 
factors such as XIa, Xa and thrombin (IIa).  
Its major activity against thrombin and Xa is 
enhanced by heparin and fondaparinux, explaining 
their anticoagulant effect. Tissue factor pathway 
inhibitor (TFPI) binds to and inactivates VIIa and 
Xa. Activation of PC occurs following binding of 
thrombin to membrane-bound thrombomodulin; 
activated protein C (aPC) binds to its co-factor 
protein S (PS), and cleaves Va and VIIIa. PC and 
PS are vitamin K-dependent and are depleted by 
coumarin anticoagulants such as warfarin.
 E Stage 5 Fibrinolysis: plasmin degrades fibrin 
to allow vessel recanalisation and tissue repair. 
The insoluble clot needs to be broken  
down for vessel recanalisation. Plasmin, the 
main fibrinolytic enzyme, is produced when 
plasminogen is activated, e.g. by tissue 
plasminogen activator (t-PA) or urokinase in the 
clot. Plasmin hydrolyses the fibrin clot, producing 
fibrin degradation products, including the 
D-dimer. This process is highly regulated; the 
plasminogen activators are controlled by an 
inhibitor called plasminogen activator inhibitor 
(PAI), the activity of plasmin is inhibited by 
α2-antiplasmin and α2-macroglobulin, and 
fibrinolysis is further inhibited by the thrombin-
activated TAFI. 
reticulo-endothelial system. Some 30% of peripheral 
platelets are normally pooled in the spleen and do not 
circulate.
Under normal conditions platelets are discoid, with a 
diameter of 2–4 µm (Fig. 24.7). The surface membrane 
invaginates to form a tubular network, the canalicular 
system, which provides a conduit for the discharge of 
the granule content following platelet activation. Drugs 
which inhibit platelet function and thrombosis include 
aspirin (cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor), clopidogrel (adeno­
sine diphosphate (ADP)-mediated activation inhibitor), 
dipyridamole (phosphodiesterase inhibitor), and the 
IIb/IIIa inhibitors abciximab, tirofiban and eptifibatide 
(which prevent fibrinogen binding; p. 594).
Clotting factors
The coagulation system consists of a cascade of soluble 
inactive zymogen proteins designated by Roman numer­
als. When proteolytically cleaved and activated, each is 
capable of activating one or more components of the 
cascade. Activated factors are designated by the suffix 
‘a’. Some of these reactions require phospholipid and 
calcium. Coagulation occurs by two pathways: it is initi­
ated by the extrinsic (or tissue factor) pathway and 
amplified by the ‘intrinsic pathway’ (see Fig. 24.6).
Clotting factors are synthesised by the liver, although 
factor V is also produced by platelets and endothelial 
cells. Factors II, VII, IX and X require post-translational 
carboxylation to allow them to participate in coagula­
tion. The carboxylase enzyme responsible for this in the 
liver is vitamin K-dependent. Vitamin K is converted to 
an epoxide in this reaction and must be reduced to its 
active form by a reductase enzyme. This reductase is 
inhibited by warfarin, and this is the basis of the anti­
coagulant effect of coumarins (p. 1019). Congenital (e.g. 
haemophilia) and acquired (e.g. liver failure) causes 
of coagulation factor deficiency are associated with 
bleeding.
Blood disease
24
998
Bone marrow examination
In adults, bone marrow for examination is usually 
obtained from the posterior iliac crest. After a local 
anaesthetic, marrow can be sucked out from the medul­
lary space, stained and examined under the microscope 
(bone marrow aspirate). In addition, a core of bone may 
be removed (trephine biopsy), fixed and decalcified 
before sections are cut for staining (Fig. 24.9). A bone 
marrow aspirate is used to assess the composition and 
morphology of haematopoietic cells or abnormal infil­
trates. Further investigations may be performed, such as 
cell surface marker analysis (immunophenotyping), 
chromosome and molecular studies to assess malignant 
disease, or marrow culture for suspected tuberculosis. A 
trephine biopsy is superior for assessing marrow cellu­
larity, marrow fibrosis, and infiltration by abnormal cells 
such as metastatic carcinoma.
INVESTIGATION OF DISEASES 
OF THE BLOOD
The full blood count
To obtain a full blood count (FBC), anticoagulated blood 
is processed through automated blood analysers which 
use a variety of technologies (particle-sizing, radio­
frequency and laser instrumentation) to measure the 
haematological parameters. These include numbers of 
circulating cells, the proportion of whole blood volume 
occupied by red cells (the haematocrit, Hct), and the 
red cell indices which give information about the size of 
red cells (mean cell volume, MCV) and the amount of 
haemo­globin present in the red cells (mean cell haemo­
globin, MCH). Blood analysers can differentiate types 
of white blood cell and give automated counts of 
neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and 
basophils. It is important to appreciate, however, that a 
number of conditions can lead to spurious results (Box 
24.1). The reference ranges for a number of common 
haematological parameters in adults are given in 
Chapter 29.
Blood film examination
Although technical advances in full blood count analys­
ers have resulted in fewer blood samples requiring 
manual examination, scrutiny of blood components pre­
pared on a microscope slide (the ‘blood film’) can often 
yield valuable information (Box 24.2 and Fig. 24.8). 
Analysers cannot identify abnormalities of red cell 
shape and content (e.g. Howell–Jolly bodies, basophilic 
stippling, malaria parasites) or fully define abnormal 
white cells such as blasts.
Fig. 24.7  Normal platelet structure. (5-HT = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin; ADP = adenosine diphosphate; ATP = adenosine triphosphate) 
Fibrinogen
von Willebrand
factor
Collagen in
damaged
subendothelium
Surface-connected
canicular system
Peroxisome
Glycogen
Dense granule
– Calcium
– ATP/ADP
– 5-HT
Actin
Myosin
Alpha granule
– von Willebrand factor
– Fibrinogen
– Platelet factor 4
Dense tubules
Lysosome
– Acid hydrolases
Glycoprotein Ia
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
Glycoprotein Ib
Microtubules
Result
Explanation
Increased haemoglobin
Lipaemia, jaundice, very high 
white cell count
Reduced haemoglobin
Improper sample mixing, blood 
taken from vein into which an 
infusion is flowing
Increased red cell volume 
(MCV)
Cold agglutinins, non-ketotic 
hyperosmolarity
Increased white cell count
Nucleated red cells present
Reduced platelet count
Clot in sample, platelet  
clumping
24.1  Spurious FBC results from autoanalysers
Investigation of diseases of the blood
24
999
sometimes known as the partial thromboplastin time 
with kaolin (PTTK). Coagulation is delayed by deficien­
cies of coagulation factors and by the presence of inhibi­
tors of coagulation, such as heparin. The approximate 
reference ranges and causes of abnormalities are shown 
in Box 24.3. If both the PT and APTT are prolonged, this 
indicates either deficiency or inhibition of the final 
common pathway (which includes factors X, V, pro­
thrombin and fibrinogen) or global coagulation factor 
deficiency involving more than one factor, as occurs in 
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC, pp. 201 
and 1055). Further specific tests may be performed based 
on interpretation of the clinical scenario and results of 
these screening tests. A mixing test with normal plasma 
Investigation of coagulation
Bleeding disorders
In patients with clinical evidence of a bleeding disorder 
(p. 991), there are recommended screening tests (Box 24.3).
Coagulation tests measure the time to clot formation 
in vitro in a plasma sample after the clotting process is 
initiated by activators and calcium. The result of the test 
sample is compared with normal controls. The tissue 
factor (‘extrinsic’) pathway (see Fig 24.6) is assessed by 
the prothrombin time (PT), and the ‘intrinsic’ pathway 
by the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 
24.2  How to interpret red cell appearances
Fig. 24.8  Appearance of red blood cells.  A Microcytosis. B Macrocytosis. C Target cells.  D Spherocytes.  E Red cell fragments.
 F Nucleated red blood cells. G Howell–Jolly bodies. H Polychromasia. I Basophilic stippling. 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Nucleated red blood cells (normoblasts) F
• Marrow infiltration
• Severe haemolysis
• Myelofibrosis
• Acute haemorrhage
Howell–Jolly bodies (small round nuclear remnants) G
• Hyposplenism
• Dyshaematopoiesis
• Post-splenectomy
Polychromasia (young red cells – reticulocytes present) H
• Haemolysis, acute 
haemorrhage
• Increased red cell turnover
Basophilic stippling (abnormal ribosomal RNA appears as blue 
dots) I
• Dyshaematopoiesis
• Lead poisoning
Microcytosis (reduced average cell size, MCV < 76 fL)  A
• Iron deficiency
• Thalassaemia
• Sideroblastic anaemia
Macrocytosis (increased average cell size, MCV > 100 fL) B
• Vitamin B12 or folate 
deficiency
• Liver disease, alcohol
• Hypothyroidism
• Drugs (e.g. zidovudine, 
trimethoprim, phenytoin, 
methotrexate)
Target cells (central area of haemoglobinisation) C
• Liver disease
• Thalassaemia
• Post-splenectomy
• Haemoglobin C disease
Spherocytes (dense cells, no area of central pallor) D
• Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia
• Post-splenectomy
• Hereditary spherocytosis
Red cell fragments (intravascular haemolysis) E
• Microangiopathic 
haemolysis, e.g.  
HUS, TTP
• DIC
(DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; HUS = haemolytic uraemic syndrome; MCV = mean cell volume; TTP = thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura)
Blood disease
24
1000
with a normal APTT; further investigation of suspected 
cases is detailed on page 1053.
Platelet function has historically been assessed by the 
bleeding time, measured as the time to stop bleeding 
after a standardised incision. However, most centres 
have abandoned the use of this test. Platelet function 
can be assessed in vitro by measuring aggregation in 
response to various agonists, such as adrenaline (epi­
nephrine), collagen, thrombin and ADP, or by measur­
ing the constituents of the intracellular granules, e.g. 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)/ADP.
Coagulation screening tests are also performed in 
patients with suspected DIC, when clotting factors and 
platelets are consumed, resulting in thrombocytopenia 
and prolonged PT and APTT. In addition, there is evi­
dence of active coagulation with consumption of fibrino­
gen and generation of fibrin degradation products 
(D-dimers). Note, however, that fibrinogen is an acute 
phase protein which may also be elevated in inflamma­
tory disease (p. 82).
Monitoring anticoagulant therapy
The international normalised ratio (INR) is validated 
only to assess the therapeutic effect of coumarin anti­
coagulants, including warfarin. INR is the ratio of 
the patient’s PT to that of a normal control, raised to 
the power of the international sensitivity index of the 
thromboplastin used in the test (ISI, derived by com­
parison with an international reference standard 
material).
Monitoring of heparin therapy is, on the whole, only 
required with unfractionated heparins. Therapeutic 
anticoagulation prolongs the APTT relative to a control 
sample by a ratio of approximately 1.5–2.5. Low mol­
ecular weight heparins have such a predictable dose 
allows differentiation between a coagulation factor defi­
ciency (the prolonged time corrects) and the presence of 
an inhibitor of coagulation (the prolonged time does not 
correct); the latter may be chemical (heparins) or an anti­
body (most often a lupus anticoagulant but occasionally 
a specific inhibitor of one of the coagulation factors, typi­
cally factor VIII). Von Willebrand disease may present 
Fig. 24.9  Bone marrow aspirate and trephine. A Trephine biopsy needle. B Macroscopic appearance of a trephine biopsy. C Microscopic 
appearance of stained section of trephine. D Bone marrow aspirate needle. E Stained macroscopic appearance of marrow aspirate: smear (left) and 
squash (right). F Microscopic appearance of stained marrow particles and trails of haematopoietic cells. 
C
B
D
E
F
A
Investigation
Reference range*
Situations in which 
tests may be abnormal
Platelet count
150–400 × 109/L
Thrombocytopenia
Prothrombin 
time (PT)
9–12 secs
Deficiencies of factors 
II, V, VII or X
Severe fibrinogen 
deficiency
Activated 
partial 
thromboplastin 
time (APTT)
26–36 secs
Deficiencies of factors 
II, V, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII
Severe fibrinogen 
deficiency
Unfractionated heparin 
therapy
Antibodies against 
clotting factors
Lupus anticoagulant
Fibrinogen 
concentration
1.5–4.0 g/L
Hypofibrinogenaemia, 
e.g. liver failure, DIC
N.B. International normalised ratio (INR) is used only to monitor coumarin 
therapy and is not a coagulation screening test.
*Ranges are approximate and may vary between laboratories.
24.3  Coagulation screening tests
(DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation)
Presenting problems in blood disease
24
1001
lupus anticoagulant assays. Therefore these tests, when 
required, should be performed when the patient is not 
taking anticoagulants.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS 
IN BLOOD DISEASE
Anaemia
Anaemia refers to a state in which the level of haemo­
globin in the blood is below the reference range appro­
priate for age and sex. Other factors, including pregnancy 
and altitude, also affect haemoglobin levels and must be 
taken into account when considering whether an indi­
vidual is anaemic. The clinical features of anaemia reflect 
diminished oxygen supply to the tissues (p. 991). A 
rapid onset of anaemia (e.g. due to blood loss) causes 
more profound symptoms than a gradually developing 
anaemia. Individuals with cardiorespiratory disease are 
more susceptible to symptoms of anaemia.
The clinical assessment and investigation of anaemia 
should gauge its severity and define the underlying 
cause (Box 24.7).
Clinical assessment
•	 Iron deficiency anaemia (p. 1021) is the most 
common type of anaemia worldwide. A thorough 
gastrointestinal history is important, looking in 
particular for symptoms of blood loss. Menorrhagia 
response that monitoring of the anticoagulant effect is 
not required, except in patients with renal impairment 
(glomerular filtration rate less than 30 mL/min). When 
monitoring is indicated, an anti-Xa activity assay rather 
than APTT should be used.
Thrombotic disorders
Measurement of plasma levels of D-dimers derived from 
fibrin degradation is useful in excluding the diagnosis 
of active venous thrombosis in some patients (see 
Fig. 24.15, p. 1010).
A variety of tests exist which may help to explain an 
underlying propensity to thrombosis, especially venous 
thromboembolism (thrombophilia) (Box 24.4). Examples 
of possible indications for testing are given in Box 24.5. 
In most patients, the results do not affect clinical man­
agement (p. 1054) but they may influence the duration 
of anticoagulation (e.g. antiphospholipid antibodies, 
p. 1055), justify family screening in inherited throm­
bophilias (p. 1054), or suggest additional management 
strategies to reduce thrombosis risk (e.g. in myeloprolif­
erative disease and paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglob­
inuria; p. 1031). Anticoagulants can interfere with some 
of these assays; for example, warfarin reduces protein C 
and S levels and affects measurement of lupus antico­
agulant, while heparin interferes with antithrombin and 
• Blood cell counts and film components: not altered in 
general by ageing alone, although haemoglobin 
concentrations fall with increasing age.
• Ratio of bone marrow cells to marrow fat: falls.
• Neutrophils: maintained throughout life, although 
leucocytes may be less readily mobilised by bacterial  
invasion in old age.
• Lymphocytes: functionally compromised by age due to a T 
cell-related defect in cell-mediated immunity.
• Clotting factors: no major changes, although mild congenital 
deficiencies may be first noticed in old age.
• Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): raised above the 
reference range, but usually in association with chronic or 
subacute disease. In truly healthy older people, the ESR 
range is very similar to that in younger people.
24.6  Haematological investigations in old age
Decreased or ineffective marrow production
• Lack of iron, vitamin B12 or 
folate
• Hypoplasia/myelodysplasia
• Invasion by malignant cells
• Renal failure
• Anaemia of chronic  
disease
Normal marrow production but increased removal of cells
• Blood loss
• Haemolysis
• Hypersplenism
24.7  Causes of anaemia
Full blood count
Plasma levels
• Antithrombin
• Protein C
• Protein S (free)
• Antiphospholipid antibodies/lupus anticoagulant and 
anticardiolipin antibody
Thrombin/reptilase time (for dysfibrinogenaemia)
Genetic testing
• Factor V Leiden
• Prothrombin G20210A
• JAK-2 mutation
Flow cytometry
• Screen for glycerol phosphatidyl inositol (GPI)-linked cell 
surface proteins (CD14, 16, 55, 59), deficient in paroxysmal 
nocturnal haemoglobinuria
24.4  Investigation of possible thrombophilia
• Venous thrombosis < 45 yrs
• Recurrent venous 
thrombosis
• Family history of 
unprovoked or recurrent 
thrombosis
• Combined arterial and 
venous thrombosis
• Venous thrombosis at an 
unusual site
Cerebral venous 
thrombosis
Hepatic vein (Budd–
Chiari syndrome)
Portal vein, mesenteric 
vein
24.5  Indications for thrombophilia testing*
*Antiphospholipid antibodies should be sought where clinical criteria  
for antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) are fulfilled (p. 1055). Thrombophilia 
testing may explain the diagnosis without necessarily affecting 
management.
Blood disease
24
1002
fossa mass due to an underlying caecal carcinoma. 
Haemolytic anaemias can cause jaundice. Vitamin B12 
deficiency may be associated with neurological signs, 
including peripheral neuropathy, dementia and signs of 
subacute combined degeneration of the cord (p. 1025). 
Sickle-cell anaemia (p. 1032) may result in leg ulcers, 
stroke or features of pulmonary hypertension. Anaemia 
may be multifactorial and the lack of specific symptoms 
and signs does not rule out silent pathology.
Investigations
Schemes for the investigation of anaemias are often 
based on the size of the red cells, which is most accu­
rately indicated by the MCV in the FBC. Commonly, in 
the presence of anaemia:
•	 A normal MCV (normocytic anaemia) suggests 
either acute blood loss or the anaemia of chronic 
disease (ACD) (Fig. 24.10).
•	 A low MCV (microcytic anaemia) suggests iron 
deficiency or thalassaemia (see Fig. 24.10).
•	 A high MCV (macrocytic anaemia) suggests  
vitamin B12 or folate deficiency or myelodysplasia 
(Fig. 24.11).
Specific types of anaemia and their management are 
described later in this chapter (p. 1021).
is a common cause of anaemia in pre-menopausal 
females, so women should always be asked about 
their periods.
•	 A dietary history should assess the intake of iron and 
folate, which may become deficient in comparison 
to needs (e.g. in pregnancy or during periods of 
rapid growth; pp. 1025 and 125).
•	 Past medical history may reveal a disease which is 
known to be associated with anaemia, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis (anaemia of chronic disease), 
or previous surgery (e.g. resection of the stomach or 
small bowel, which may lead to malabsorption of 
iron and/or vitamin B12).
•	 Family history and ethnic background may raise 
suspicion of haemolytic anaemias, such as the 
haemoglobinopathies and hereditary spherocytosis. 
Pernicious anaemia may also be familial.
•	 A drug history may reveal the ingestion of drugs 
which cause blood loss (e.g. aspirin and anti-
inflammatory drugs), haemolysis (e.g. 
sulphonamides) or aplasia (e.g. chloramphenicol).
On examination, as well as the general physical find­
ings of anaemia shown on page 991, there may be spe­
cific findings related to the aetiology of the anaemia; for 
example, a patient may be found to have a right iliac 
Fig. 24.10  Investigation of anaemia with normal or low MCV. 
?Haemolysis
? Sideroblastic
Fe deficient
Investigate
Beta-
thalassaemia
trait
Alpha-
thalassaemia
trait
Check family
Low
Normal 
or high
MCV normal (76–98 fL)
or low (< 76 fL)
Blood film and
reticulocyte count
High reticulocyte
count
Normal or low
reticulocyte count
Hypochromia
(low MCH)
Target cells
basophilic stippling
Hb electrophoresis
Increased
HbA2
Normal
HbA2
Dimorphic
Bone marrow
Ferritin
Consider ferritin
Non-specific
?Bleeding
If Hb <  80 g/L consider
bone marrow to
establish diagnosis
? Anaemia of
chronic disease
No obvious
cause
Presenting problems in blood disease
24
1003
identify most patients with polycythaemia secondary to 
hypoxia. The presence of hypertension, smoking, excess 
alcohol consumption and/or diuretic use is consistent 
with low-volume polycythaemia (Gaisbock’s syndrome). 
In polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV), a mutation in a 
kinase, JAK-2 V617F, is found in over 90% of cases 
(p. 1049). Patients with PRV have an increased risk of 
arterial thromboses, particularly stroke, and venous 
thrombo­embolism. They may also have aquagenic 
pruritus (worse after a hot bath), hepatosplenomegaly 
and gout (due to high red cell turnover).
If the JAK-2 mutation is absent and there is no obvious 
secondary cause, a measurement of red cell mass is 
required to confirm an absolute erythrocytosis, followed 
High haemoglobin
Patients with a persistently raised haematocrit (Hct) 
(> 0.52 males, > 0.48 females) for more than 2 months 
should be investigated. ‘True’ polycythaemia (or abso­
lute erythrocytosis) indicates an excess of red cells, while 
‘relative’ (or ‘low-volume’) polycythaemia is due to a 
decreased plasma volume. Causes are shown in Box 24.8.
Clinical assessment and investigations
Males and females with Hct values of over 0.60 and over 
0.56, respectively, can be assumed to have an absolute 
erythrocytosis. A clinical history and examination will 
Fig. 24.11  Investigation of anaemia with high MCV. (LDH = lactate dehydrogenase) 
? Bleeding
? Haemolysis
Low
Polychromasia/high
reticulocyte count
MCV high
(> 98 fL)
Blood film
± reticulocyte count
Clinical clues
Alcohol, liver disease, family
history of pernicious anaemia,
hypothyroidism, drugs, previous
abdominal surgery etc.
Drugs/cytotoxic
agents
Investigate
cause
Liver function
tests
Hypersegmented
neutrophils
Target cells,
stomatocytes
Dysplasia/
cytopenia
Dimorphic
Marrow
Marrow
Folate, B12
? Myelodysplasia
? Sideroblastic
anaemia
Bilirubin ↑
LDH ↑
Spherocytes
Fragments
+ve Coombs test  
Absolute erythrocytosis
Relative (low-volume) erythrocytosis
Haematocrit
High
High
Red cell mass
High
Normal
Plasma volume
Normal
Low
Causes
Primary
Myeloproliferative disorder
Polycythaemia rubra vera (primary proliferative polycythaemia)
Secondary
High erythropoietin due to tissue hypoxia
High altitude
Cardiorespiratory disease
High-affinity haemoglobins
Inappropriately increased erythropoietin
Renal disease (hydronephrosis, cysts, carcinoma)
Other tumours (hepatoma, bronchogenic carcinoma, uterine fibroids, 
phaeochromocytoma, cerebellar haemangioblastoma)
Exogenous erythropoietin administration
Performance-enhancing drug-taking in athletes
Diuretics
Smoking
Obesity
Alcohol excess
Gaisbock’s syndrome
24.8  Classification and causes of erythrocytosis
Blood disease
24
1004
Drug-induced neutropenia is not uncommon (Box 
24.10). Clinical manifestations range from no symptoms 
to overwhelming sepsis. The risk of bacterial infection 
is related to the degree of neutropenia, with counts 
lower than 0.5 × 109/L considered to be critically low. 
Fever is the first and often only manifestation of infec­
tion. A sore throat, perianal pain or skin inflammation 
may be present. The lack of neutrophils allows the 
patient to become septicaemic and shocked within hours 
if immediate antibiotic therapy is not commenced. Man­
agement is discussed on page 302.
Lymphopenia
This is an absolute lymphocyte count of less than 1 × 
109/L. The causes are shown in Box 24.9. Although 
minor reductions may be asymptomatic, deficiencies in 
cell-mediated immunity may result in infections (with 
organisms such as fungi, viruses and mycobacteria) and 
a propensity to lymphoid and other malignancies (par­
ticularly those associated with viral infections such as 
by further investigations to exclude hypoxia, and causes 
of inappropriate erythropoietin secretion. Red cell mass 
measurement is performed by radiolabelling an aliquot 
of the patient’s red cells, re-injecting them and measur­
ing the dilution of the isotope.
Leucopenia (low white cell count)
A reduction in the total numbers of circulating white 
cells is called leucopenia. This may be due to a reduction 
in all types of white cell or in individual cell types 
(usually neutrophils or lymphocytes). Leucopenia may 
occur in isolation or as part of a reduction in all three 
haematological lineages (pancytopenia; p. 1008).
Neutropenia
A reduction in neutrophil count (usually less than 
1.5 × 109/L, but dependent on age and race) is called 
neutropenia. The main causes are listed in Box 24.9. 
24.9  How to interpret white blood cell results
Fig. 24.12  Appearance of white blood cells. A Neutrophil. B Eosinophil. C Basophil. D Monocyte. E Lymphocyte. 
A
B
C
D
E
Neutrophils A
Neutrophilia
• Infection: bacterial, fungal
• Trauma: surgery, burns
• Infarction: myocardial infarct, pulmonary embolus, sickle-cell 
crisis
• Inflammation: gout, rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis, 
Crohn’s disease
• Malignancy: solid tumours, Hodgkin lymphoma
• Myeloproliferative disease: polycythaemia, chronic myeloid 
leukaemia
• Physiological: exercise, pregnancy
Neutropenia
• Infection: viral, bacterial (e.g. Salmonella), protozoal (e.g. 
malaria)
• Drugs: see Box 24.10
• Autoimmune: connective tissue disease
• Alcohol
• Bone marrow infiltration: leukaemia, myelodysplasia
• Congenital: Kostmann’s syndrome
• Constitutional: Afro-Caribbean and Middle Eastern descent
Eosinophils B
Eosinophilia
• Allergy: hay fever, asthma, eczema
• Infection: parasitic
• Drug hypersensitivity: e.g. gold, sulphonamides
• Vasculitis, e.g. Churg–Strauss syndrome, granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis)
• Connective tissue disease: polyarteritis nodosa
• Malignancy: solid tumours, lymphomas
• Primary bone marrow disorders: myeloproliferative disorders, 
hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES), acute myeloid leukaemia
Basophils C
Basophilia
• Myeloproliferative disease: polycythaemia, chronic myeloid 
leukaemia
• Inflammation: acute hypersensitivity, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s 
disease
• Iron deficiency
Monocytes D
Monocytosis
• Infection: bacterial (e.g. tuberculosis)
• Inflammation: connective tissue disease, ulcerative colitis, 
Crohn’s disease
• Malignancy: solid tumours, chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia
Lymphocytes E
Lymphocytosis
• Infection: viral, bacterial (e.g. Bordetella pertussis)
• Lymphoproliferative disease: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 
lymphoma
• Post-splenectomy
Lymphopenia
• Inflammation: connective tissue disease
• Lymphoma
• Renal failure
• Sarcoidosis
• Drugs: corticosteroids, cytotoxics
• Congenital: severe combined immunodeficiency
• HIV infection
Presenting problems in blood disease
24
1005
Eosinophil infiltration can damage many organs (e.g. 
heart, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, skin, musculoskeletal 
system); therefore evaluation of eosinophilia includes 
not only the identification of any underlying cause and 
its appropriate treatment, but also assessment of any 
related organ damage.
Lymphocytosis
A lymphocytosis is an increase in circulating lym­
phocytes above that expected for the patient’s age. In 
adults, this is greater than 3.5 × 109/L. Infants and chil­
dren have higher counts; age-related reference ranges 
should be consulted. Causes are shown in Box 24.9; the 
most common is viral infection.
Lymphadenopathy
Enlarged lymph glands may be an important indicator 
of haematological disease but they are not uncommon 
in reaction to infection or inflammation (Box 24.11). The 
sites of lymph node groups, and symptoms and signs 
that may help elucidate the underlying cause are shown 
on page 991. Nodes which enlarge in response to local 
infection or inflammation (‘reactive nodes’) usually 
expand rapidly and are painful, whereas those due to 
haematological disease are more frequently painless. 
Localised lymphadenopathy should elicit a search for a 
source of inflammation in the appropriate drainage area:
•	 the scalp, ear, mouth, face or teeth for neck nodes
•	 the breast for axillary nodes
•	 the perineum or external genitalia for inguinal nodes.
Generalised lymphadenopathy may be secondary to 
infection, connective tissue disease or extensive skin 
disease, but is more likely to signify underlying haema­
tological malignancy. Weight loss and drenching night 
sweats that may require a change of night clothes are 
associated with haematological malignancies, particu­
larly lymphoma.
Initial investigations in lymphadenopathy include an 
FBC (to detect neutrophilia in infection or evidence of 
haematological disease), an ESR and a chest X-ray (to 
detect mediastinal lymphadenopathy). If the findings 
suggest malignancy, a formal cutting needle or excision 
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), human papillomavirus (HPV) 
and human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8)).
Leucocytosis (high white cell count)
An increase in the total numbers of circulating white 
cells is called leucocytosis. This is usually due to an 
increase in a specific type of cell (see Box 24.9). It is 
important to realise that an increase in a single type of 
white cell (e.g. eosinophils or monocytes) may not 
increase the total white cell count (WCC) above the 
upper limit of normal and will only be apparent if the 
‘differential’ of the white count is examined.
Neutrophilia
An increase in the number of circulating neutrophils is 
called a neutrophilia or a neutrophil leucocytosis. It can 
result from an increased production of cells from the bone 
marrow or redistribution from the marginated pool. The 
normal neutrophil count depends upon age, race and 
certain physiological parameters. During pregnancy, not 
only is there an increase in neutrophils but also earlier 
forms such as metamyelocytes can be found in the blood. 
The causes of a neutrophilia are shown in Box 24.9.
Eosinophilia
A high eosinophil count of more than 0.5 × 109/L is 
usually secondary to infection (especially parasites; 
p. 311), allergy (e.g. eczema, asthma, reactions to drugs; 
p. 89), immunological disorders (e.g. polyarteritis, sar­
coidosis) or malignancy (e.g. lymphomas) (see Box 24.9). 
Usually, such eosinophilia is short-lived.
In the rarer primary disorders, there is a persistently 
raised, often clonal, eosinophilia: for example, in myelo­
proliferative disorders, subtypes of acute myeloid leu­
kaemia and idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome 
(HES). Recently, specific mutations in receptor tyrosine 
kinase genes have been found in some primary eosi­
nophilias (e.g. causing re-arrangements of platelet-
derived growth factor receptors α and β or c-kit), which 
allow diagnosis and, in some cases, specific therapy with 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib.
Infective
• Bacterial: streptococcal, tuberculosis, brucellosis
• Viral: Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)
• Protozoal: toxoplasmosis
• Fungal: histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis
Neoplastic
• Primary: lymphomas, leukaemias
• Secondary: lung, breast, thyroid, stomach
Connective tissue disorders
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Sarcoidosis
Amyloidosis
Drugs
• Phenytoin
24.11  Causes of lymphadenopathy
Group
Examples
Analgesics/anti-
inflammatory agents
Gold, penicillamine, naproxen
Antithyroid drugs
Carbimazole, propylthiouracil
Anti-arrhythmics
Quinidine, procainamide
Antihypertensives
Captopril, enalapril, nifedipine
Antidepressants/
psychotropics
Amitriptyline, dosulepin, 
mianserin
Antimalarials
Pyrimethamine, dapsone, 
sulfadoxine, chloroquine
Anticonvulsants
Phenytoin, sodium valproate, 
carbamazepine
Antibiotics
Sulphonamides, penicillins, 
cephalosporins
Miscellaneous
Cimetidine, ranitidine, 
chlorpropamide, zidovudine
24.10  Drugs that can induce neutropenia
Blood disease
24
1006
menorrhagia is more likely to be due to 
thrombocytopenia, a platelet function disorder or 
von Willebrand disease. Recurrent bleeds at a single 
site suggest a local structural abnormality.
•	 Duration of history. It may be possible to assess 
whether the disorder is congenital or acquired.
•	 Precipitating causes. Bleeding arising spontaneously 
indicates a more severe defect than bleeding that 
occurs only after trauma.
•	 Surgery. Ask about operations. Dental extractions, 
tonsillectomy and circumcision are stressful tests of 
biopsy of a representative node is indicated to obtain a 
histological diagnosis.
Splenomegaly
The spleen may be enlarged due to involvement by 
lymphoproliferative disease, the resumption of extra­
medullary haematopoiesis in myeloproliferative disease, 
enhanced reticulo-endothelial activity in autoimmune 
haemolysis, expansion of the lymphoid tissue in response 
to infections, or vascular congestion as a result of portal 
hypertension (Box 24.12). Hepatosplenomegaly is sug­
gestive of lympho- or myeloproliferative disease, liver 
disease or infiltration (e.g. with amyloid). Associated 
lymphadenopathy is suggestive of lymphoproliferative 
disease. An enlarged spleen may cause abdominal dis­
comfort, accompanied by back pain and abdominal 
bloating due to stomach compression. Splenic infarction 
produces severe abdominal pain radiating to the left 
shoulder tip, associated with a splenic rub on ausculta­
tion. Rarely, spontaneous or traumatic rupture and 
bleeding may occur.
Investigation should focus on the suspected cause. 
Imaging of the spleen by ultrasound or computed tomo­
graphy (CT) will detect variations in density in the spleen, 
which may be a feature of lymphoproliferative disease; it 
also allows imaging of the liver and abdominal lymph 
nodes. Biopsy of enlarged abdominal or superficial lymph 
nodes may provide the diagnosis. A chest X-ray or CT of 
the thorax will detect mediastinal lymphadenopathy. An 
FBC may show pancytopenia secondary to hypersplen­
ism, when the enlarged spleen has become overactive, 
destroying blood cells prematurely. If other abnormalities 
are present, such as abnormal lymphocytes or a leuco-
erythroblastic blood film, a bone marrow examination 
is indicated. Screening for infectious or liver disease 
(p. 928) may be appropriate. If all investigations are 
unhelpful, splenectomy may be diagnostic but is rarely 
carried out in these circumstances.
Bleeding
Normal bleeding is seen following surgery and trauma. 
Pathological bleeding occurs when structurally abnor­
mal vessels rupture or when a vessel is breached in the 
presence of a defect in haemostasis. This may be due to 
a deficiency or dysfunction of platelets, to the coagula­
tion factors, or occasionally to excessive fibrinolysis, 
which is most commonly observed following therapeu­
tic thrombolysis (p. 596).
Clinical assessment
‘Screening’ blood tests (see Box 24.3, p. 1000) do not 
reliably detect all causes of pathological bleeding (e.g. 
von Willebrand disease, scurvy, certain anticoagulant 
drugs and the causes of purpura listed in Box 24.13) and 
should not be used indiscriminately. A careful clinical 
evaluation is the key to diagnosis of bleeding disorders 
(p. 1049). It is important to consider the following:
•	 Site of bleeding. Bleeding into muscle and joints, along 
with retroperitoneal and intracranial haemorrhage, 
indicates a likely defect in coagulation factors. 
Purpura, prolonged bleeding from superficial cuts, 
epistaxis, gastrointestinal haemorrhage or 
Congestive
Portal hypertension
• Cirrhosis
• Hepatic vein occlusion
• Portal vein thrombosis
• Stenosis or malformation of 
portal or splenic vein
Cardiac
• Chronic congestive cardiac 
failure
• Constrictive pericarditis
Infective
Bacterial
• Endocarditis
• Septicaemia
• Tuberculosis
• Brucellosis
• Salmonella
Viral
• Hepatitis
• Epstein–Barr
• Cytomegalovirus
Protozoal
• Malaria*
• Leishmaniasis (kala-azar)*
• Trypanosomiasis
Fungal
• Histoplasmosis
Inflammatory/granulomatous disorders
• Felty’s syndrome in 
rheumatoid arthritis
• Sarcoidosis
• Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Haematological
Red cell disorders
• Megaloblastic anaemia
• Haemoglobinopathies
• Hereditary spherocytosis
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias
Myeloproliferative disorders
• Chronic myeloid leukaemia*
• Myelofibrosis*
• Polycythaemia rubra vera
• Essential thrombocythaemia
Neoplastic
• Leukaemias, including 
chronic myeloid leukaemia*
• Lymphomas
Other malignancies
• Metastatic cancer – rare
Lysosomal storage diseases
• Gaucher’s disease
• Niemann–Pick disease
Miscellaneous
• Cysts, amyloid, thyrotoxicosis
*Causes of massive splenomegaly.
24.12  Causes of splenomegaly
Presenting problems in blood disease
24
1007
Investigations
Screening investigations and their interpretation are 
described on page 999. If the patient has a history that 
is strongly suggestive of a bleeding disorder and all the 
preliminary screening tests give normal results, further 
investigations, such as measurement of von Willebrand 
factor and assessment of platelet function, should be 
performed (p. 1053).
Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count)
A reduced platelet count may arise by one of two 
mechanisms:
•	 decreased or abnormal production (bone marrow 
failure and hereditary thrombocytopathies)
the haemostatic system. Immediate post-surgical 
bleeding suggests defective platelet plug formation 
and primary haemostasis; delayed haemorrhage is 
more suggestive of a coagulation defect. In post-
surgical patients, persistent bleeding from a single 
site is more likely to indicate surgical bleeding than 
a bleeding disorder.
•	 Family history. While a positive family history may 
be present in patients with inherited disorders, the 
absence of affected relatives does not exclude a 
hereditary bleeding diathesis; about one-third of 
cases of haemophilia arise in individuals without a 
family history, and deficiencies of factor VII, X and 
XIII are recessively inherited. Recessive disorders 
are more common in cultures where there is 
consanguineous marriage.
•	 Drugs. Use of antithrombotic, anticoagulant and 
fibrinolytic drugs must be elicited. Drug interactions 
with warfarin and drug-induced thrombocytopenia 
should be considered. Some ‘herbal’ remedies may 
result in a bleeding diathesis.
Clinical examination may reveal different patterns of 
skin bleeding. Petechial purpura is minor bleeding into 
the dermis that is flat and non-blanching (Fig. 24.13). 
Petechiae are typically found in patients with thrombo­
cytopenia or platelet dysfunction. Palpable purpura 
occurs in vasculitis. Ecchymosis, or bruising, is more 
extensive bleeding into deeper layers of the skin. The 
lesions are initially dark red or purple but become 
yellow as haemoglobin is degraded. Retroperitoneal 
bleeding presents with a flank haematoma. Telangiecta­
sia of lips and tongue points to hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia (p. 1049). Joints should be examined for 
evidence of haemarthroses. A full examination is impor­
tant, as it may give clues to an underlying associated 
systemic illness such as a haematological or other malig­
nancy, liver disease, renal failure, connective tissue 
disease and possible causes of splenomegaly.
Fig. 24.13  Petechial purpura. 
• Senile purpura
• Factitious purpura
• Henoch–Schönlein purpura 
(pp. 501 and 1119)
• Vasculitis (p. 1115)
• Paraproteinaemias
• Purpura fulminans, e.g. in 
DIC secondary to sepsis
24.13  Causes of non-thrombocytopenic purpura
24.14  Causes of thrombocytopenia
Decreased production
Marrow hypoplasia
• Childhood bone marrow failure syndromes, e.g. Fanconi’s 
anaemia, dyskeratosis congenita, amegakaryocytic 
thrombocytopenia
• Idiopathic aplastic anaemia
• Drug-induced: cytotoxics, antimetabolites
• Transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease
Marrow infiltration
• Leukaemia
• Myeloma
• Carcinoma (rare)
• Myelofibrosis
• Osteopetrosis
• Lysosomal storage 
disorders, e.g. Gaucher’s 
disease
Haematinic deficiency
• Vitamin B12 and/or folate deficiency
Familial (macro-)thrombocytopathies
• Myosin heavy chain abnormalities, e.g. Alport’s syndrome, 
Fechner’s syndrome
• Bernard Soulier disease
• Montreal platelet syndrome
• Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome (small platelets)
Increased consumption
Immune mechanisms
• Idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura*
• Neonatal alloimmune 
thrombocytopenia
• Post-transfusion purpura
• Drug-associated, 
especially quinine and 
vancomycin
Coagulation activation
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation (see Box 24.70,  
p. 1056)
Mechanical pooling
• Hypersplenism
Thrombotic microangiopathies
• Haemolytic uraemic 
syndrome
• Liver disease
• Thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura
• Pre-eclampsia
Others
• Gestational thrombocytopenia
• Type 2B von Willebrand disease
*Associated conditions include collagen vascular diseases (particularly SLE), 
B cell malignancy, HIV infection and antiphospholipid syndrome.
Blood disease
24
1008
Bone marrow failure
• Hypoplastic/aplastic anaemia (p. 1048): inherited, idiopathic, 
viral, drugs
Bone marrow infiltration
• Acute leukaemia
• Myeloma
• Lymphoma
• Carcinoma
• Haemophagocytic 
syndrome
• Myelodysplastic syndromes
Ineffective haematopoiesis
• Megaloblastic anaemia
• Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Peripheral pooling/destruction
• Hypersplenism: portal hypertension, Felty’s syndrome, 
malaria, myelofibrosis
• Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
24.16  Causes of pancytopenia
Reactive thrombocytosis
• Chronic inflammatory 
disorders
• Malignant disease
• Tissue damage
• Haemolytic anaemias
• Post-splenectomy
• Post-haemorrhage
Clonal thrombocytosis
• Primary 
thrombocythaemia
• PRV
• Chronic myeloid 
leukaemia
• Myelofibrosis
• Myelodysplastic syndromes 
(RARS with thrombocytosis, 
5 q− syndrome)
(PRV = polycythaemia rubra vera; RARS = refractory anaemia with 
sideroblasts)
24.15  Causes of a raised platelet count
ischaemia or gangrene are also features. In addition, 
patients with myeloproliferative disorders present with 
features such as itching after exposure to water (aqua­
genic pruritus), splenomegaly and systemic upset.
Pancytopenia
Pancytopenia refers to the combination of anaemia, 
leucopenia and thrombocytopenia. It may be due to 
reduced production of blood cells as a consequence of 
bone marrow suppression or infiltration, or there may 
be peripheral destruction or splenic pooling of mature 
cells. Causes are shown in Box 24.16. A bone marrow 
aspirate and trephine are usually required to establish the 
diagnosis.
•	 increased consumption following release into the 
circulation (immune-mediated, DIC or sequestration).
Spontaneous bleeding does not usually occur until 
the platelet count falls below 20 × 109/L, unless their 
function is also compromised. Purpura and spontaneous 
bruising are characteristic but there may also be oral, 
nasal, gastrointestinal or genitourinary bleeding. Severe 
thrombocytopenia (< 10 × 109/L) may result in retinal 
haemorrhage and potentially fatal intracranial bleeding, 
but this is rare.
Investigations are directed at the possible causes 
listed in Box 24.14. A blood film is the single most useful 
initial investigation. Examination of the bone marrow 
may reveal increased megakaryocytes in consumptive 
causes of thrombocytopenia, or the underlying cause of 
bone marrow failure in leukaemia, hypoplastic anaemia 
or myelodysplasia.
Treatment (if required) depends on the underlying 
cause. Platelet transfusion is rarely required and is 
usually confined to patients with bone marrow failure 
and platelet counts below 10 × 109/L, or to clinical situ­
ations with actual or predicted serious haemorrhage.
Thrombocytosis (high platelet count)
The most common reason for a raised platelet count is 
that it is reactive to another process such as infection, 
connective tissue disease, malignancy, iron deficiency, 
acute haemolysis or gastrointestinal bleeding (Box 24.15). 
The presenting clinical features are usually those of the 
underlying disorder and haemostasis is rarely affected. 
Reactive thrombocytosis is distinguished from the myelo­
proliferative disorders by the presence of uniform small 
platelets, lack of splenomegaly, and the presence of an 
associated disorder. The key to diagnosis is the clinical 
history and examination, combined with observation of 
the platelet count over time (reactive thrombocytosis gets 
better with resolution of the underlying cause).
The platelets are a product of an abnormally expand­
ing clone of cells in the myeloproliferative disorders, 
chronic myeloid leukaemia and some forms of myelod­
ysplasia. Patients with PRV, essential thrombocythae­
mia and occasionally myelofibrosis may present 
with thrombosis or, rarely, bleeding. Stroke and tran­
sient ischaemic attacks, amaurosis fugax, and digital 
Infection
Infection is a major complication of haematological dis­
orders. It relates to the immunological deficit caused by 
the disease itself, or its treatment with chemotherapy 
and/or immunotherapy (pp. 1004 and 302).
Venous thrombosis
While the most common presentation of venous thrombo­
embolic disease (VTE) is with deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) of the leg and/or pulmonary embolism (PE; see 
also p. 721), similar principles apply to rarer manifesta­
tions such as jugular vein thrombosis, upper limb DVT, 
cerebral sinus thrombosis (p. 1247) and intra-abdominal 
venous thrombosis (e.g. Budd–Chiari syndrome; p. 976).
DVT has an annual incidence of approximately 
1 : 1000 in Western populations and the case mortality is 
1–3%. It is increasingly common with ageing, and many 
of the deaths are related to coexisting medical condi­
tions, such as active cancer. Risk factors for DVT and PE 
are often present (Box 24.17). Figure 24.14 illustrates 
some of the causes and consequences of VTE disease.
Clinical assessment
Lower limb DVT characteristically starts in the distal 
veins, causing pain, swelling, an increase in temperature 
Presenting problems in blood disease
24
1009
Fig. 24.14  Causes and consequences of venous thromboembolic disease and its treatment. (IVC = inferior vena cava) 
Lateral sinus
thrombosis is an
uncommon form of
venous thrombosis
at an unusual site
c
i
n
e
g
o
rt
a
I
l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
h
t
a
P
Fatal intracerebral
haemorrhage is the
most common cause
of haemorrhagic death
in patients on warfarin
Post-mortem
fatal massive
pulmonary
embolism
Absent IVC
predisposes
to lower
limb DVT
Inferior vena cava
Common iliac vein
Common femoral vein
Superficial femoral vein
Popliteal vein
External and internal iliac veins
Profunda femoris vein
Gastrocnemius vein
Anterior tibial vein
Soleus muscle sinus
Massive haemorrhage may complicate
heparin therapy. This is particularly
problematic in patients with renal failure
on haemodialysis
Iliac vein thrombosis
IVC filter
Post-thrombotic syndrome
complicates 30% of
cases of lower limb DVT.
Severe cases
are complicated
by ulceration
Patient factors
• Increasing age
• Obesity
• Varicose veins
• Previous DVT
• Family history, especially of 
unprovoked VTE when young
• Pregnancy/puerperium
• Oestrogen-containing oral 
contraceptives and HRT
• Immobility, e.g. long-
distance travel (> 4 hrs)
• IV drug use (femoral vein)
Surgical conditions
• Major surgery, especially if > 30 mins’ duration
• Abdominal or pelvic surgery, especially for cancer
• Major lower limb orthopaedic surgery, e.g. joint replacement 
and hip fracture surgery
Medical conditions
• Myocardial infarction/heart 
failure
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Malignancy
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Pneumonia
• Neurological conditions 
associated with immobility, 
e.g. stroke, paraplegia, 
Guillain–Barré syndrome
24.17  Factors predisposing to venous thrombosis
Haematological disorders
• Polycythaemia rubra vera
• Essential thrombocythaemia
• Deficiency of anticoagulants: antithrombin, protein C, protein S
• Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
• Gain-of-function prothrombotic mutations: factor V Leiden, 
prothrombin gene G20210A
• Myelofibrosis
Antiphospholipid syndrome
• Lupus anticoagulant (more strongly associated with thrombosis 
than anticardiolipin antibodies)
• Anticardiolipin antibody
Blood disease
24
1010
and dilatation of the superficial veins. Often, however, 
symptoms and signs are minimal. It is typically unilat­
eral but may be bilateral, and clot may extend proximally 
into the inferior vena cava. Bilateral DVT is more com­
monly seen with under­lying malignancy or anomalies of 
the inferior vena cava. The differential diagnosis of uni­
lateral leg swelling includes a spontaneous or traumatic 
calf muscle tear or a ruptured Baker’s cyst, both charac­
terised by sudden onset and localised tenderness. Infec­
tive cellulitis is usually distinguished by marked skin 
erythema and heat localised within a well-demarcated 
area of the leg and may be associated with an obvious 
source of entry of infection (e.g. insect bite, leg ulcer).
Risk factors for DVT should be considered (see Box 
24.17), and examination should include assessment for 
malignancy. Symptoms and signs of PE should be 
sought (p. 721), particularly in those with proximal 
thrombosis; asymptomatic PE is thought to be present 
in approximately 30% of patients with lower limb DVT.
Clinical criteria can be used to rank patients according 
to their likelihood of DVT or PE: for example, by using 
scoring systems such as the Wells score (Box 24.18).
Investigations
Figure 24.15 gives an algorithm for investigation of sus­
pected DVT based on initial Wells score. In patients with 
a low (‘unlikely’) pre-test probability of DVT, D-dimer 
levels can be measured; if these are normal, further 
investigation for DVT is unnecessary. In those with a 
moderate or high (‘likely’) probability of DVT or with 
elevated D-dimer levels, objective diagnosis of DVT 
should be obtained using appropriate imaging.
Compression ultrasound is the imaging modality of 
choice in most centres. It has a sensitivity for proximal 
DVT (clot involving the popliteal vein or above) of 99.5%. 
Sensitivity and specificity are lower for diagnosing calf 
vein thrombosis. Contrast venography is an alternative 
that is now rarely used. In patients with proven DVT, 
further imaging to diagnose PE is not required unless 
massive PE is clinically suspected or there is otherwise 
unexplained breathlessness (p. 722).
Predisposing factors, particularly pelvic malignancy 
and those listed in Box 24.17, should be considered and 
Clinical characteristic
Score
Active cancer (patient receiving treatment for 
cancer within previous 6 mths or currently 
receiving palliative treatment)
1
Paralysis, paresis or recent plaster 
immobilisation of lower extremities
1
Recently bedridden for ≥ 3 days, or major 
surgery within previous 4 wks
1
Localised tenderness along distribution of 
deep venous system
1
Entire leg swollen
1
Calf swelling at least 3 cm larger than that 
on asymptomatic side (measured 10 cm 
below tibial tuberosity)
1
Pitting oedema confined to symptomatic leg
1
Collateral superficial veins (non-varicose)
1
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT
−2
Clinical probability
Total score
DVT low probability
≤ 1
DVT moderate probability
1–2
DVT high probability
≥ 2
*A dichotomised revised Wells score, which classifies patients as ‘unlikely’ 
or ‘likely’, may also be used.
24.18  Predicting the pre-test probability of deep 
vein thrombosis using the Wells score*
From Wells PS. New Engl J Med 2003; 
349:1227; copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.
Fig. 24.15  Investigation of suspected deep vein thrombosis. Pre-test probability is calculated in Box 24.18. 
Pre-test probability (see Box 24.18)
Low
D-dimer −ve
D-dimer +ve
+ve
+ve
−ve
−ve
Probability low, or moderate
with −ve D-dimer
Probability high, or moderate
with +ve D-dimer
Repeat compression
ultrasound in 7 days
Treat
Exclude
Compression ultrasound
Moderate or high
investigation pursued. In occasional patients, further 
investigation for an underlying thrombophilic condition 
may be considered (see Boxes 24.4 and 24.5, p. 1001).
Management
The management of leg DVT includes elevation and 
analgesia. Thrombolysis may be considered for limb-
threatening DVT, but the mainstay of treatment is anti­
coagulation with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), 
followed by a coumarin anticoagulant, such as warfarin. 
An alternative is the oral Xa inhibitor, rivaroxaban, which 
Blood products and transfusion
24
1011
has a rapid onset of action and can be used immediately 
from diagnosis without the need for LMWH. Treatment 
of acute VTE with LMWH should continue for at least 5 
days. If a coumarin is being introduced, the heparin 
should continue until the INR has been in the target 
range (2–3; pp. 1000 and 1018) for 2 days. Patients who 
have had a DVT and have a strong contraindication to 
anticoagulation, and those who, despite therapeutic anti­
coagulation, continue to have new pulmonary emboli, 
should have an inferior vena cava filter inserted to prevent 
life-threatening PE.
The optimal initial duration of anticoagulation is 
between 6 weeks and 6 months. Patients who have 
thrombosis in the presence of a temporary risk factor, 
which is then removed, can usually be treated for shorter 
periods (e.g. 3 months) than those who sustain unpro­
voked thrombosis. In patients with active cancer and 
VTE, there is evidence that LMWH should be continued 
for 6 months rather than being replaced by a coumarin 
(Box 24.19). Evidence indicates that periods of anti­
coagulation of more than 6 months do not alter the rate 
of recurrence following discontinuation of therapy.
Recurrence of DVT is about 2–3% per annum in 
patients who have a medical temporary risk factor at 
presentation and about 8% per annum in those with 
apparently unprovoked DVT. Recurrence plateaus at 
around 30–40% at 5 years. Post-thrombotic syndrome is 
due to damage of venous valves by the thrombus. It 
results in persistent leg swelling, heaviness and discol­
oration. The most severe complication of this syndrome 
is ulceration around the medial malleolus.
BLOOD PRODUCTS AND TRANSFUSION
Blood transfusion from an unrelated donor to a recipient 
inevitably carries some risk, including adverse immuno­
logical interactions between the host and infused blood 
(p. 94) and transmission of infectious agents. Although 
there are many compelling clinical indications for blood 
component transfusion, there are also many clinical cir­
cumstances in which transfusion is conventional but the 
evidence for its effectiveness is limited. In these settings, 
allogeneic transfusion may be avoided by following pro­
tocols that recommend use of low haemoglobin thresh­
olds for red cell transfusion (Box 24.20), perioperative 
blood salvage and antifibrinolytic drugs.
Blood products
Blood components are prepared from whole blood col­
lected from individual donors and include red cells, plate­
lets, plasma and cryoprecipitate (Box 24.22).
Plasma derivatives are licensed pharmaceutical prod­
ucts produced on a factory scale from large volumes of 
‘In patients with trauma, burns or following surgery, there is no 
evidence that resuscitation with albumin or other colloid 
solutions reduces the risk of death compared to resuscitation 
with crystalloid solutions.’
• Perel P, Roberts I. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically ill 
patients. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2011, issue 3. Art. no. 
CD000567.
24.21  Fluid resuscitation in critically ill patients
‘A restrictive strategy of red cell transfusion is at least as 
effective as, and possibly superior to, a liberal transfusion 
strategy in critically ill patients. A restrictive strategy allows 
transfusion when Hb is below 70 g/L and maintains Hb at 
70–90 g/L, whereas a liberal strategy allows transfusion when 
Hb is below 100 g/L and maintains Hb at 100–120 g/L.’
• Hébert PC, et al. N Eng J Med 1999; 340(6):409–417.
For further information: 
 www.transfusionguidelines.org.uk
 
 www.learnbloodtransfusion.org.uk
24.20  Red cell transfusion in critically ill patients
‘In patients with active cancer, treatment of deep vein 
thrombosis with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) for  
6 months is superior in preventing recurrence of thrombosis to 
short-period LMWH followed by warfarin.’
• Lee AY, et al. N Engl J Med 2003; 349(2):146–153.
24.19  Treatment of venous thromboembolism
human plasma obtained from many people and treated 
to remove transmissible infection. Examples include:
•	 Coagulation factors. Concentrates of factors VIII and 
IX are used for the treatment of conditions such as 
haemophilia A, haemophilia B and von Willebrand 
disease. Coagulation factors made by recombinant 
DNA technology are now preferred due to 
perceived lack of infection risk but plasma-derived 
products are still used in many countries.
•	 Immunoglobulins. Intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIgG) is administered as regular replacement 
therapy to reduce infective complications in patients 
with immunodeficiency. A short, high-dose course of 
IVIgG may also be effective in some immunological 
disorders, including immune thrombocytopenia  
(p. 1049) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (p. 1224). 
IVIgG can cause acute reactions and must be infused 
strictly according to the manufacturer’s product 
information. There is a risk of renal dysfunction in 
susceptible patients and, in these circumstances, 
immunoglobulin products containing low or no 
sucrose are preferred. Anti-zoster immunoglobulin 
has a role in the prophylaxis of varicella zoster  
(p. 317). Anti-Rhesus D immunoglobulin is used in 
pregnancy to prevent haemolytic disease of the 
newborn (see Box 24.24 below).
•	 Human albumin. This is available in two strengths. 
The 5% solution can be used as a colloid 
resuscitation fluid, but it is no more effective and  
is more expensive than crystalloid solutions (Box 
24.21). Human albumin 20% solution is used in the 
management of hypoproteinaemic oedema in 
nephrotic syndrome (p. 476), and ascites in chronic 
liver disease (p. 938). It is hyperoncotic and expands 
plasma volume by more than the amount infused.
Blood donation
A safe supply of blood components depends on a well-
organised system with regular donation by healthy indi­
viduals who have no excess risk of infections transmissible 
in blood (Fig. 24.16). Blood donations are obtained by 
Blood disease
24
1012
Adverse effects of transfusion
Death directly attributable to transfusion is rare, at less 
than 0.3 per 100 000 transfusions. However, relatively 
minor symptoms of transfusion reactions (fever, itch or 
urticaria) occur in up to 3% of transfusions, usually in 
patients who have had repeated transfusions. Any 
symptoms or signs that arise during a transfusion must 
be taken seriously, as they may be the first warnings of 
a serious reaction. Figure 24.18 (p. 1016) outlines the 
symptoms and signs, management and investigation of 
acute reactions to blood components.
Red cell incompatibility
Red blood cell membranes contain numerous cell surface 
molecules which are potentially antigenic (see Fig. 24.4, 
p. 994). The ABO and Rh(D) antigens are the most 
important in routine transfusion and antenatal practice.
either venesection of a unit of whole blood or collection 
of a specific component, such as platelets, by apheresis. 
During apheresis, the donor’s blood is drawn via a 
closed system into a machine which separates the com­
ponents by centrifugation and collects the desired frac­
tion into a bag, returning the rest of the blood to the 
donor. Each donation must be tested for hepatitis B 
(HBV), hepatitis C (HCV), HIV and human T cell lym­
photropic (HTLV) virus nucleic acid and/or antibodies. 
Platelet concentrates may be tested for bacterial contami­
nation. The need for other microbiological tests depends 
on local epidemiology. For example, testing for Trypano-
soma cruzi (Chagas’ disease; p. 360) is necessary in areas 
of South America and the USA where infection is preva­
lent; tests for West Nile virus have been required in the 
USA since this agent became prevalent; plasma donated 
in the UK is not used at present for producing pooled 
plasma derivatives in view of concerns about transmis­
sion of variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (vCJD; p. 1211).
Component
Major haemorrhage
Other indications
Red cell concentrate1
Most of the plasma is removed and 
replaced with a solution of glucose 
and adenine in saline to maintain 
viability of red cells
ABO compatibility with recipient is 
essential
Replace acute blood loss: increase 
circulating red cell mass to relieve 
clinical features caused by 
insufficient oxygen delivery
Severe anaemia
If no cardiovascular disease, transfuse to maintain 
Hb at 70 g/L
If known or likely to have cardiovascular disease, 
maintain Hb at 90 g/L
Platelet concentrate
One adult dose is made from four 
donations of whole blood, or from a 
single platelet apheresis donation
ABO compatibility with recipient is 
preferable
Maintain platelet count > 50 × 109/L, 
or in multiple or CNS trauma > 100 × 
109/L
Each adult dose has a minimum of 
2.4 × 1011 platelets, which raises 
platelet count by 40 × 109/L unless 
there is consumptive coagulopathy, 
e.g. DIC
Thrombocytopenia, e.g. in acute leukaemia
Maintain platelet count > 10 × 109/L if not bleeding
Maintain platelet count > 20 × 109/L if minor 
bleeding or at risk (sepsis, concurrent use of 
antibiotics, abnormal clotting)
Increase platelet count > 50 × 109/L for minor 
invasive procedure (e.g. lumbar puncture, 
gastroscopy and biopsy, insertion of indwelling lines, 
liver biopsy, laparotomy) or if acute, major blood loss
Increase platelet count > 100 × 109/L for operations 
in critical sites such as brain or eyes
Fresh frozen plasma2
150–300 mL plasma from one 
donation of whole blood
ABO compatibility with recipient is 
recommended
Dilutional coagulopathy with a PT 
prolonged > 50% is likely after 
replacement of 1–1.5 blood volumes 
with red cell concentrate
Initial dose of FFP 15 mL/kg
Further doses only if bleeding 
continues and guided by PT and APTT
Replacement of coagulation factor deficiency
If no virally inactivated or recombinant product is 
available
TTP
Plasma exchange (using virus-inactivated plasma if 
available) is frequently effective
Cryoprecipitate2
Fibrinogen and coagulation factor 
concentrated from plasma by 
controlled thawing
10–20 mL pack contains fibrinogen 
150–300 mg, factor VIII 80–120 U, 
von Willebrand factor 80–120 U
In UK, supplied as pools of 5 U
May be indicated if fibrinogen  
< 0.8 g/L due to dilution and DIC
Pooled units (of 10 donations) 
containing 3 g fibrinogen in 300 mL 
raise fibrinogen by 1 g/L
von Willebrand disease and haemophilia
If virus-inactivated or recombinant products are not 
available
1Whole blood is an alternative to red cell concentrate. ABO compatibility with recipient is essential.
2Pooled plasma can be treated with solvent and detergent or single units treated with methylene blue as an additional viral inactivation step. Virus-inactivated 
plasma is indicated for large-volume exposure, as in treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, and for treatment of children in the UK born after 1995.
24.22  Blood components and their use
(APTT = activated partial thromboplastin time; CNS = central nervous system; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; FFP = fresh frozen plasma; PT = 
prothrombin time; TTP = thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura)
Blood products and transfusion
24
1013
leaving the ABO antigen precursor (called the H antigen) 
unmodified. The A and B alleles encode enzymes that 
differ by four amino acids and hence attach different 
sugars to the end of the chain. Individuals are tolerant 
to their own ABO antigens, but do not suppress B cell 
clones producing antibodies against ABO antigens that 
they do not carry themselves (Box 24.23). They are there­
fore capable of mounting a humoral immune response 
to these ‘foreign’ antigens.
ABO blood groups
The frequency of the ABO antigens varies among differ­
ent populations. The ABO blood group antigens are 
oligo­saccharide chains that project from the red cell 
surface. These chains are attached to proteins and lipids 
that lie in the red cell membrane. The ABO gene encodes 
a glycosyltransferase that catalyses the final step in the 
synthesis of the chain which has three common alleles: 
A, B and O. The O allele encodes an inactive enzyme, 
Fig. 24.16  Blood donation, processing and storage. 1Platelet apheresis involves circulating the donor’s blood through a cell separator to remove 
platelets before returning other blood components to the donor. 2In the UK, plasma for fractionation is imported as a precautionary measure against variant 
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease. (HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; HTLV = human T cell lymphotropic virus) 
A
A
A
Donor
Education Recruitment Selection
Donation
Process into blood components
Filter to remove leucocytes
Test for:
HIV
HTLV
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Syphilis
ABO + RhD
Other blood
groups
Red cell
antibodies
Platelet
 apheresis 1
450 mL whole blood
collected into 63 mL
anticoagulant/preservative
Pooled/apheresis
platelets
Red cells
Fresh frozen plasma
Plasma2
C
°
2
2
C
°
4
–30°C
Storage
Fractionation
Plasma derivatives,
e.g. albumin,
immunoglobulin
Patient
 
5
s
y
a
d
 
5
3
days (agitate)
24 months
Confirm compatibility
Thaw
Blood disease
24
1014
RhC, RhE, Rhe, and the Kell, Kidd and Duffy antigen 
systems. HDN can also occur if there is fetomaternal 
ABO incompatibility, most commonly seen in a group 
O mother with a group A fetus. The fetus is generally 
less severely affected by ABO incompatibility than by 
RhD, Rhc or Kell antigen mismatch.
Other immunological complications 
of transfusion
Rare but serious complications include transfusion-
associated lung injury (TRALI) and transfusion-associated 
graft-versus-host disease (TA GVHD). The latter occurs 
when there is sharing of a human leucocyte antigen (HLA) 
haplotype between donor and recipient, which allows 
transfused lymphocytes to engraft, proliferate and recog­
nise the recipient as foreign, resulting in acute GVHD 
(p. 1017). Prevention is by gamma- or X-ray irradiation of 
blood components before their administration to prevent 
lymphocyte proliferation. Those at risk of TA GVHD who 
must receive irradiated blood components include: 
patients with congenital T cell immuno­deficiencies or 
Hodgkin lymphoma; patients with aplastic anaemia 
receiving 
immunosuppressive 
therapy 
with 
anti-
thymocyte globulin; recipients of haematopoietic stem 
cell transplants or of blood from a family member; 
neonates who have received an intrauterine transfusion; 
and patients taking T lymphocyte-suppressing drugs, 
such as fludarabine and other purine analogues.
Transfusion-transmitted infection
Over the past 30 years, HBV, HIV-1 and HCV have been 
identified and effective tests introduced to detect and 
exclude infected donations. Where blood is from ‘safe’ 
donors and correctly tested, the current risk of a donated 
unit being infectious is very small. By 2010 in the UK, the 
estimated chance that a unit of blood from a ‘safe’ donor 
might transmit one of the viruses for which blood is tested 
was 1 in 6.4 million units for HIV-1, 1 in 100 million for 
HCV and 1 in 1.4 million for HBV. However, some patients 
who received transfusions before these tests were availa­
ble suffered serious consequences from infection; this 
serves as a reminder to avoid non-essential transfusion, 
ABO-incompatible red cell transfusion
If red cells of an incompatible ABO group are transfused 
(especially if a group O recipient is transfused with 
group A, B or AB red cells), the recipient’s IgM anti-A, 
anti-B or anti-AB binds to the transfused red cells. This 
activates the full complement pathway (p. 75), creating 
pores in the red cell membrane and destroying the trans­
fused red cells in the circulation (intravascular haemoly­
sis). The anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a, released by 
complement activation, liberate cytokines such as tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin 1 (IL-1) and IL-8, and 
stimulate degranulation of mast cells with release of 
vasoactive mediators. All these substances may lead 
to inflammation, increased vascular permeability and 
hypotension, which may, in turn, cause shock and renal 
failure. Inflammatory mediators can also cause platelet 
aggregation, lung peribronchial oedema and smooth 
muscle contraction. About 20–30% of ABO-incompatible 
transfusions cause some degree of morbidity, and 5–10% 
cause or contribute to a patient’s death. The main reason 
for this relatively low morbidity is the lack of potency of 
ABO antibodies in group A or B subjects; even if the 
recipient is group O, those who are very young or very 
old usually have weaker antibodies that do not lead to 
the activation of large amounts of complement.
The Rhesus D blood group and haemolytic 
disease of the newborn
About 15% of Caucasians are Rhesus-negative; that is, 
they lack the Rhesus D (RhD) red cell surface antigen (see 
Fig. 24.4, p. 994). In other populations (e.g. in Chinese and 
Bengalis), only 1–5% are Rhesus-negative. RhD-negative 
individuals do not normally produce substantial amounts 
of anti-RhD antibodies. However, if RhD-positive red 
cells enter the circulation of an RhD-negative individual, 
IgG antibodies are produced. This can occur during preg­
nancy if the mother is exposed to fetal cells via feto­
maternal haemorrhage, or following transfusion. If a 
woman is so sensitised, during a subsequent pregnancy 
anti-RhD antibodies can cross the placenta; if the fetus is 
RhD-positive, haemolysis with severe fetal anaemia and 
hyperbilirubinaemia can result. This can cause severe 
neurological damage or death due to haemolytic disease 
of the newborn (HDN). Therefore, an RhD-negative 
female who may subsequently become pregnant should 
never be transfused with RhD-positive blood.
In RhD-negative women, administration of anti-RhD 
immunoglobulin (anti-D) perinatally can block the 
immune response to RhD antigen on fetal cells and is 
the only effective product for preventing the develop­
ment of Rhesus antibodies (Box 24.24).
HDN can also be caused by other alloantibodies 
against red cell antigens, usually after previous preg­
nancies or transfusions. These antigens include Rhc, 
• Haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN): occurs when 
the mother has anti-red cell IgG antibodies that cross the 
placenta and haemolyse fetal red cells.
• Screening for HDN in pregnancy: at the time of booking 
(12–16 wks) and again at 28–34 wks gestation, every 
pregnant woman should have a blood sample sent for 
determination of ABO and RhD group and testing for red cell 
alloantibodies that may be directed against paternal blood 
group antigens present in fetal red cells.
• Anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis in a pregnant woman 
who is RhD-negative: antenatal anti-D prophylaxis is offered 
at 28–34 wks to RhD-negative pregnant women who have 
no evidence of immune anti-D. This prevents the formation 
of antibodies that could cause HDN. Following delivery of an 
RhD-positive baby, the mother is given further anti-D within 
72 hrs; a maternal sample is checked for remaining fetal red 
cells and additional anti-D is given if indicated. Additional 
anti-D is also given after potential sensitising events 
antenatally (e.g. early bleeding). Doses vary according to 
national recommendations.
24.24  Rhesus D blood groups in pregnancy
ABO blood 
group
Red cell A or 
B antigens
Antibodies in 
plasma
UK frequency 
(%)
O
None
Anti-A and anti-B
46
A
A
Anti-B
42
B
B
Anti-A
9
AB
A and B
None
3
24.23  ABO blood group antigens and antibodies
Blood products and transfusion
24
1015
expressing the most important antigens to detect any red 
cell antibodies. Any antibody detected can be identified 
by further testing, so that red cell units that lack the cor­
responding antigen can be selected. The patient’s sample 
can be held in the laboratory for up to a week, so that 
the hospital blood bank can quickly prepare compatible 
blood without the need for a further patient sample. 
Conventional cross-matching consists of the group 
and antibody screen, followed by direct confirmation of 
the compatibility of individual units of red cells with 
the patient’s serum. Full cross-matching takes about 
45 minutes if no red cell antibodies are present, but may 
require hours if a patient has multiple antibodies.
Blood can be supplied by ‘electronic issue’, without the 
need for compatibility cross-matching, if the laboratory’s 
computer system shows that the patient’s ABO and RhD 
groups have been identified and confirmed on two sepa­
rate occasions and their antibody screen is negative.
Bedside procedures for  
safe transfusion
Errors leading to patients receiving the wrong blood are 
an important avoidable cause of mortality and morbid­
ity. Most incompatible transfusions result from failure 
to adhere to standard procedures for taking correctly 
labelled blood samples from the patient and ensuring 
that the correct pack of blood component is transfused 
into the intended patient. In the UK in 2011, there were 
247 reports of transfusion of an incorrect blood compo­
nent (8 per 100 000 units transfused). Every hospital 
where blood is transfused should have a written trans­
fusion policy used by all staff who order, check or 
administer blood products (Fig. 24.17). Management of 
suspected transfusion reactions is shown in Figure 24.18.
since it is impossible to exclude the emergence of new or 
currently unrecognised transfusion-transmissible infec­
tion. Licensed plasma derivatives that have been virus-
inactivated do not transmit HIV, HTLV, HBV, HCV, 
cytomegalovirus or other lipid-enveloped viruses.
vCJD is a human prion disease linked to bovine 
spongiform encephalitis (BSE; p. 1211). The risk of a 
recipient acquiring the agent of vCJD from a transfusion 
is uncertain, but of 16 recipients of blood from donors 
who later developed the disease, 3 have died with clini­
cal vCJD and 1 other had postmortem pathological fea­
tures of infection.
Bacterial contamination of a blood component – 
usually platelets – is extremely rare (e.g. no reports in 
the UK in either 2010 or 2011) but can result in severe 
bacteraemia/septicaemia in the recipient.
Safe transfusion procedures
The proposed transfusion and any alternatives should 
be discussed with the patient or, if that is not possible, 
with a relative, and this should be documented. Some 
patients, e.g. Jehovah’s Witnesses, may refuse transfu­
sion and require specialised management to survive 
profound anaemia following blood loss.
Pre-transfusion testing
To ensure that red cells supplied for transfusion are 
compatible with the intended recipient, the transfusion 
laboratory will perform either a ‘group and screen’ pro­
cedure or a ‘cross-match’. In the group and screen pro­
cedure, the red cells from the patient’s blood sample are 
tested to determine the ABO and RhD type, and the 
patient’s serum is also tested against an array of red cells 
Fig. 24.17  Bedside procedures for safe blood transfusion. The patient’s safety depends on adherence to standard procedures for taking samples 
for compatibility testing, administering blood, record-keeping and observations. 
MORAG MACDONALD
HOSPITAL No. 100198E
DOB: 11/07/1956
SEX: Female
Taking blood for pre-transfusion testing
Positively identify the patient at the bedside
Label the sample tube and complete
the request form clearly and accurately
after identifying the patient
Do not write forms and labels in advance
Administering blood
Positively identify the patient at the bedside
Ensure that the identification of each blood pack
matches the patient’s identification
Check that the ABO and RhD groups of each
pack are compatible with the patient’s
Check each pack for evidence of damage
If in doubt, do not use and return to the blood bank
Complete the forms that document the transfusion of each pack
Check the compatibility label on the pack against the patient’s wristband
Always involve
the patient by asking
them to state their name
and date of birth, where possible
Surname
Forname
Date of birth
Unique identifier/
hospital number
d
n
a
btsir
w
 s’tn
eita
P
k
c
a
p d
o
ol
B
Observations
Transfusions should only be given when the patient can be observed
Blood pressure, pulse and temperature should be monitored before and 15 minutes after starting each pack
In concious patients, further observations are only needed if the patient has symptoms or signs of a reaction
In unconscious patients, check pulse and temperature at intervals during transfusion
Signs of abnormal bleeding during the transfusion could be due to disseminated intravascular coagulation
resulting from an acute haemolytic reaction
Record-keeping
Record in the patient’s notes the reason for transfusion, the product given, dose, any adverse effects and the clinical response
Blood disease
24
1016
Fig. 24.18  Investigation and management of acute transfusion reactions. *Use size-appropriate dose in children. (ARDS = acute respiratory 
distress syndrome; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; FBC = full blood count) 
Bacterial infection of unit
•  Take down unit and giving set/return intact to blood
 bank with all other used/unused units
•  Take blood cultures, repeat blood group/cross-match/
   FBC, coagulation screen, biochemistry, urinalysis
•  Monitor urine output
•  Commence broad-spectrum antibiotics if suspected
   bacterial infection (Ch 6)
•  Commence oxygen and fluid support
•  Seek advice
Severe allergic reaction
•  Discontinue transfusion
•  Give chlorphenamine 10 mg slowly IV*
•  Commence O2 and fluid support
•  Give salbutamol nebuliser
•  If severe hypotension or bronchospasm, give
   adrenaline (epinephrine) 0.5 mg IM*
•  Send clotted blood sample to transfusion laboratory
•  Take down unit and giving set, and return intact to
 blood bank with all other used/unused units
             Bacterial contamination?
• Blood pack discoloured or damaged
• Rapid onset of hyper- or hypotension, rigors or collapse
• Temperature ≥ 39°C or rise of ≥ 2°C
Fluid overload
• Give oxygen and furosemide 40–80 mg IV*
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)
• Typically within 6–24 hrs of transfusion
• Breathlessness, non-productive cough
• Chest X-ray bilateral nodular infiltration
• Discontinue transfusion
• Give 100% oxygen
• Treat as ARDS— ventilate if severely hypoxaemic
          If acute dyspnoea/hypotension
•  Monitor blood gases
•  Perform chest X-ray
•  Measure central venous/pulmonary
   capillary pressure
No
Raised
CVP
Yes
Normal
CVP
Severe allergic reaction?
• Bronchospasm, angioedema,
  abdominal pain, hypotension
Yes
No
 Suspected ABO incompatibility?
• Wrong blood pack infused
• Haemoglobinuria
Yes
ABO incompatibility
•  Take down unit and giving set; return
 intact to blood bank
•  Commence IV saline infusion
•  Monitor urine output/catheterise
   Maintain urine output at > 100 mL/hr
   Give furosemide if urine output falls*
•  Treat DIC with appropriate blood
   components
•  Inform hospital transfusion department
   immediately
No
Reaction involves mild fever
or urticarial rash only?
Fever
No
Febrile non-haemolytic transfusion reaction
If isolated temperature ≥ 38°C, or rise of 1–2°C,
observations are stable and patient is otherwise well
•  Give paracetamol*
• Restart infusion at a slower rate and observe more
   frequently
Urticaria
Mild pruritus/rash
• Give chlorphenamine 10 mg slowly IV*
• Restart the transfusion at a slower rate and observe
   more frequently
                                       Stop the transfusion
• Undertake rapid clinical assessment, including temperature, pulse, BP,
   respiratory rate and O2 saturation
• Check the identity of recipient details on the unit and compatibility form
                    Symptoms/signs of possible acute transfusion reaction
• Fever, chills, tachycardia, hyper- or hypotension, collapse, rigors, flushing,
  urticaria, bone, muscle, chest and/or abdominal pain, shortness of breath,
  nausea, generally feeling unwell, respiratory distress
Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation
24
1017
HAEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL 
TRANSPLANTATION
Transplantation of haematopoietic stem cells (HSCT) 
has offered the only hope of ‘cure’ in a variety of hae­
matological and non-haematological disorders (Box 
24.25). As standard treatment improves, the indications 
for HSCT are being refined and extended, although its 
use remains most common in haematological malignan­
cies. The type of HSCT is defined according to the donor 
and source of stem cells:
•	 In allogeneic HSCT, the stem cells come from a donor 
– either related (usually an HLA-identical sibling) 
or a closely HLA-matched volunteer unrelated 
donor (VUD).
•	 In an autologous transplant, the stem cells are 
harvested from the patient and stored in the vapour 
phase of liquid nitrogen until required. Stem cells 
can be harvested from the bone marrow or from the 
blood.
Allogeneic HSCT
Healthy bone marrow or blood stem cells from a donor 
are infused intravenously into the recipient, who has 
been suitably ‘conditioned’. The conditioning treatment 
(chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy) destroys 
malignant cells and immunosuppresses the recipient, as 
well as ablating the recipient’s haematopoietic tissues 
(myeloablation). The infused donor cells ‘home’ to the 
marrow, engraft and produce enough erythrocytes, 
granulocytes and platelets for the patient’s needs after 
about 3–4 weeks. During this period of aplasia, patients 
are at risk of infection and bleeding, and require inten­
sive supportive care as described on page 1038. It may 
take several years to regain normal immunological func­
tion and patients remain at risk from opportunistic 
infections, in particular in the first year.
An advantage of receiving allogeneic donor stem 
cells is that the donor’s immune system can recognise 
residual recipient malignant cells and destroy them. This 
immunological ‘graft versus disease’ effect is a powerful 
tool against many haematological tumours and can be 
boosted post transplantation by the infusion of T cells 
taken from the donor, so-called donor lymphocyte infu­
sion (DLI).
Considerable morbidity and mortality are associated 
with HSCT. The best results are obtained with minimal 
residual disease, and in those under 20 years of age who 
have an HLA-identical sibling donor. Reduced-intensity 
HSCT has enabled treatment of older or less fit patients. 
In this form of transplantation, rather than using very 
intensive conditioning which causes morbidity from 
• Neoplastic disorders affecting stem cell compartments (e.g. 
leukaemias)
• Failure of haematopoiesis (e.g. aplastic anaemia)
• Major inherited defects in blood cell production (e.g. 
thalassaemia, immunodeficiency diseases)
• Inborn errors of metabolism with missing enzymes or cell lines
24.25  Indications for allogeneic HSCT
Infection
Time after HSCT
Management
Herpes simplex 
(p. 325)
0–4 wks 
(aplastic phase)
Aciclovir prophylaxis 
and therapy
Bacterial, fungal
0–4 wks 
(aplastic phase)
As for acute 
leukaemia (p. 1036) 
– antibiotic and 
antifungal prophylaxis 
and therapy
Cytomegalovirus 
(p. 321)
5–21 wks 
(cell-mediated 
immune 
deficiency)
Antigen screening in 
blood (PCR) and 
pre-emptive therapy 
(e.g. ganciclovir)
Varicella zoster 
(p. 316)
After 13 wks
Aciclovir prophylaxis 
and therapy
Pneumocystis 
jirovecii (p. 400)
8–26 wks
Co-trimoxazole
Encapsulated 
bacteria
8 wks to years 
(immunoglobulin 
deficiency, 
prolonged with 
GVHD)
Prophylaxis and 
revaccination
(GVHD = graft-versus-host disease; PCR = polymerase chain reaction)
24.27  Infections during recovery from HSCT
Early
• Anaemia
• Infections
• Bleeding
• Acute GVHD
• Mucositis – pain, nausea, 
diarrhoea
• Liver veno-occlusive 
disease
Late
• Chronic GVHD
• Infertility
• Cataracts
• Secondary malignancy
(GVHD = graft-versus-host disease)
24.26  Complications of allogeneic HSCT
organ damage, relatively low doses of drugs, such as 
fludarabine and cyclophosphamide, are used to immu­
nosuppress the recipient and allow donor stem cells to 
engraft. The emerging donor immune system then elimi­
nates malignant cells via the ‘graft versus disease’ effect, 
which may be boosted by the elective use of donor T cell 
infusions post transplant.
Complications
These are outlined in Boxes 24.26 and 24.27. The risks 
and outcomes of transplantation depend upon several 
patient- and disease-related factors. In general, 25% die 
from procedure-related complications, such as infection 
and GVHD, and there remains a significant risk of 
relapse of the haematological malignancy. The long-
term survival for patients undergoing allogeneic HSCT 
in acute leukaemia is around 50%.
Graft-versus-host disease
Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is caused by the cyto­
toxic activity of donor T lymphocytes which become 
Blood disease
24
1018
sensitised to their new host, regarding it as foreign. This 
may cause either an acute or a chronic form of GVHD.
Acute GVHD occurs in the first 100 days after trans­
plant in about one-third of patients. It can affect the skin, 
causing rashes, the liver, causing jaundice, and the 
gut, causing diarrhoea, and may vary from mild to 
lethal. Prevention includes HLA-matching of the donor, 
immunosuppressant drugs, including methotrexate, 
ciclosporin, alemtuzumab or antithymocyte globulin. 
Severe presentations are very difficult to control and, 
despite high-dose corticosteroids, may result in death.
Chronic GVHD may follow acute GVHD or arise 
independently; it occurs later than acute GVHD. It often 
resembles a connective tissue disorder, and carries an 
increased risk of infection, although in mild cases a 
rash may be the only manifestation. Chronic GVHD is 
usually treated with corticosteroids and prolonged 
immunosuppression with, for example, ciclosporin. 
However, associated with chronic GVHD are the graft-
versus-leukaemia effect and a lower relapse rate of the 
underlying malignancy.
Autologous HSCT
This procedure can also be used in haematological 
malignancies. The patient’s own stem cells from blood 
or marrow are first harvested and frozen. After condi­
tioning myeloablative therapy, the autologous stem cells 
are reinfused into the blood stream in order to rescue 
the patient from the marrow damage and aplasia caused 
by chemotherapy. Autologous HSCT may be used for 
disorders which do not primarily involve the haemato­
poietic tissues, or in patients in whom very good remis­
sions have been achieved. The preferred source of stem 
cells for autologous transplants is peripheral blood. 
These stem cells engraft more quickly, marrow recovery 
occurring within 2–3 weeks. There is no risk of GVHD 
and no immunosuppression is required. Thus autolo­
gous stem cell transplantation carries a lower procedure-
related mortality rate than allogeneic HSCT at around 
5%, but there is a higher rate of recurrence of malig­
nancy. Whether the stem cells should be treated (purged) 
in an attempt to remove any residual malignant cells 
remains controversial.
ANTICOAGULANT AND 
ANTITHROMBOTIC THERAPY
There are numerous indications for anticoagulant and 
antithrombotic medications (Box 24.28). The guiding 
principles are outlined here, but management in specific 
indications is discussed elsewhere in the book. Broadly 
speaking, antiplatelet medications are of greater efficacy 
in the prevention of arterial thrombosis and of less value 
in the prevention of VTE. Thus, antiplatelet agents, such 
as aspirin and clopidogrel, are the drugs of choice in 
acute coronary events and in ischaemic cerebrovascular 
disease, while warfarin and other anticoagulants are 
favoured in VTE. In some extremely prothrombotic situ­
ations, such as coronary artery stenting, a combination 
of anticoagulant and antiplatelet drugs is used.
A range of anticoagulant and antithrombotic drugs is 
used in clinical practice (Box 24.29). Newer agents allow 
predictable anticoagulation without the need for fre­
quent monitoring and dose titration. Although warfarin 
24.28  Indications for anticoagulation
remains the mainstay for oral anti­coagulation, newer 
oral anticoagulants (dabigatran, rivaroxaban and apixa­
ban), which can be given at fixed doses with predictable 
effects and no need for monitoring, have now been 
approved for the prevention of perioperative VTE, the 
treatment of established VTE and the prevention of car­
dioembolic stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation.
Heparins
Unfractionated heparin (UFH) and low molecular 
weight heparins (LMWH) both act by binding via a spe­
cific pentasaccharide to antithrombin which potentiates 
its natural anticoagulant activity (see Fig. 24.6, p. 996). 
Increased cleavage of activated proteases, particularly 
factor Xa and thrombin (IIa), accounts for the anti­
coagulant effect. LMWHs preferentially augment anti­
thrombin activity against factor Xa. For the licensed 
indications, LMWHs are at least as efficacious as UFH 
but have several advantages:
•	 LMWHs are nearly 100% bioavailable and therefore 
produce reliable dose-dependent anticoagulation.
Anticoagulant and antithrombotic therapy
24
1019
usual to aim for a patient APTT which is 1.5–2.5 times 
the control time of the test.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a rare com­
plication of heparin therapy, caused by induction of 
anti-heparin/PF4 antibodies which bind to and activate 
platelets via an Fc receptor. This results in platelet acti­
vation and a prothrombotic state, with a paradoxical 
thrombocytopenia. HIT is more common in surgical 
than medical patients (especially cardiac and orthopae­
dic patients), with use of UFH rather than LMWH, and 
with higher doses of heparin.
Clinical features
Patients present, typically 5–14 days after starting 
heparin treatment, with a fall in platelet count of more 
than 30% from baseline. The count may still be in the 
reference range. They may be asymptomatic, or develop 
venous or arterial thrombosis and skin lesions, including 
overt skin necrosis. Affected patients may complain of 
pain or itch at injection sites and of systemic symptoms, 
such as shivering, following heparin injections. Patients 
who have received heparin in the preceding 100 days 
and who have preformed antibodies may develop acute 
systemic symptoms and an abrupt fall in platelet count 
in the first 24 hours after re-exposure.
Investigations
The pre-test probability of the diagnosis is assessed 
using the 4Ts scoring system. This assigns a score 
based on:
•	 the thrombocytopenia
•	 the timing of the fall in platelet count
•	 the presence of new thrombosis
•	 the likelihood of another cause for the 
thrombocytopenia.
Individuals at low risk need no further test; those 
with intermediate and high likelihood scores should 
have the diagnosis confirmed or refuted using an anti-
PF4 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Management
Heparin should be discontinued as soon as HIT is diag­
nosed and an alternative anticoagulant which does not 
cross-react with the antibody substituted. Argatroban (a 
direct thrombin inhibitor) and danaparoid (a heparin 
analogue) are licensed for use in the UK. In asympto­
matic patients with HIT who do not receive an alterna­
tive anticoagulant, around 50% will sustain a thrombosis 
in the subsequent 30 days. Patients with established 
thrombosis have a poor prognosis.
Coumarins
Although several coumarin anticoagulants are used 
around the world, warfarin is the most common.
Coumarins inhibit the vitamin K-dependent post-
translational carboxylation of factors II, VII, IX and X in 
the liver. This results in anticoagulation due to an effec­
tive deficiency of these factors. This is monitored by the 
INR, a standardised test based on measurement of the 
prothrombin time (p. 1000). Recommended target INR 
values for specific indications are given in Box 24.28.
•	 LMWHs do not require monitoring of their 
anticoagulant effect (except possibly in patients 
with very low body weight and with a glomerular 
filtration rate below 30 mL/min).
•	 LMWHs have a half-life of around 4 hours when 
given subcutaneously, compared with 1 hour for 
UFH. This permits once-daily dosing by the 
subcutaneous route, rather than the therapeutic 
continuous intravenous infusion or prophylactic 
twice-daily subcutaneous administration required 
for UFH.
•	 While rates of bleeding are similar between products, 
the risk of osteoporosis and heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia is much lower for LMWH.
•	 However, UFH is more completely reversed by 
protamine sulphate in the event of bleeding and at 
the end of cardiopulmonary bypass, for which UFH 
remains the drug of choice.
LMWHs are widely used for the prevention and 
treatment of VTE, the management of acute coronary 
syndromes and for most other scenarios listed in Box 
24.28. In some situations, UFH is still favoured by some 
clinicians, though there is little evidence that it is advan­
tageous, except when rapid reversibility is required. 
UFH is useful in patients with a high risk of bleeding: 
for example, those who have peptic ulceration or may 
require surgery. It is also favoured in the treatment of 
life-threatening thromboembolism: for example, major 
PE with significant hypoxaemia, hypotension and right-
sided heart strain. In this situation, UFH is started with 
a loading intravenous dose of 80 U/kg., followed by a 
continuous infusion of 18 U/kg/hr initially. The level of 
anticoagulation should be assessed by the APTT after 
6 hours and, if satisfactory, twice daily thereafter. It is 
Mode of action
Drug
Antiplatelet drugs
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibition
Aspirin
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptor 
inhibition
Clopidogrel
Prasugrel
Ticagrelor
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibition
Abciximab
Tirofiban
Eptifibatide
Phosphodiesterase inhibition
Dipyridamole
Oral anticoagulants
Vitamin K antagonism
Warfarin/coumarins
Direct thrombin inhibition
Dabigatran
Direct Xa inhibition
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Injectable anticoagulants
Antithrombin-dependent inhibition of 
thrombin and Xa
Heparin
Antithrombin-dependent inhibition of Xa
Fondaparinux
Idraparinux
Direct thrombin inhibition
Lepirudin
Argatroban
Bivalirudin
24.29  Modes of action of anticoagulant and 
antithrombotic drugs
Blood disease
24
1020
(see Box 24.30). Management of warfarin includes strate­
gies for over-anticoagulation and for bleeding:
•	 If the INR is above the therapeutic level, warfarin 
should be withheld or the dose reduced. If the 
patient is not bleeding, it may be appropriate to 
give a small dose of vitamin K either orally or IV 
(1–2.5 mg), especially if the INR is greater than 8.
•	 In the event of bleeding, withhold further warfarin. 
Minor bleeding can be treated with 1–2.5 mg of 
vitamin K IV. Major haemorrhage should be treated 
as an emergency with vitamin K 5–10 mg slowly IV, 
combined with coagulation factor replacement. This 
should optimally be a prothrombin complex 
concentrate (30–50 U/kg) which contains factors II, 
VII, IX and X; if that is not available, fresh frozen 
plasma (15–30 mL/kg) should be given.
Prophylaxis of venous thrombosis
All patients admitted to hospital should be assessed for 
their risk of developing VTE and appropriate prophy­
lactic measures put in place. Both medical and surgical 
patients are at increased risk. A summary of the risk 
categories is given in Box 24.31. Early mobilisation of 
patients is important to prevent DVT. Patients at medium 
Warfarin anticoagulation typically takes 3–5 days to 
become established, even using initial loading doses. 
Patients who require rapid initiation of therapy may 
receive higher initiation doses of warfarin. A typical 
regime in this situation is to give 10 mg warfarin on the 
first and second days, with 5 mg on the third day; sub­
sequent doses are titrated against the INR. Patients 
without an urgent need for anticoagulation (e.g. atrial 
fibrillation) can have warfarin introduced slowly using 
lower doses. Low-dose regimens are associated with a 
lower risk of the patient developing a supratherapeutic 
INR, and hence a lower bleeding risk. The duration of 
warfarin therapy depends on the clinical indication, and 
while treatment of DVT or preparation for cardioversion 
requires a limited duration, anticoagulation to prevent 
cardioembolic stroke in atrial fibrillation or from heart 
valve disease is long-term.
The major problems with warfarin are:
•	 a narrow therapeutic window
•	 metabolism that is affected by many factors
•	 numerous drug interactions.
Drug interactions are common through protein 
binding and metabolism by the cytochrome P450 system. 
Inter-individual differences in warfarin doses required 
to achieve a therapeutic INR are mostly accounted for 
by naturally occurring polymorphisms in the CYP2C9 
and the VKORC1 genes and dietary intake of vitamin K.
Major bleeding is the most common serious side-
effect of warfarin and occurs in 1–2% of patients each 
year. Fatal haemorrhage, most commonly intracranial, 
occurs in about 0.25% per annum. There are scoring 
systems which predict the annual bleeding risk and these 
can be used to help compare the risks and benefits of 
warfarin for an individual patient (Box 24.30). There are 
also some specific contraindications to anticoagulation 
Indications
Patients in the following categories should be considered for 
specific antithrombotic prophylaxis:
Moderate risk of DVT
Major surgery
• In patients > 40 yrs or with other risk factor for VTE
Major medical illness, e.g.
• Heart failure
• MI with complications
• Sepsis
• Inflammatory conditions, 
including inflammatory 
bowel disease
• Active malignancy
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Stroke and other conditions 
leading to lower limb 
paralysis
High risk of DVT
• Major abdominal or pelvic surgery for malignancy or with 
history of DVT or known thrombophilia (see Box 24.4,  
p. 1001)
• Major hip or knee surgery
• Neurosurgery
Methods of VTE prophylaxis
Mechanical
• Intermittent pneumatic 
compression
• Mechanical foot pumps
• Graduated compression 
stockings
Pharmacological
• LMWHs
• Unfractionated heparin
• Fondaparinux
• Dabigatran
• Rivaroxaban
• Apixaban
• Warfarin
(DVT = deep vein thrombosis; MI = myocardial infarction; VTE = venous 
thromboembolism)
24.31  Antithrombotic prophylaxis
Contraindications
• Recent surgery, especially to eye or CNS
• Pre-existing haemorrhage state, e.g. liver disease, 
haemophilia, thrombocytopenia
• Pre-existing structural lesions, e.g. peptic ulcer
• Recent cerebral or gastrointestinal haemorrhage
• Uncontrolled hypertension
• Cognitive impairment
• Frequent falls
Bleeding risk score*
• Age > 65 yrs (1 point)
• Previous gastrointestinal bleed (1 point)
• Previous stroke (1 point)
• Medical illness (1 point)
Recent myocardial infarction
Renal failure
Anaemia
Diabetes mellitus
Score: annual rate of major haemorrhage
0 = 3%
1–2 = 12%
3–4 = 30–48%
24.30  How to assess risks of anticoagulation
*Other bleeding risk scores have been applied to different clinical 
circumstances, e.g. HAS-BLED score in atrial fibrillation.
Anaemias
24
1021
In megaloblastic anaemia, the biochemical conse­
quence of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency is an inability 
to synthesise new bases to make DNA. A similar defect 
of cell division is seen in the presence of cytotoxic drugs 
or haematological disease in the marrow, such as myelo­
dysplasia. In these states, cells haemoglobinise normally 
but undergo fewer cell divisions, resulting in circulating 
red cells with a raised MCV. The red cell membrane is 
composed of a lipid bilayer which will freely exchange 
with the plasma pool of lipid. Conditions such as liver 
disease, hypothyroidism, hyperlipidaemia and preg­
nancy are associated with raised lipids and may also 
cause a raised MCV. Reticulocytes are larger than mature 
red cells, so when the reticulocyte count is raised – for 
example, in haemolysis – this may also increase the MCV.
Iron deficiency anaemia
This occurs when iron losses or physiological require­
ments exceed absorption.
Blood loss
The most common explanation in men and post-
menopausal women is gastrointestinal blood loss 
(p. 853). This may result from occult gastric or colorectal 
malignancy, gastritis, peptic ulceration, inflammatory 
bowel disease, diverticulitis, polyps and angiodysplastic 
lesions. Worldwide, hookworm and schistosomiasis are 
the most common causes of gut blood loss (pp. 369 and 
376). Gastrointestinal blood loss may be exacerbated 
by the chronic use of aspirin or non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which cause intestinal 
or high risk require additional antithrombotic measures; 
these may be pharmacological or mechanical. There is 
increasing evidence in high-risk groups, such as patients 
who have had major lower limb orthopaedic surgery 
and abdominal or pelvic cancer surgery, for protracted 
thromboprophylaxis for as long as 30 days after the pro­
cedure. Particular care should be taken with the use of 
pharmacological prophylaxis in patients with a high risk 
of bleeding or with specific risks of haemorrhage related 
to the site of surgery or the use of spinal or epidural 
anaesthesia.
ANAEMIAS
Around 30% of the total world population is anaemic 
and half of these, some 600 million people, have iron 
deficiency. The classification of anaemia by the size of 
the red cells (MCV) indicates the likely cause (see Figs 
24.10 and 24.11, pp. 1002 and 1003).
Red cells in the bone marrow must acquire a minimum 
level of haemoglobin before being released into the 
blood stream (Fig. 24.19). Whilst in the marrow compart­
ment, red cell precursors undergo cell division, driven 
by erythropoietin. If red cells cannot acquire haemo­
globin at a normal rate, they will undergo more divi­
sions than normal and will have a low MCV when 
finally released into the blood. The MCV is low because 
component parts of the haemoglobin molecule are not 
fully available: that is, iron in iron deficiency, globin 
chains in thalassaemia, haem ring in congenital sidero­
blastic anaemia and, occasionally, poor iron utilisation 
in the anaemia of chronic disease.
Fig. 24.19  Factors which influence the size of red cells in anaemia. In microcytosis, the MCV is < 76 fL. In macrocytosis, the MCV is > 100 fL. 
(MCV = mean cell volume; RBC = red blood cell) 
Normal
Defective
haemoglobinisation
Defective
DNA synthesis
Normal DNA synthesis
e.g. Iron deficiency
       Thalassaemia
       Sideroblastic
       anaemia
Reticulocyte
e.g. ↓ B12
        ↓ Folate
       Cytotoxic drugs
       Myelodysplasia
Marked
reticulocytosis
Normal-sized
RBC
Elevated plasma
lipid
   Liver disease
   Hypothyroidism
   Alcohol
   Hyperlipidaemia
   Pregnancy
Normal
haemoglobinisation
Macrocytosis
(↑ MCV)
Microcytosis
(↓ MCV)
Marrow
Blood
Blood disease
24
1022
erosions and impair platelet function. In women of 
child-bearing age, menstrual blood loss, pregnancy and 
breastfeeding contribute to iron deficiency by depleting 
iron stores; in developed countries, one-third of pre-
menopausal women have low iron stores but only 3% 
display iron-deficient haematopoiesis. Very rarely, 
chronic haemoptysis or haematuria may cause iron 
deficiency.
Malabsorption
A dietary assessment should be made in all patients to 
ascertain their iron intake (p. 130). Gastric acid is 
required to release iron from food and helps to keep iron 
in the soluble ferrous state (Fig. 24.20). Achlorhydria in 
the elderly or that due to drugs such as proton pump 
inhibitors may contribute to the lack of iron availability 
from the diet, as may previous gastric surgery. Iron is 
absorbed actively in the upper small intestine and hence 
can be affected by coeliac disease (p. 880).
Physiological demands
At times of rapid growth, such as infancy and puberty, 
iron requirements increase and may outstrip absorption. 
In pregnancy, iron is diverted to the fetus, the placenta 
and the increased maternal red cell mass, and is lost with 
bleeding at parturition (Box 24.32).
Fig. 24.20  The regulation of iron absorption, uptake and distribution in the body. The transport of iron is regulated in a similar fashion to 
enterocytes in other iron-transporting cells such as macrophages. 
< 10%
Non-haem
iron
Haem
iron
> 90%
Iron
available
for
absorption
or
Amino acids
Vitamin C
Phytates
Tannins
Phosphates
Dietary iron
7 mg/1000 kCal
< 5%
~30%
Iron binds
to transferrin
for delivery
to tissues
Maximum
iron absorption
3.5 mg/day
Tissue iron
Enzymes (2%)
Myoglobin (4%)
Ferritin (29%)
Haemoglobin
(65%)
High hepcidin state
Low hepcidin state
Ferroportin
internalised
Ferroportin
available
Gut lumen
Fe
Fe Fe Fe
Fe Fe
Fe
Fe
Blood
Enterocyte
Ferroportin
Hepcidin
Inflammatory
cytokines
induce hepcidin
secretion from liver
Anaemia
Hypoxia
Low iron stores
suppress hepcidin
secretion from liver
• Full blood count: increased plasma volume (40%) 
lowers normal Hb (reference range reduced to  
> 105 g/L at 28 wks). The MCV may increase by 
5 fL. A progressive neutrophilia occurs. Gestational 
thrombocytopenia (rarely < 60 × 109/L) is a benign 
phenomenon.
• Depletion of iron stores: iron deficiency is a common cause 
of anaemia in pregnancy and, if present, should be treated 
with oral iron supplement.
• Vitamin B12: serum levels are physiologically low in 
pregnancy but deficiency is uncommon.
• Folate: tissue stores may become depleted, and folate 
supplementation is recommended in all pregnancies (see Box 
5.32, p. 125).
• Coagulation factors: from the second trimester, 
procoagulant factors increase approximately  
threefold, particularly fibrinogen, von Willebrand  
factor and factor VIII. This causes activated protein C 
resistance and a shortened activated partial  
thromboplastin time (APTT), and contributes to a 
prothrombotic state.
• Anticoagulants: levels of protein C increase from the second 
trimester, while levels of free protein S fall as C4b binding 
protein increases.
24.32  Haematological physiology in pregnancy
Anaemias
24
1023
iron replacement is appropriate. Ferrous sulphate 
200 mg 3 times daily (195 mg of elemental iron per day) 
is adequate and should be continued for 3–6 months to 
replete iron stores. Many patients suffer gastrointestinal 
side-effects with ferrous sulphate, including dyspepsia 
and altered bowel habit. When this occurs, reduction in 
dose to 200 mg twice daily or a switch to ferrous gluco­
nate 300 mg twice daily (70 mg of elemental iron per 
day) should be tried. Delayed-release preparations are 
not useful, since they release iron beyond the upper 
small intestine, where it cannot be absorbed.
The haemoglobin should rise by around 10 g/L every 
7–10 days and a reticulocyte response will be evident 
within a week. A failure to respond adequately may be 
due to non-compliance, continued blood loss, malab­
sorption or an incorrect diagnosis. Patients with malab­
sorption or chronic gut disease may need parenteral iron 
therapy. Previously, iron dextran or iron sucrose was 
used, but new preparations of iron isomaltose and iron 
carboxymaltose have fewer allergic effects and are pre­
ferred. Doses required can be calculated based on the 
patient’s starting haemoglobin and body weight. Obser­
vation for anaphylaxis following an initial test dose is 
recommended.
Anaemia of chronic disease
Anaemia of chronic disease (ACD) is a common type of 
anaemia, particularly in hospital populations. It occurs 
in the setting of chronic infection, chronic inflammation 
or neoplasia. The anaemia is not related to bleeding, 
haemolysis or marrow infiltration, is mild, with haemo­
globin in the range of 85–115 g/L, and is usually associ­
ated with a normal MCV (normocytic, normochromic), 
though this may be reduced in long-standing inflamma­
tion. The serum iron is low but iron stores are normal or 
increased, as indicated by the ferritin or stainable 
marrow iron.
Pathogenesis
It has recently become clear that the key regulatory 
protein that accounts for the findings characteristic of 
ACD is hepcidin, which is produced by the liver (see 
Fig. 24.20). Hepcidin production is induced by pro-
inflammatory cytokines, especially IL-6. Hepcidin binds 
to ferroportin on the membrane of iron-exporting cells, 
such as small intestinal enterocytes and macrophages, 
internalising the ferroportin and thereby inhibiting the 
export of iron from these cells into the blood. The iron 
remains trapped inside the cells in the form of ferritin, 
levels of which are therefore normal or high in the face 
of significant anaemia. Inhibition or blockade of hepci­
din is a potential target for treatment of this form of 
anaemia.
Diagnosis and management
It is often difficult to distinguish ACD associated with a 
low MCV from iron deficiency. Box 24.33 summarises 
the investigations and results. Examination of the 
marrow may ultimately be required to assess iron stores 
directly. A trial of oral iron can be given in difficult situ­
ations. A positive response occurs in true iron deficiency 
but not in ACD. Measures which reduce the severity 
of the underlying disorder generally help to improve 
the ACD.
Investigations
Confirmation of iron deficiency
Plasma ferritin is a measure of iron stores in tissues and 
is the best single test to confirm iron deficiency (Box 
24.33). It is a very specific test; a subnormal level is due 
to iron deficiency or, very rarely, hypothyroidism or 
vitamin C deficiency. Ferritin levels can be raised in liver 
disease and in the acute phase response; in these condi­
tions, a ferritin level of up to 100 µg/L may still be 
compatible with low bone marrow iron stores.
Plasma iron and total iron binding capacity (TIBC) 
are measures of iron availability; hence they are affected 
by many factors besides iron stores. Plasma iron has a 
marked diurnal and day-to-day variation and becomes 
very low during an acute phase response but is raised 
in liver disease and haemolysis. Levels of transferrin, the 
binding protein for iron, are lowered by malnutrition, 
liver disease, the acute phase response and nephrotic 
syndrome, but raised by pregnancy and the oral contra­
ceptive pill. A transferrin saturation (i.e. iron/TIBC × 
100) of less than 16% is consistent with iron deficiency 
but is less specific than a ferritin measurement.
All proliferating cells express membrane transferrin 
receptors to acquire iron; a small amount of this receptor 
is shed into blood, where it can be detected in a free 
soluble form. At times of poor iron stores, cells 
up-regulate transferrin receptor expression and the 
levels of soluble plasma transferrin receptor increase. 
This can now be measured by immunoassay and used 
to distinguish storage iron depletion in the presence of 
an acute phase response or liver disease, when a raised 
level indicates iron deficiency. In difficult cases, it may 
still be necessary to examine a bone marrow aspirate for 
iron stores.
Investigation of the cause
This will depend upon the age and sex of the patient, as 
well as the history and clinical findings. In men and in 
post-menopausal women with a normal diet, the upper 
and lower gastrointestinal tract should be investigated 
by endoscopy or radiological studies. Serum anti-
endomysial or anti-transglutaminase antibodies and 
possibly a duodenal biopsy are indicated (p. 881) to 
detect coeliac disease. In the tropics, stool and urine 
should be examined for parasites (p. 311).
Management
Unless the patient has angina, heart failure or evidence 
of cerebral hypoxia, transfusion is not necessary and oral 
Ferritin
Iron
TIBC
Transferrin 
saturation
Soluble 
transferrin 
receptor
Iron 
deficiency 
anaemia
↓
↓
↑
↓
↑
Anaemia 
of chronic 
disease
↑/Normal
↓
↓
↓
↓/Normal
(TIBC = total iron binding capacity)
24.33  Investigations to differentiate anaemia of 
chronic disease from iron deficiency anaemia
Blood disease
24
1024
Peripheral nerves
• Glove and stocking paraesthesiae
• Loss of ankle reflexes
Spinal cord
• Subacute combined degeneration of the cord
Posterior columns – diminished vibration sensation and 
proprioception
Corticospinal tracts – upper motor neuron signs
Cerebrum
• Dementia
• Optic atrophy
Autonomic neuropathy
24.36  Neurological findings in B12 deficiency
Investigation
Result
Haemoglobin
Often reduced, may be very low
MCV
Usually raised, commonly > 120 fL
Erythrocyte count
Low for degree of anaemia
Blood film
Oval macrocytosis, poikilocytosis, 
red cell fragmentation, neutrophil 
hypersegmentation
Reticulocyte count
Low for degree of anaemia
Leucocyte count
Low or normal
Platelet count
Low or normal
Bone marrow
Increased cellularity, megaloblastic 
changes in erythroid series, giant 
metamyelocytes, dysplastic 
megakaryocytes, increased iron in 
stores, pathological non-ring 
sideroblasts
Serum ferritin
Elevated
Plasma lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH)
Elevated, often markedly
24.35  Investigations in megaloblastic anaemia
Megaloblastic anaemia
This results from a deficiency of vitamin B12 or folic acid, 
or from disturbances in folic acid metabolism. Folate is 
an important substrate of, and vitamin B12 a co-factor for, 
the generation of the essential amino acid methionine 
from homocysteine. This reaction produces tetrahydro­
folate, which is converted to thymidine monophosphate 
for incorporation into DNA. Deficiency of either vitamin 
B12 or folate will therefore produce high plasma levels of 
homocysteine and impaired DNA synthesis.
The end result is cells with arrested nuclear matura­
tion but normal cytoplasmic development: so-called 
nucleocytoplasmic asynchrony. All proliferating cells 
will exhibit megaloblastosis; hence changes are evident 
in the buccal mucosa, tongue, small intestine, cervix, 
vagina and uterus. The high proliferation rate of bone 
marrow results in striking changes in the haematopoi­
etic system in megaloblastic anaemia. Cells become 
arrested in development and die within the marrow; this 
ineffective erythropoiesis results in an expanded hyper­
cellular marrow. The megaloblastic changes are most 
evident in the early nucleated red cell precursors, and 
haemolysis within the marrow results in a raised 
bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), but without 
the reticulocytosis characteristic of other forms of 
haemolysis (p. 1026). Iron stores are usually raised. The 
mature red cells are large and oval, and sometimes 
contain nuclear remnants. Nuclear changes are seen in 
the immature granulocyte precursors and a characteris­
tic appearance is that of ‘giant’ metamyelocytes with a 
large ‘sausage-shaped’ nucleus. The mature neutrophils 
show hypersegmentation of their nuclei, with cells 
having six or more nuclear lobes. If severe, a pancyto­
penia may be present in the peripheral blood.
Vitamin B12 deficiency, but not folate deficiency, is 
associated with neurological disease in up to 40% of 
cases, although advanced neurological disease due to B12 
deficiency is now uncommon in the developed world. 
The main pathological finding is focal demyelination 
affecting the spinal cord, peripheral nerves, optic nerves 
and cerebrum. The most common manifestations are 
sensory, with peripheral paraesthesiae and ataxia of 
gait. The clinical and diagnostic features of megaloblas­
tic anaemia are summarised in Boxes 24.34 and 24.35, 
and the neurological features of B12 deficiency in 
Box 24.36.
Vitamin B12
Vitamin B12 absorption
The average daily diet contains 5–30 µg of vitamin B12, 
mainly in meat, fish, eggs and milk – well in excess of 
the 1 µg daily requirement. In the stomach, gastric 
enzymes release vitamin B12 from food and at gastric pH 
it binds to a carrier protein termed R protein. The gastric 
parietal cells produce intrinsic factor, a vitamin B12-
binding protein which optimally binds vitamin B12 at pH 
8. As gastric emptying occurs, pancreatic secretion raises 
the pH and vitamin B12 released from the diet switches 
from the R protein to intrinsic factor. Bile also contains 
vitamin B12 which is available for reabsorption in the 
intestine. The vitamin B12–intrinsic factor complex binds 
to specific receptors in the terminal ileum, and vitamin 
B12 is actively transported by the enterocytes to plasma, 
Symptoms
• Malaise (90%)
• Breathlessness (50%)
• Paraesthesiae (80%)
• Sore mouth (20%)
• Weight loss
• Altered skin pigmentation
• Impotence
• Poor memory
• Depression
• Personality change
• Hallucinations
• Visual disturbance
Signs
• Smooth tongue
• Angular cheilosis
• Vitiligo
• Skin pigmentation
• Heart failure
• Pyrexia
24.34  Clinical features of megaloblastic anaemia
where it binds to transcobalamin II, a transport protein 
produced by the liver, which carries it to the tissues for 
utilisation. The liver stores enough vitamin B12 for 
3 years and this, together with the enterohepatic circula­
tion, means that vitamin B12 deficiency takes years to 
Anaemias
24
1025
competition for free vitamin B12 can lead to deficiency. 
This is corrected to some extent by appropriate 
antibiotics.
A small number of people heavily infected with the 
fish tapeworm (p. 378) develop vitamin B12 deficiency.
Inflammatory disease of the terminal ileum, such as 
Crohn’s disease, may impair the absorption of vitamin 
B12–intrinsic factor complex, as may surgery on that part 
of the bowel.
Folate
Folate absorption
Folates are produced by plants and bacteria; hence 
dietary leafy vegetables (spinach, broccoli, lettuce), 
fruits (bananas, melons) and animal protein (liver, 
kidney) are a rich source. An average Western diet 
contains more than the minimum daily intake of 50 µg 
but excess cooking destroys folates. Most dietary folate 
is present as polyglutamates; these are converted to 
monoglutamate in the upper small bowel and actively 
transported into plasma. Plasma folate is loosely bound 
to plasma proteins such as albumin and there is an 
entero­hepatic circulation. Total body stores of folate are 
small and deficiency can occur in a matter of weeks.
Folate deficiency
The causes and diagnostic features of folate deficiency 
are shown in Boxes 24.37 and 24.38. The edentulous 
elderly or psychiatric patient is particularly susceptible 
to dietary deficiency and this is exacerbated in the pres­
ence of gut disease or malignancy. Pregnancy-induced 
folate deficiency is the most common cause of megalo­
blastosis worldwide and is more likely in the context 
of twin pregnancies, multiparity and hyperemesis 
become manifest, even if all dietary intake is stopped or 
severe B12 malabsorption supervenes.
Blood levels of vitamin B12 provide a reasonable indi­
cation of tissue stores and are usually diagnostic of defi­
ciency. Levels of cobalamins fall in normal pregnancy. 
Reference ranges vary between laboratories but levels 
below 150 ng/L are common and, in the last trimester, 
5–10% of women have levels below 100 ng/L. Spuri­
ously low B12 values occur in women using the oral 
contraceptive pill and in patients with myeloma, in 
whom paraproteins can interfere with vitamin B12 assays.
Causes of vitamin B12 deficiency
Dietary deficiency
This only occurs in strict vegans but the onset of clinical 
features can occur at any age between 10 and 80 years. 
Less strict vegetarians often have slightly low vitamin 
B12 levels but are not tissue vitamin B12-deficient.
Gastric pathology
Release of vitamin B12 from the food requires normal 
gastric acid and enzyme secretion, and this is impaired 
by hypochlorhydria in elderly patients or following 
gastric surgery. Total gastrectomy invariably results in 
vitamin B12 deficiency within 5 years, often combined 
with iron deficiency; these patients need life-long 
3-monthly vitamin B12 injections. After partial gastrec­
tomy, vitamin B12 deficiency only develops in 10–20% of 
patients by 5 years; an annual injection of vitamin B12 
should prevent deficiency in this group.
Pernicious anaemia
This is an organ-specific autoimmune disorder in which 
the gastric mucosa is atrophic, with loss of parietal cells 
causing intrinsic factor deficiency. In the absence of 
intrinsic factor, less than 1% of dietary vitamin B12 is 
absorbed. Pernicious anaemia has an incidence of 
25/100 000 population over the age of 40 years in devel­
oped countries, but an average age of onset of 60 years. 
It is more common in individuals with other auto­
immune disease (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ 
disease, vitiligo, hypoparathyroidism or Addison’s 
disease; Ch. 20) or a family history of these or pernicious 
anaemia. The finding of anti-intrinsic factor antibodies 
in the context of B12 deficiency is diagnostic of pernicious 
anaemia without further investigation. Antiparietal cell 
antibodies are present in over 90% of cases but are also 
present in 20% of normal females over the age of 
60 years; a negative result makes pernicious anaemia 
less likely but a positive result is not diagnostic. The 
Schilling test, involving measurement of absorption of 
radio-labelled B12 after oral administration before and 
after replacement of intrinsic factor, has fallen out of 
favour with the availability of autoantibody tests, greater 
caution in the use of radioactive tracers, and limited 
availability of intrinsic factor.
Small bowel pathology
One-third of patients with pancreatic exocrine insuffi­
ciency fail to transfer dietary vitamin B12 from R protein 
to intrinsic factor. This usually results in slightly low 
vitamin B12 values but no tissue evidence of vitamin B12 
deficiency.
Motility disorders or hypogammaglobulinaemia can 
result in bacterial overgrowth, and the ensuing 
Diet
• Poor intake of vegetables
Malabsorption
• e.g. Coeliac disease
Increased demand
• Cell proliferation, e.g. haemolysis
• Pregnancy
Drugs*
• Certain anticonvulsants (e.g. phenytoin)
• Contraceptive pill
• Certain cytotoxic drugs (e.g. methotrexate)
*Usually only a problem in patients deficient in folate from another cause.
24.37  Causes of folate deficiency
Diagnostic findings
• Serum folate levels may be low but are difficult to interpret
• Low red cell folate levels indicate prolonged folate deficiency 
and are probably the most relevant measure
Corroborative findings
• Macrocytic dysplastic blood picture
• Megaloblastic marrow
24.38  Investigation of folic acid deficiency
Blood disease
24
1026
releasing reticulocytes prematurely. Anaemia only 
occurs if the rate of destruction exceeds this increased 
production rate.
Results of investigations which establish the presence 
of haemolysis are shown in Box 24.39. Red cell destruc­
tion overloads pathways for haemoglobin breakdown in 
the liver (p. 927), causing a modest rise in unconjugated 
bilirubin in the blood and mild jaundice. Increased 
reabsorption of urobilinogen from the gut results in an 
increase in urinary urobilinogen (pp. 936 and 994). Red 
cell destruction releases LDH into the serum. The bone 
marrow compensation results in a reticulocytosis, and 
sometimes nucleated red cell precursors appear in the 
blood. Increased proliferation of the bone marrow can 
result in a thrombocytosis, neutrophilia and, if marked, 
immature granulocytes in the blood, producing a leuco-
erythroblastic blood film. The appearances of the red 
cells may give an indication of the likely cause of the 
haemolysis:
•	 Spherocytes are small, dark red cells which suggest 
autoimmune haemolysis or hereditary 
spherocytosis.
•	 Sickle cells suggest sickle-cell disease.
•	 Red cell fragments indicate microangiopathic 
haemolysis.
The compensatory erythroid hyperplasia may give 
rise to folate deficiency, with megaloblastic blood 
features.
The differential diagnosis of haemolysis is deter­
mined by the clinical scenario in combination with the 
results of blood film examination and Coombs testing 
for antibodies directed against red cells (see below and 
Fig. 24.21).
Extravascular haemolysis
Physiological red cell destruction occurs in the reticulo-
endothelial cells in the liver or spleen, so avoiding free 
haemoglobin in the plasma. In most haemolytic states, 
haemolysis is predominantly extravascular.
To confirm the haemolysis, patients’ red cells can be 
labelled with 51chromium. When re-injected, they can be 
used to determine red cell survival; when combined 
with body surface radioactivity counting, this test may 
indicate whether the liver or the spleen is the main 
source of red cell destruction. However, it is seldom 
performed in clinical practice.
Intravascular haemolysis
Less commonly, red cell lysis occurs within the blood 
stream due to membrane damage by complement (ABO 
transfusion reactions, paroxysmal nocturnal haemo­
globinuria), infections (malaria, Clostridium perfringens), 
gravidarum. Serum folate is very sensitive to dietary 
intake; a single folate-rich meal can normalise it in a 
patient with true folate deficiency, whereas anorexia, 
alcohol and anticonvulsant therapy can reduce it in the 
absence of megaloblastosis. For this reason, red cell 
folate levels are a more accurate indicator of folate stores 
and tissue folate deficiency.
Management of megaloblastic 
anaemia
If a patient with a severe megaloblastic anaemia is very 
ill and treatment must be started before vitamin B12 and 
red cell folate results are available, that treatment should 
always include both folic acid and vitamin B12. The use 
of folic acid alone in the presence of vitamin B12 defi­
ciency may result in worsening of neurological deficits.
Rarely, if severe angina or heart failure is present, 
transfusion can be used in megaloblastic anaemia. The 
cardiovascular system is adapted to the chronic anaemia 
present in megaloblastosis, and the volume load imposed 
by transfusion may result in decompensation and severe 
cardiac failure. In such circumstances, exchange transfu­
sion or slow administration of 1 U of red cells with diu­
retic cover may be given cautiously.
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency is treated with hydroxycobalamin 
1000 µg IM for 6 doses 2 or 3 days apart, followed by 
maintenance therapy of 1000 µg every 3 months for life. 
The reticulocyte count will peak by the 5th–10th day 
after starting replacement therapy. The haemoglobin 
will rise by 10 g/L every week until normalised. The 
response of the marrow is associated with a fall in 
plasma potassium levels and rapid depletion of iron 
stores. If an initial response is not maintained and the 
blood film is dimorphic (i.e. shows a mixture of micro­
cytic and macrocytic cells), the patient may need addi­
tional iron therapy. A sensory neuropathy may take 
6–12 months to correct; long-standing neurological 
damage may not improve.
Folate deficiency
Oral folic acid 5 mg daily for 3 weeks will treat acute 
deficiency and 5 mg once weekly is adequate mainte­
nance therapy. Prophylactic folic acid in pregnancy pre­
vents megaloblastosis in women at risk, and reduces the 
risk of fetal neural tube defects (p. 125). Prophylactic 
supplementation is also given in chronic haematological 
disease associated with reduced red cell lifespan (e.g. 
haemolytic anaemias). There is some evidence that 
supraphysiological supplementation (400 µg/day) can 
reduce the risk of coronary and cerebrovascular disease 
by lowering plasma homocysteine levels. This has led 
the US Food and Drug Administration to introduce for­
tification of bread, flour and rice with folic acid.
Haemolytic anaemia
Haemolysis indicates that there is shortening of the 
normal red cell lifespan of 120 days. There are many 
causes, as shown in Figure 24.21. To compensate, the 
bone marrow may increase its output of red cells six- to 
eightfold by increasing the proportion of red cells pro­
duced, expanding the volume of active marrow, and 
Hallmarks of haemolysis
• ↓Haemoglobin
• ↑Unconjugated bilirubin
• ↑Lactate dehydrogenase
• ↑Reticulocytes
• ↑Urinary urobilinogen
Additional features of intravascular haemolysis
• ↓Haptoglobin
• ↑Methaemalbumin
• Positive urinary haemosiderin
• Haemoglobinuria
24.39  Investigation results indicating 
active haemolysis
Anaemias
24
1027
mechanical trauma (heart valves, DIC) or oxidative 
damage (e.g. drugs such as dapsone and maloprim). 
When intravascular red cell destruction occurs, free hae­
moglobin is released into the plasma. Free haemoglobin 
is toxic to cells and binding proteins have evolved to 
minimise this risk. Haptoglobin is an α2-globulin pro­
duced by the liver, which binds free haemoglobin, 
resulting in a fall in its levels during active haemolysis. 
Once haptoglobins are saturated, free haemoglobin is 
oxidised to form methaemoglobin, which binds to 
albumin, in turn forming methaemalbumin, which can 
be detected spectrophotometrically in the Schumm’s 
test. Methaemoglobin is degraded and any free haem is 
bound to a second binding protein called haemopexin. 
If all the protective mechanisms are saturated, free hae­
moglobin may appear in the urine (haemoglobinuria). 
When fulminant, this gives rise to black urine, as in 
severe falciparum malaria infection (p. 353). In smaller 
amounts, renal tubular cells absorb the haemoglobin, 
Fig. 24.21  Causes of haemolysis. A Inherited causes. B Acquired causes. (CLL = chronic lymphatic leukaemia; DIC = disseminated intravascular 
coagulation; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; G6PD = glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; HUS = haemolytic uraemic syndrome; PK = pyruvate kinase; 
RA = rheumatoid arthritis; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; TTP = thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura) 
A
B
Primary idiopathic
Secondary
•Autoimmune, e.g. SLE, RA
•Drugs, e.g. L-dopa, methyldopa, mefenamic
  acid, penicillin, quinidine, fludarabine
•Lymphoid malignancy, e.g. CLL, myeloma,
  lymphoma
•Other malignancy, e.g. lung, colon, kidney,
  ovary, thymoma
•Others, e.g. ulcerative colitis, HIV
Primary idiopathic
Secondary
•Infection, e.g.
  mycoplasma,
  EBV, syphilis
•Lymphoprolifer-
  ative disorders,
  e.g. lymphoma 
Red cell antigen-
induced
•Transfusion
  reaction
•Haemolytic
  disease of the
  newborn  
Immune
Acquired
Inherited
Non-immune
Autoantibodies
Alloantibodies
Warm antibodies 
Cold antibodies 
Mechanical
•Prosthetic valves
•Microangiopathic,
  e.g. DIC, HUS, TTP
•March
  haemoglobinuria 
Infection
•Intracellular
  organisms, e.g.
  malaria
•Toxins, e.g.
  C. perfringens  
Chemical/physical
•Oxidative drugs,
  e.g. dapsone,
  maloprim
•Copper (Wilson’s
  disease)
•Burns
•Drowning 
 
 
Acquired abnormal
membrane
•Paroxysmal
  nocturnal
  haemoglobinuria  
Red cell membrane abnormality
•Hereditary spherocytosis
•Hereditary elliptocytosis
Haemoglobin
•Deficiency, e.g. thalassaemias
•Abnormality, e.g. sickle cell disease  
Red cell enzyme deficiency
•Glycolytic pathway, e.g. PK
•Hexose monophosphate shunt,
  e.g. G6PD
•Pyrimidine 5´ nucleotidase  
degrade it and store the iron as haemosiderin. When the 
tubular cells are subsequently sloughed into the urine, 
they give rise to haemosiderinuria, which is always 
indicative of intravascular haemolysis.
Red cell membrane defects
The structure of the red cell membrane is shown in 
Figure 24.4 (p. 994). The basic structure is a cytoskeleton 
‘stapled’ on to the lipid bilayer by special protein com­
plexes. This structure ensures great deformability and 
elasticity; the red cell diameter is 8 µm but the narrowest 
capillaries in the circulation are in the spleen, measuring 
just 2 µm in diameter. When the normal red cell struc­
ture is disturbed, usually by a quantitative or functional 
deficiency of one or more proteins in the cytoskeleton, 
cells lose their elasticity. Each time such cells pass 
through the spleen, they lose membrane relative to their 
cell volume. This results in an increase in mean cell 
haemoglobin concentration (MCHC), abnormal cell 
Blood disease
24
1028
• Vaccinate with pneumococcal, Haemophilus influenzae type 
B, meningococcal group C and influenza vaccines at least 
2–3 wks before elective splenectomy. Vaccination should be 
given after emergency surgery but may be less effective
• Pneumococcal re-immunisation should be given at least 
5-yearly and influenza annually. Vaccination status must be 
documented
• Life-long prophylactic penicillin V 500 mg twice daily is 
recommended. In penicillin-allergic patients, consider a 
macrolide
• Patients should be educated regarding the risks of infection 
and methods of prophylaxis
• A card or bracelet should be carried to alert health 
professionals to the risk of overwhelming sepsis
• In septicaemia, patients should be resuscitated and given IV 
antibiotics to cover pneumococcus, Haemophilus and 
meningococcus, according to local resistance patterns
• The risk of cerebral malaria is increased in the event of 
infection
• Animal bites should be promptly treated with local 
disinfection and antibiotics, to prevent serious soft tissue 
infection and septicaemia
24.40  Management of the splenectomised patient
Hereditary elliptocytosis
This term refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders 
that produce an increase in elliptocytic red cells on the 
blood film and a variable degree of haemolysis. This is 
due to a functional abnormality of one or more anchor 
proteins in the red cell membrane, e.g. alpha spectrin or 
protein 4.1. Inheritance may be autosomal dominant or 
recessive. Hereditary elliptocytosis is less common than 
hereditary spherocytosis in Western countries, with an 
incidence of 1/10 000, but is more common in equatorial 
Africa and parts of South-east Asia. The clinical course 
is variable and depends upon the degree of membrane 
dysfunction caused by the inherited molecular defect(s); 
most cases present as an asymptomatic blood film 
abnormality, but occasional cases result in neonatal 
haemolysis or a chronic compensated haemolytic state. 
Management of the latter is the same as for hereditary 
spherocytosis.
A characteristic variant of hereditary elliptocytosis 
occurs in South-east Asia, particularly Malaysia and 
Papua New Guinea, with stomatocytes and ovalocytes 
in the blood. This has a prevalence of up to 30% in some 
communities because it offers relative protection from 
malaria and thus has sustained a high gene frequency. 
The blood film is often very abnormal and immediate 
differential diagnosis is broad.
Red cell enzymopathies
The mature red cell must produce energy via ATP to 
maintain a normal internal environment and cell 
volume whilst protecting itself from the oxidative stress 
presented by oxygen carriage. Anaerobic glycolysis via 
the Embden–Meyerhof pathway generates ATP, and 
the hexose monophosphate shunt produces nicotina­
mide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and 
glutathione to protect against oxidative stress. The 
impact of functional or quantitative defects in the 
enzymes in these pathways depends upon the impor­
tance of the steps affected and the presence of 
shape (see Box 24.2, p. 999) and reduced red cell survival 
due to extravascular haemolysis.
Hereditary spherocytosis
This is usually inherited as an autosomal dominant con­
dition, although 25% of cases have no family history and 
represent new mutations. The incidence is approximately 
1 : 5000 in developed countries but this may be an under­
estimate, since the disease may present de novo in 
patients aged over 65 years and is often discovered as a 
chance finding on a blood count. The most common 
abnormalities are deficiencies of beta spectrin or ankyrin 
(see Fig. 24.4, p. 994). The severity of spontaneous haemo­
lysis varies. Most cases are associated with an asympto­
matic compensated chronic haemolytic state with 
spherocytes present on the blood film, a reticulo­cytosis 
and mild hyperbilirubinaemia. Pigment gallstones are 
present in up to 50% of patients and may cause sympto­
matic cholecystitis. Occasional cases are associated with 
more severe haemolysis; these may be due to coinciden­
tal polymorphisms in alpha spectrin or co-inheritance of 
a second defect involving a different protein.
The clinical course may be complicated by crises:
•	 A haemolytic crisis occurs when the severity of 
haemolysis increases; this is rare, and usually 
associated with infection.
•	 A megaloblastic crisis follows the development of 
folate deficiency; this may occur as a first 
presentation of the disease in pregnancy.
•	 An aplastic crisis occurs in association with 
parvovirus B19 infection (p. 315). Parvovirus causes 
a common exanthem in children, but if individuals 
with chronic haemolysis become infected, the virus 
directly invades red cell precursors and temporarily 
switches off red cell production. Patients present 
with severe anaemia and a low reticulocyte count.
Investigations
The patient and other family members should be 
screened for features of compensated haemolysis (see 
Box 24.39). This may be all that is required to confirm 
the diagnosis. Haemoglobin levels are variable, depend­
ing on the degree of compensation. The blood film will 
show spherocytes but the direct Coombs test (see Fig. 
24.22) is negative, excluding immune haemolysis. An 
osmotic fragility test may show increased sensitivity to 
lysis in hypotonic saline solutions but is limited by lack 
of sensitivity and specificity. More specific flow cytomet­
ric tests, detecting binding of eosin-5-maleimide to red 
cells, are recommended in borderline cases.
Management
Folic acid prophylaxis, 5 mg daily, should be given for 
life. Consideration may be given to splenectomy, which 
improves but does not normalise red cell survival. 
Potential indications include moderate to severe haemo­
lysis with complications (anaemia and gallstones), 
although splenectomy should be delayed until after 
6 years of age in view of the risk of sepsis. Guidelines 
for the management of patients after splenectomy are 
presented in Box 24.40.
Acute, severe haemolytic crises require transfusion 
support, but blood must be cross-matched carefully and 
transfused slowly as haemolytic transfusion reactions 
may occur (p. 1016).
Anaemias
24
1029
in Caucasians. In East and West Africa, up to 20% of 
males and 4% of females (homozygotes) are affected and 
have enzyme levels of about 15% of normal. The defi­
ciency in Caucasian and Oriental populations is more 
severe, with enzyme levels as low as 1%.
Clinical features and investigation findings are shown 
in Box 24.41.
Management aims to stop any precipitant drugs 
and treat any underlying infection. Acute transfusion 
support may be life-saving.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
This is the second most common red cell enzyme defect. 
It results in deficiency of ATP production and a chronic 
haemolytic anaemia. It is inherited as an autosomal 
recessive trait. The extent of anaemia is variable; the 
blood film shows characteristic ‘prickle cells’ which 
resemble holly leaves. Enzyme activity is only 5–20% of 
normal. Transfusion support may be necessary.
Pyrimidine 5′ nucleotidase deficiency
The pyrimidine 5′ nucleotidase enzyme catalyses the 
dephosphorylation of nucleoside monophosphates and 
is important during the degradation of RNA in reticulo­
cytes. It is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait and 
is as common as pyruvate kinase deficiency in Mediter­
ranean, African and Jewish populations. The accumula­
tion of excess ribonucleoprotein results in coarse 
basophilic stippling (see Box 24.2, p. 999), associated 
with a chronic haemolytic state. The enzyme is very 
sensitive to inhibition by lead and this is the reason why 
basophilic stippling is a feature of lead poisoning.
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
This results from increased red cell destruction due to 
red cell autoantibodies. The antibodies may be IgG or 
M, or more rarely IgE or A. If an antibody avidly fixes 
complement, it will cause intravascular haemolysis, but 
if complement activation is weak, the haemolysis will be 
extravascular. Antibody-coated red cells lose membrane 
to macrophages in the spleen and hence spherocytes are 
present in the blood. The optimum temperature at which 
the antibody is active (thermal specificity) is used to 
classify immune haemolysis:
•	 Warm antibodies bind best at 37°C and account for 
80% of cases. The majority are IgG and often react 
against Rhesus antigens.
•	 Cold antibodies bind best at 4°C but can bind up to 
37°C in some cases. They are usually IgM and bind 
complement. To be clinically relevant, they must act 
within the range of normal body temperatures. 
They account for the other 20% of cases.
Warm autoimmune haemolysis
The incidence of warm autoimmune haemolysis is 
approximately 1/100 000 population per annum; it 
occurs at all ages but is more common in middle age and 
in females. No underlying cause is identified in up to 
50% of cases. The remainder are secondary to a wide 
variety of other conditions (see Fig. 24.21B).
Investigations
There is evidence of haemolysis and spherocytes on the 
blood film. The diagnosis is confirmed by the direct 
alternative pathways. In general, defects in the hexose 
monophosphate shunt pathway result in periodic 
haemolysis precipitated by episodic oxidative stress, 
whilst those in the Embden–Meyerhof pathway result 
in shortened red cell survival and chronic haemolysis.
Glucose-6-phosphate  
dehydrogenase deficiency
The 
enzyme 
glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase 
(G6PD) is pivotal in the hexose monophosphate shunt 
pathway. Deficiencies result in the most common 
human enzymopathy, affecting 10% of the world’s 
popu­lation, with a geographical distribution which par­
allels the malaria belt because heterozygotes are pro­
tected from malarial parasitisation. The enzyme is a 
heteromeric structure made of catalytic subunits which 
are encoded by a gene on the X chromosome. The defi­
ciency therefore affects males and rare homozygous 
females (p. 53), but it is carried by females. Carrier het­
erozygous females are usually only affected in the neo­
natal period or in the presence of extreme lyonisation, 
producing selective inactivation of the non-affected X 
chromosome.
Over 400 subtypes of G6PD are described. The most 
common types associated with normal activity are the 
B+ enzyme present in most Caucasians and 70% of Afro-
Caribbeans, and the A+ variant present in 20% of Afro-
Caribbeans. The two common variants associated with 
reduced activity are the A− variety in approximately 10% 
of Afro-Caribbeans, and the Mediterranean or B− variety 
Clinical features
• Acute drug-induced haemolysis to (e.g.):
Analgesics: aspirin, phenacetin
Antimalarials: primaquine, quinine, chloroquine, 
pyrimethamine
Antibiotics: sulphonamides, nitrofurantoin, ciprofloxacin
Miscellaneous: quinidine, probenecid, vitamin K, dapsone
• Chronic compensated haemolysis
• Infection or acute illness
• Neonatal jaundice: may be a feature of the B− enzyme
• Favism, i.e. acute haemolysis after ingestion of broad beans 
(Vicia faba)
Laboratory features
Non-spherocytic intravascular haemolysis during an attack
The blood film will show:
• Bite cells (red cells with a ‘bite’ of membrane missing)
• Blister cells (red cells with surface blistering of the 
membrane)
• Irregularly shaped small cells
• Polychromasia reflecting the reticulocytosis
• Denatured haemoglobin visible as Heinz bodies within the red 
cell cytoplasm with a supravital stain such as methyl violet
G6PD level
• Can be indirectly assessed by screening methods which 
usually depend upon the decreased ability to reduce dyes
• Direct assessment of G6PD is made in those with low 
screening values
• Care must be taken close to an acute haemolytic episode 
because reticulocytes may have higher enzyme levels and 
give rise to a false normal result
24.41  Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency
Blood disease
24
1030
incompatible blood should be used but this may still 
give rise to transfusion reactions or the development of 
alloantibodies.
If the haemolysis fails to respond to corticosteroids or 
can only be stabilised by large doses, then splenectomy 
should be considered. This removes a main site of red 
cell destruction and antibody production, with a good 
response in 50–60% of cases. The operation can be per­
formed laparoscopically with reduced morbidity. If 
splenectomy is not appropriate, alternative immunosup­
pressive therapy with azathioprine or cyclophospha­
mide may be considered. This is least suitable for young 
patients, in whom long-term immunosuppression 
carries a risk of secondary neoplasms. The anti-CD20 (B 
cell) monoclonal antibody, rituximab, has shown some 
success in difficult cases.
Cold agglutinin disease
This is due to antibodies, usually IgM, which bind to the 
red cells at low temperatures and cause them to agglu­
tinate. It may cause intravascular haemolysis if comple­
ment fixation occurs. This can be chronic when the 
antibody is monoclonal, or acute or transient when the 
antibody is polyclonal.
Chronic cold agglutinin disease
This affects elderly patients and may be associated with 
an underlying low-grade B cell lymphoma. It causes a 
low-grade intravascular haemolysis with cold, painful 
and often blue fingers, toes, ears or nose (so-called acro­
cyanosis). The latter is due to red cell agglutination in 
the small vessels in these colder exposed areas. The 
blood film shows red cell agglutination and the 
MCV may be spuriously high because the automated 
Coombs or antiglobulin test (Fig. 24.22). The patient’s 
red cells are mixed with Coombs reagent, which contains 
antibodies against human IgG/M/complement. If the 
red cells have been coated by antibody in vivo, the 
Coombs reagent will induce their agglutination and this 
can be detected visually. The relevant antibody can be 
eluted from the red cell surface and tested against a panel 
of typed red cells to determine against which red cell 
antigen it is directed. The most common specificity is 
Rhesus and most often anti-e; this is helpful when choos­
ing blood to cross-match. The direct Coombs test can be 
negative in the presence of brisk haemolysis. A positive 
test requires about 200 antibody molecules to attach to 
each red cell; with a very avid complement-fixing anti­
body, haemolysis may occur at lower levels of antibody-
binding. The standard Coombs reagent will miss IgA or 
IgE antibodies. Around 10% of all warm autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemias are Coombs test-negative.
Management
If the haemolysis is secondary to an underlying cause, 
this must be treated and any implicated drugs stopped.
It is usual to treat patients initially with prednisolone 
1 mg/kg orally. A response is seen in 70–80% of cases 
but may take up to 3 weeks; a rise in haemoglobin will 
be matched by a fall in bilirubin, LDH and reticulocyte 
levels. Once the haemoglobin has normalised and the 
reticulocytosis resolved, the corticosteroid dose can be 
reduced slowly over about 10 weeks. Corticosteroids 
work by decreasing macrophage destruction of antibody-
coated red cells and reducing antibody production.
Transfusion support may be required for life-
threatening problems, such as the development of heart 
failure or rapid unabated falls in haemoglobin. The least 
Fig. 24.22  Direct and indirect antiglobulin tests.  
Direct antiglobulin test (DAT) (Coombs test)
Detects the presence of antibody bound to
the red cell surface, e.g.
1. Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
2. Haemolytic disease of newborn 
3. Transfusion reactions
Antibodies to
human globulin
Red cell
agglutination
Indirect antiglobulin test (IAT) (indirect Coombs test)
Detects antibodies in the plasma, e.g.
1. Antibody screen in pre-transfusion testing
2. Screening in pregnancy for antibodies that may cause
 
haemolytic disease of newborn
Red cells with
known antigen
expression
Red cell
agglutination
Patient’s
plasma
Stage 1
Red cells with
Ag – Ab complex
on cell surface
Stage 2
Antibodies to
human globulin
Key
Red blood cells
Red cell antigen
Antibody bound
to red cell antigen
A
B
Anaemias
24
1031
Chemicals or drugs
Dapsone and sulfasalazine cause haemolysis by oxida­
tive denaturation of haemoglobin. Denatured haemo­
globin forms Heinz bodies in the red cells, visible on 
supravital staining with brilliant cresyl blue. Arsenic 
gas, copper, chlorates, nitrites and nitrobenzene deriva­
tives may all cause haemolysis.
Paroxysmal nocturnal 
haemoglobinuria
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare 
acquired, non-malignant clonal expansion of haemato­
poietic stem cells deficient in GPI-anchor protein; it 
results in intravascular haemolysis and anaemia because 
of increased sensitivity of red cells to lysis by comple­
ment. Episodes of intravascular haemolysis result in 
haemoglobinuria, most noticeable in early morning 
urine, which has a characteristic red–brown colour. The 
disease is associated with an increased risk of venous 
thrombosis in unusual sites, such as the liver or abdomen. 
PNH is also associated with hypoplastic bone marrow 
failure, aplastic anaemia and myelodysplastic syndrome 
(pp. 1048 and 1041). Management is supportive with 
transfusion and treatment of thrombosis. Recently, the 
anti-complement C5 monoclonal antibody eculizumab 
was shown to be effective in reducing haemolysis.
Haemoglobinopathies
These diseases are caused by mutations affecting the 
genes encoding the globin chains of the haemoglobin 
mol­ecule. Normal haemoglobin is comprised of two 
alpha and two non-alpha globin chains. Alpha globin 
chains are produced throughout life, including in the 
fetus, so severe mutations may cause intrauterine death. 
Production of non-alpha chains varies with age; fetal 
haemoglobin (HbF-αα/γγ) has two gamma chains, while 
the predominant adult haemoglobin (HbA-αα/ββ) has 
two beta chains. Thus, disorders affecting the beta chains 
do not present until after 6 months of age. A constant 
small amount of haemoglobin A2 (HbA2-αα/δδ, usually 
less than 2%) is made from birth.
The geographical distribution of the common haemo­
globinopathies is shown in Figure 24.23. The haemo­
globinopathies can be classified into qualitative or 
quantitative abnormalities.
Qualitative abnormalities – abnormal 
haemoglobins
In qualitative abnormalities (called the abnormal hae­
moglobins), there is a functionally important alteration 
in the amino acid structure of the polypeptide chains of 
the globin chains. Several hundred such variants are 
known; they were originally designated by letters of the 
alphabet, e.g. S, C, D or E, but are now described by 
names usually taken from the town or district in which 
they were first described. The best-known example is 
haemoglobin S, found in sickle-cell anaemia. Mutations 
around the haem-binding pocket cause the haem ring to 
fall out of the structure and produce an unstable 
haemoglobin. These substitutions often change the 
charge of the globin chains, producing different electro­
phoretic mobility, and this forms the basis for the 
analysers detect aggregates as single cells. Monoclonal 
IgM usually has anti-I or, less often, anti-i specificity. 
Treatment is directed at any underlying lymphoma but 
if the disease is idiopathic, then patients must keep 
extremities warm, especially in winter. Some patients 
respond to corticosteroid therapy and blood transfusion 
may be considered, but the cross-match sample must be 
placed in a transport flask at a temperature of 37°C and 
blood administered via a blood-warmer. All patients 
should receive folic acid supplementation.
Other causes of cold agglutination
Cold agglutination can occur in association with Myco-
plasma pneumoniae or with infectious mononucleosis. 
Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria is a very rare cause 
seen in children, in association with viral or bacterial 
infection. An IgG antibody binds to red cells in the 
peripheral circulation but lysis occurs in the central 
circulation when complement fixation takes place. This 
antibody is termed the Donath–Landsteiner antibody 
and has specificity against the P antigen on the 
red cells.
Alloimmune haemolytic anaemia
Alloimmune haemolytic anaemia is caused by antibod­
ies against non-self red cells, and occurs after unmatched 
transfusion (p. 1016), or after maternal sensitisation to 
paternal antigens on fetal cells (haemolytic disease of the 
newborn, p. 1014).
Non-immune haemolytic anaemia
Physical trauma
Physical disruption of red cells may occur in a number 
of conditions and is characterised by the presence of red 
cell fragments on the blood film and markers of intra­
vascular haemolysis:
•	 Mechanical heart valves. High flow through 
incompetent valves or periprosthetic leaks through 
the suture ring holding a valve in place result in 
shear stress damage.
•	 March haemoglobinuria. Vigorous exercise, such as 
prolonged marching or marathon running, can 
cause red cell damage in the capillaries in the feet.
•	 Thermal injury. Severe burns cause thermal damage 
to red cells, characterised by fragmentation and the 
presence of microspherocytes in the blood.
•	 Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia. Fibrin 
deposition in capillaries can cause severe red cell 
disruption. It may occur in a wide variety of 
conditions: disseminated carcinomatosis, malignant 
or pregnancy-induced hypertension, haemolytic 
uraemic syndrome (p. 495), thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura (p. 1056) and 
disseminated intravascular coagulation (p. 1055).
Infection
Plasmodium falciparum malaria (p. 353) may be associated 
with intravascular haemolysis; when severe, this is 
termed blackwater fever because of the associated 
haemoglobinuria. Clostridium perfringens septicaemia 
(p. 305), usually in the context of ascending cholangitis, 
may cause severe intravascular haemolysis with marked 
spherocytosis due to bacterial production of a lecithi­
nase which destroys the red cell membrane.
Blood disease
24
1032
the red cell ‘irreversibly sickled’. The greater the 
concentration of sickle-cell haemoglobin in the individ­
ual cell, the more easily tactoids are formed, but this 
process may be enhanced or retarded by the presence of 
other haemoglobins. Thus, the abnormal haemoglobin C 
variant participates in the polymerisation more readily 
than haemoglobin A, whereas haemoglobin F strongly 
inhibits polymerisation.
Clinical features
Sickling is precipitated by hypoxia, acidosis, dehydra­
tion and infection. Irreversibly sickled cells have a 
shortened survival and plug vessels in the microcircula­
tion. This results in a number of acute syndromes, 
termed ‘crises’, and chronic organ damage (Fig. 24.24):
•	 Painful vaso-occlusive crisis. Plugging of small 
vessels in the bone produces acute severe bone 
pain. This affects areas of active marrow: the hands 
and feet in children (so-called dactylitis) or the 
femora, humeri, ribs, pelvis and vertebrae in adults. 
Patients usually have a systemic response with 
tachycardia, sweating and a fever. This is the most 
common crisis.
•	 Sickle chest syndrome. This may follow a vaso-
occlusive crisis and is the most common cause of 
death in adult sickle disease. Bone marrow 
infarction results in fat emboli to the lungs, which 
cause further sickling and infarction, leading to 
ventilatory failure if not treated.
•	 Sequestration crisis. Thrombosis of the venous 
outflow from an organ causes loss of function and 
acute painful enlargement. In children, the spleen is 
the most common site. Massive splenic enlargement 
may result in severe anaemia, circulatory collapse 
and death. Recurrent sickling in the spleen in 
childhood results in infarction and adults may have 
no functional spleen. In adults, the liver may 
undergo sequestration with severe pain due to 
capsular stretching. Priapism is a complication seen 
in affected men.
•	 Aplastic crisis. Infection with human parvovirus B19 
results in a severe but self-limiting red cell aplasia. 
This produces a very low haemoglobin, which may 
cause heart failure. Unlike in all other sickle crises, 
the reticulocyte count is low.
diagnostic use of haemoglobin electrophoresis to iden­
tify haemoglobinopathies.
Quantitative abnormalities – thalassaemias
In quantitative abnormalities (the thalassaemias), there 
are mutations causing a reduced rate of production of 
one or other of the globin chains, altering the ratio of 
alpha to non-alpha chains. In alpha-thalassaemia excess 
beta chains are present, whilst in beta-thalassaemia 
excess alpha chains are present. The excess chains pre­
cipitate, causing red cell membrane damage and reduced 
red cell survival.
Sickle-cell anaemia
Sickle-cell disease results from a single glutamic acid to 
valine substitution at position 6 of the beta globin 
polypeptide chain. It is inherited as an autosomal reces­
sive trait (p. 53). Homozygotes only produce abnormal 
beta chains that make haemoglobin S (HbS, termed SS), 
and this results in the clinical syndrome of sickle-cell 
disease. Heterozygotes produce a mixture of normal and 
abnormal beta chains that make normal HbA and HbS 
(termed AS), and this results in the clinically asympto­
matic sickle-cell trait.
Epidemiology
The heterozygote frequency is over 20% in tropical 
Africa (see Fig. 24.23). In black American populations, 
sickle-cell trait has a frequency of 8%. Individuals with 
sickle-cell trait are relatively resistant to the lethal effects 
of falciparum malaria in early childhood; the high preva­
lence in equatorial Africa can be explained by the sur­
vival advantage it confers in areas where falciparum 
malaria is endemic. However, homozygous patients 
with sickle-cell anaemia do not have correspondingly 
greater resistance to falciparum malaria.
Pathogenesis
When haemoglobin S is deoxygenated, the molecules 
of haemoglobin polymerise to form pseudocrystalline 
structures known as ‘tactoids’. These distort the red cell 
membrane and produce characteristic sickle-shaped 
cells (Fig. 24.24). The polymerisation is reversible when 
re-oxygenation occurs. The distortion of the red 
cell membrane, however, may become permanent and 
Fig. 24.23  The geographical distribution of the haemoglobinopathies. From Hoffbrand and Pettit 1992 – see p. 1056.
Thalassaemia
Sickle-cell anaemia
HbC
HbD
HbE
Anaemias
24
1033
should be with fully genotyped blood wherever possi­
ble. Simple top-up transfusion may be used in a 
sequestration or aplastic crisis. A regular transfusion 
programme to suppress HbS production and maintain 
the HbS level below 30% may be indicated in patients 
with recurrent severe complications, such as cerebro­
vascular accidents in children or chest syndromes in 
adults. Exchange transfusion, in which a patient is 
simultaneously venesected and transfused to replace 
HbS with HbA, may be used in life-threatening crises or 
to prepare patients for surgery.
A high HbF level inhibits polymerisation of HbS and 
reduces sickling. Patients with sickle-cell disease and 
high HbF levels have a mild clinical course with few 
crises. Some agents are able to increase synthesis of HbF 
and this has been used to reduce the frequency of severe 
crises. The oral cytotoxic agent hydroxycarbamide has 
been shown to have clinical benefit with acceptable side-
effects in children and adults who have recurrent severe 
crises.
Relatively few allogeneic stem cell transplants from 
HLA-matched siblings have been performed but this 
procedure appears to be potentially curative (p. 1017).
Prognosis
In Africa, few children with sickle-cell anaemia survive 
to adult life without medical attention. Even with 
Investigations
Patients with sickle-cell disease have a compensated 
anaemia, usually around 60–80 g/L. The blood film 
shows sickle cells, target cells and features of hyposplen­
ism. A reticulocytosis is present. The presence of HbS 
can be demonstrated by exposing red cells to a reducing 
agent such as sodium dithionite; HbA gives a clear solu­
tion, whereas HbS polymerises to produce a turbid solu­
tion. This forms the basis of emergency screening tests 
before surgery in appropriate ethnic groups but cannot 
distinguish between sickle-cell trait and disease. The 
definitive diagnosis requires haemoglobin electrophor­
esis to demonstrate the absence of HbA, 2–20% HbF and 
the predominance of HbS. Both parents of the affected 
individual will have sickle-cell trait.
Management
All patients with sickle-cell disease should receive 
prophylaxis with daily folic acid, and penicillin V to 
protect against pneumococcal infection, which may be 
lethal in the presence of hyposplenism. These patients 
should be vaccinated against pneumococcus, meningo­
coccus, Haemophilus influenzae B, hepatitis B and seasonal 
influenza.
Vaso-occlusive crises are managed by aggressive 
rehydration, oxygen therapy, adequate analgesia (which 
often requires opiates) and antibiotics. Transfusion 
Fig. 24.24  Clinical and laboratory features of sickle-cell disease. 
CNS
Subarachnoid bleed
Fits
Cardiac
Sickle myocardium
Cardiomegaly
Transfusional iron overload
Vertebral collapse
Osteoporosis
Splenic infarction
Avascular necrosis
Cerebrovascular
accident
Priapism
Leg
ulceration
Background retinopathy
Proliferative retinopathy
Vitreous bleeds
Ocular
Sickle chest syndrome
Infection
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary
Osteomyelitis
Cholelithiasis
Hepatic sequestration
Dactylitis
Enuresis
Haematuria
Papillary necrosis
Chronic renal failure
Renal
Arthropathy
Blood film
Electrophoresis gel
Nucleated
red cell
Sickle cell
Normal
HbC trait
HbS trait
HbC
HbS
HbA
HbF
Autosomal recessive
inheritance
Blood disease
24
1034
standard medical care, approximately 15% die by the 
age of 20 years and 50% by the age of 40 years.
Other abnormal haemoglobins
Another beta chain haemoglobinopathy, haemoglobin C 
(HbC) disease, is clinically silent but associated with 
microcytosis and target cells on the blood film. Com­
pound heterozygotes inheriting one HbS gene and one 
HbC gene from their parents have haemoglobin SC 
disease, which behaves like a mild form of sickle-cell 
disease. SC disease is associated with a reduced fre­
quency of crises but is not uncommonly linked with 
complications in pregnancy and retinopathy.
The thalassaemias
Thalassaemia is an inherited impairment of haemoglobin 
production, in which there is partial or complete failure 
to synthesise a specific type of globin chain. In alpha-
thalassaemia, disruption of one or both alleles on chro­
mosome 16 may occur, with production of some or no 
alpha globin chains. In beta-thalassaemia, defective pro­
duction usually results from disabling point mutations 
causing no (β0) or reduced (β–) beta chain production.
Beta-thalassaemia
Failure to synthesise beta chains (beta-thalassaemia) is 
the most common type of thalassaemia, most prevalent 
in the Mediterranean area. Heterozygotes have thalas­
saemia minor, a condition in which there is usually mild 
anaemia and little or no clinical disability, which may be 
detected only when iron therapy for a mild microcytic 
anaemia fails. Homozygotes (thalassaemia major) either 
are unable to synthesise haemoglobin A or, at best, 
produce very little; after the first 4–6 months of life, they 
develop profound hypochromic anaemia. The diagnos­
tic features are summarised in Box 24.42. Intermediate 
grades of severity occur.
Management and prevention
See Box 24.43. Cure is now a possibility for selected 
children, with allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell trans­
plantation (p. 1017).
It is possible to identify a fetus with homozygous 
beta-thalassaemia by obtaining chorionic villous mater­
ial for DNA analysis sufficiently early in pregnancy to 
allow termination. This examination is only appropriate 
if both parents are known to be carriers (beta-thalassaemia 
minor) and will accept a termination.
Alpha-thalassaemia
Reduced or absent alpha chain synthesis is common in 
Southeast Asia. There are two alpha gene loci on chro­
mosome 16 and therefore each individual carries four 
alpha gene alleles.
•	 If one is deleted, there is no clinical effect.
•	 If two are deleted, there may be a mild 
hypochromic anaemia.
•	 If three are deleted, the patient has haemoglobin H 
disease.
•	 If all four are deleted, the baby is stillborn (hydrops 
fetalis).
Haemoglobin H is a beta-chain tetramer, formed 
from the excess of beta chains, which is functionally 
useless, so that patients rely on their low levels of HbA 
for oxygen transport. Treatment of haemoglobin H 
• Mean haemoglobin: falls with age in both sexes but 
remains well within the reference range. When a low 
haemoglobin does occur, it is generally due to disease.
• Anaemia can never be considered ‘normal’ in old age.
• Symptoms: may be subtle and insidious. Cardiovascular 
features such as dyspnoea and oedema, and cerebral 
features such as dizziness and apathy, tend to predominate.
• Ferritin: if lower than 45 µg/L in older people, is highly 
predictive of iron deficiency.
• Serum iron and transferrin: fall with age because of the 
prevalence of other disorders, and are not reliable indicators 
of deficiency.
• Most common cause of iron deficiency: gastrointestinal 
blood loss.
• Most common cause of vitamin B12 deficiency: pernicious 
anaemia, as the prevalence of chronic atrophic gastritis rises 
in old age.
• Neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with vitamin B12 
deficiency: well-established association but a causal 
relationship has not been clearly shown. Dementia 
associated with vitamin B12 deficiency in the absence of 
haematological abnormalities is rare.
• Anaemia of chronic disease: frequent in old age because of 
the rising prevalence of diseases that inhibit iron transport.
24.44  Anaemia in old age
Beta-thalassaemia major (homozygotes)
• Profound hypochromic anaemia
• Evidence of severe red cell dysplasia
• Erythroblastosis
• Absence or gross reduction of the amount of haemoglobin A
• Raised levels of haemoglobin F
• Evidence that both parents have thalassaemia minor
Beta-thalassaemia minor (heterozygotes)
• Mild anaemia
• Microcytic hypochromic erythrocytes (not iron-deficient)
• Some target cells
• Punctate basophilia
• Raised haemoglobin A2 fraction
24.42  Diagnostic features of beta-thalassaemia
Problem
Management
Erythropoietic failure
Allogeneic HSCT from 
HLA-compatible sibling
Transfusion to maintain  
Hb > 100 g/L
Folic acid 5 mg daily
Iron overload
Iron therapy contraindicated
Iron chelation therapy
Splenomegaly causing 
mechanical problems, 
excessive transfusion needs
Splenectomy; see Box 24.40
(Hb = haemoglobin; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; 
HSCT = haematopoietic stem cell transplantation)
24.43  Treatment of beta-thalassaemia major
Haematological malignancies
24
1035
Geographical variation in incidence does occur, the most 
striking being the rarity of chronic lymphocytic leukae­
mia in the Chinese and related races. Acute leukaemia 
occurs at all ages. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia shows 
a peak of incidence in children aged 1–5 years. All forms 
of acute myeloid leukaemia have their lowest incidence 
in young adult life and there is a striking rise over the 
age of 50. Chronic leukaemias occur mainly in middle 
and old age.
The cause of the leukaemia is unknown in the major­
ity of patients. Several risk factors, however, have been 
identified (Box 24.46).
Terminology and classification
Leukaemias are traditionally classified into four main 
groups:
•	 acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)
•	 acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)
•	 chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)
•	 chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML).
In acute leukaemia, there is proliferation of primitive 
stem cells, leading to an accumulation of blasts, pre­
dominantly in the bone marrow, which causes bone 
marrow failure. In chronic leukaemia, the malignant 
clone is able to differentiate, resulting in an accumula­
tion of more mature cells. Lymphocytic and lympho­
blastic cells are those derived from the lymphoid stem 
cell (B cells and T cells). Myeloid refers to the other lin­
eages: that is, precursors of red cells, granulocytes, 
monocytes and platelets (see Fig. 24.2, p. 993).
The diagnosis of leukaemia is usually suspected from 
an abnormal blood count, often a raised white count, 
and is confirmed by examination of the bone marrow. 
This includes the morphology of the abnormal cells, 
analysis of cell surface markers (immunophenotyping), 
clone-specific chromosome abnormalities and molecular 
changes. These results are incorporated in the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumours of 
haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues; the subclassifica­
tion of acute leukaemias is shown in Box 24.47. The 
features in the bone marrow not only provide an 
disease is similar to that of beta-thalassaemia of inter­
mediate severity, involving folic acid supplementation, 
transfusion if required and avoidance of iron therapy.
HAEMATOLOGICAL MALIGNANCIES
Haematological malignancies arise when the processes 
controlling proliferation or apoptosis are corrupted in 
blood cells. If mature differentiated cells are involved, 
the cells will have a low growth fraction and produce 
indolent neoplasms, such as the low-grade lymphomas 
or chronic leukaemias, when patients have an expected 
survival of many years. In contrast, if more primitive 
stem cells are involved, the cells can have the highest 
growth fractions of all human neoplasms, producing 
rapidly progressive, life-threatening illnesses such as the 
acute leukaemias or high-grade lymphomas. Involve­
ment of pluripotent stem cells produces the most 
aggressive acute leukaemias. In general, haematological 
neoplasms are diseases of elderly patients, the excep­
tions being acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, which pre­
dominantly affects children, and Hodgkin lymphoma, 
which affects people aged 20–40 years. Management of 
young patients with haematological malignancy is par­
ticularly challenging (Box 24.45).
Leukaemias
Leukaemias are malignant disorders of the haematopoi­
etic stem cell compartment, characteristically associated 
with increased numbers of white cells in the bone 
marrow and/or peripheral blood. The course of leukae­
mia may vary from a few days or weeks to many years, 
depending on the type.
Epidemiology and aetiology
The incidence of leukaemia of all types in the population 
is approximately 10/100 000 per annum, of which just 
under half are cases of acute leukaemia. Males are 
affected more frequently than females, the ratio being 
about 3 : 2 in acute leukaemia, 2 : 1 in chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia and 1.3 : 1 in chronic myeloid leukaemia. 
Ionising radiation
• After atomic bombing of Japanese cities (myeloid leukaemia)
• Radiotherapy for ankylosing spondylitis
• Diagnostic X-rays of the fetus in pregnancy
Cytotoxic drugs
• Especially alkylating agents (myeloid leukaemia, usually after 
a latent period of several years)
• Industrial exposure to benzene
Retroviruses
• One rare form of T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma appears to be 
associated with a retrovirus similar to the viruses causing 
leukaemia in cats and cattle
Genetic
• Identical twin of patients with leukaemia
• Down’s syndrome and certain other genetic disorders
Immunological
• Immune deficiency states (e.g. hypogammaglobulinaemia)
24.46  Risk factors for leukaemia
• Tailored management protocols: the most effective 
treatment schedules for leukaemia and lymphoma differ 
between children and adults. Adolescent patients may be 
most appropriately managed in specialist centres.
• Psychosocial effects: adolescents undergoing treatment 
for haematological malignancy may suffer significant 
consequences for their schooling and social development, 
and require support from a multidisciplinary team.
• ‘Late effects’: adolescents who have been treated with 
chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy in childhood may be at 
risk of a wide range of complications, depending on the 
region irradiated, radiation dose and the drugs used. 
Particularly relevant complications in this age group include 
short stature, growth hormone deficiency, delayed puberty, 
and cognitive dysfunction affecting schooling (after cranial 
irradiation). Life-long follow-up is often undertaken to  
detect and manage these late effects and to deal with 
consequences such as infertility and secondary malignancy.
24.45  Consequences of haematological 
malignancy in adolescence
Blood disease
24
1036
accurate diagnosis but also give valuable prognostic 
information, allowing therapy to be tailored to the 
patient’s disease.
Acute leukaemia
There is a failure of cell maturation in acute leukaemia. 
Proliferation of cells which do not mature leads to an 
accumulation of primitive cells which take up more and 
more marrow space at the expense of the normal hae­
matopoietic elements. Eventually, this proliferation 
spills into the blood. Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is 
about four times more common than acute lymphoblas­
tic leukaemia (ALL) in adults. In children, the propor­
tions are reversed, the lymphoblastic variety being 
more common. The clinical features are usually those of 
bone marrow failure (anaemia, bleeding or infection – 
pp. 1001, 1006 and 1008).
Investigations
Blood examination usually shows anaemia with a 
normal or raised MCV. The leucocyte count may vary 
from as low as 1 × 109/L to as high as 500 × 109/L or 
more. In the majority of patients, the count is below 100 
× 109/L. Severe thrombocytopenia is usual but not invar­
iable. Frequently, blast cells are seen in the blood film 
but sometimes blast cells may be infrequent or absent. 
A bone marrow examination will confirm the diagnosis. 
The bone marrow is usually hypercellular, with replace­
ment of normal elements by leukaemic blast cells in 
varying degrees (but more than 20% of the cells) (Fig. 
24.25). The presence of Auer rods in the cytoplasm of 
blast cells indicates a myeloblastic type of leukaemia. 
Classification and prognosis are determined by immuno­
phenotyping, chromosome and molecular analysis, as 
shown in Figure 24.26.
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) with recurrent genetic 
abnormalities
• AML with t(8;21), gene product AML-ETO
• AML with eosinophilia inv(16) or t(16;16), gene product 
CBFβ-MYH11
• Acute promyelocytic leukaemia t(15;17), gene product 
PML-RARA
• AML with t(9;11)(p22;q23), gene product MLLT3-MLL
• AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34), gene product DEK-NUP214
• AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21;q26.2), gene product 
RPN1-EVI1
Acute myeloid leukaemia with myelodysplasia-related changes
• e.g. Following a myelodysplastic syndrome
Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms
• e.g. Alkylating agent or topoisomerase II inhibitor
Myeloid sarcoma
Myeloid proliferations related to Down’s syndrome
Acute myeloid leukaemia not otherwise specified
• e.g. AML with or without differentiation, acute 
myelomonocytic leukaemia, erythroleukaemia, 
megakaryoblastic leukaemia, myeloid sarcoma
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)
• Precursor B ALL
• Precursor T ALL
24.47  WHO classification of acute leukaemia
Management
The general strategy for acute leukaemia is shown in 
Figure 24.27. The first decision must be whether or not 
to give specific treatment. This is generally aggressive, 
has numerous side-effects, and may not be appropriate 
for the very elderly or patients with serious comorbidi­
ties (Chs 7 and 11). In these patients, supportive 
Fig. 24.25  Acute myeloid leukaemia. Bone marrow aspirate showing 
infiltration with large blast cells which display nuclear folding and 
prominent nucleoli. 
Fig. 24.26  Investigation of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL). 
A Flow cytometric analysis of blasts labelled with the fluorescent 
antibodies anti-CD19 (y axis) and anti-CD10 (x axis). ALL blasts are 
positive for both CD19 and CD10 (arrow). B Chromosome analysis 
(karyotype) of blasts showing additional chromosomes X, 4, 6, 7, 14,  
18 and 21. 
A
100
102
CD10
103
104
101
100
102
CD19
103
101
CD19- and CD10-
positive cells
B
Haematological malignancies
24
1037
treatment can effect considerable improvement in 
well-being.
Specific therapy
If a decision to embark on specific therapy has been 
taken, the patient should be prepared as recommended 
in Box 24.48. It is unwise to attempt aggressive manage­
ment of acute leukaemia unless adequate services are 
available for the provision of supportive therapy.
The aim of treatment is to destroy the leukaemic 
clone of cells without destroying the residual normal 
stem cell compartment from which repopulation of the 
haematopoietic tissues will occur. There are three 
phases:
•	 Remission induction. In this phase, the bulk of the 
tumour is destroyed by combination chemotherapy. 
The patient goes through a period of severe bone 
marrow hypoplasia, requiring intensive support 
and inpatient care from a specially trained 
multidisciplinary team.
•	 Remission consolidation. If remission has been 
achieved, residual disease is attacked by therapy 
during the consolidation phase. This consists of a 
number of courses of chemotherapy, again resulting 
in periods of marrow hypoplasia. In poor-prognosis 
leukaemia, this may include haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation.
•	 Remission maintenance. If the patient is still in 
remission after the consolidation phase for ALL,  
a period of maintenance therapy is given, with  
the individual as an outpatient and treatment 
consisting of a repeating cycle of drug 
administration. This may extend for up to 3 years  
if relapse does not occur.
In patients with ALL, it is necessary to give prophy­
lactic treatment to the central nervous system, as this is 
a sanctuary site where standard therapy does not 
Fig. 24.27  Treatment strategy in acute leukaemia. (HSCT = 
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation) 
Diagnosis
Specific
therapy?
Remission
induction
Remission
Remission
consolidation
Maintenance
therapy
HSCT
No further
treatment
Supportive
therapy only
Relapse
Yes
No
• Existing infections identified and treated (e.g. urinary tract 
infection, oral candidiasis, dental, gingival and skin infections)
• Anaemia corrected by red cell concentrate transfusion
• Thrombocytopenic bleeding controlled by platelet 
transfusions
• If possible, central venous catheter (e.g. Hickman line) 
inserted to facilitate access to the circulation for delivery of 
chemotherapy, fluids, blood products and other supportive 
drugs
• Tumour lysis risk assessed and prevention started: fluids 
with allopurinol or rasburicase
• Therapeutic regimen carefully explained to the patient and 
informed consent obtained
• Consideration of entry into clinical trial
24.48  Preparation for specific therapy in 
acute leukaemia
penetrate. This usually consists of a combination of 
cranial irradiation, intrathecal chemotherapy and high-
dose methotrexate, which crosses the blood–brain 
barrier.
Thereafter, specific therapy is discontinued and the 
patient observed.
The detail of the schedules for these treatments can 
be found in specialist texts. The drugs most commonly 
employed are listed in Box 24.49. Generally, if a patient 
fails to go into remission with induction treatment, alter­
native drug combinations may be tried, but the outlook 
is poor unless remission can be achieved. Disease which 
relapses during treatment or soon after the end of treat­
ment carries a poor prognosis and is difficult to treat. 
The longer after the end of treatment that relapse occurs, 
the more likely it is that further treatment will be 
effective.
In some patients, alternative palliative chemother­
apy, not designed to achieve remission, may be used 
to curb excessive leucocyte proliferation. Drugs used 
for this purpose include hydroxycarbamide and 
Phase
ALL
AML
Induction
Vincristine (IV)
Prednisolone (oral)
L-asparaginase (IM)
Daunorubicin (IV)
Methotrexate 
(intrathecal)
Imatinib (oral)*
Daunorubicin (IV)
Cytarabine (IV)
Etoposide (IV 
and oral)
Consolidation
Daunorubicin (IV)
Cytarabine (IV)
Etoposide (IV)
Methotrexate (IV)
Imatinib (oral)*
Cytarabine (IV)
Amsacrine (IV)
Mitoxantrone (IV)
Maintenance
Prednisolone (oral)
Vincristine (IV)
Mercaptopurine (oral)
Methotrexate (oral)
Imatinib (oral)*
*If Philadelphia chromosome-positive.
24.49  Drugs commonly used in the treatment of 
acute leukaemia
Blood disease
24
1038
Disease/risk
Risk factors
5-yr overall 
survival
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Good risk
Promyelocytic leukaemia
76%
t(15;17)
t(8;21)
inv 16 or t(16;16)
Poor risk
Cytogenetic abnormalities
21%
−5, −7, del
5q, abn(3q), complex (> 5)
Intermediate 
risk
AML with none of the above
48%
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Poor risk
Philadelphia chromosome
20%
High white count > 100 × 109/L
Abnormal short arm of 
chromosome
11 t(1;19)
Standard
ALL with none of the above
37%
24.50  Outcome in adult acute leukaemia
should be treated in the early stage with high-dose aci­
clovir, as it can be fatal in immunocompromised patients.
The value of isolation facilities, such as laminar flow 
rooms, is debatable but may contribute to staff aware­
ness of careful reverse barrier nursing practice. The iso­
lation can be psychologically stressful for the patient.
Metabolic problems.  Frequent monitoring of fluid 
balance and renal, hepatic and haemostatic function is 
necessary. Patients are often severely anorexic and diar­
rhoea is common as a consequence of the side-effects of 
therapy; they may find drinking difficult and hence 
require intravenous fluids and electrolytes. Renal toxic­
ity occurs with some antibiotics (e.g. aminoglycosides) 
and antifungal agents (amphotericin). Cellular break­
down during induction therapy (tumour lysis syn­
drome) releases intracellular ions and nucleic acid 
breakdown products, causing hyperkalaemia, hyperuri­
caemia, hyperphosphataemia and hypocalcaemia. This 
may cause renal failure. Allopurinol and intravenous 
hydration are given to try to prevent this. In patients at 
high risk of tumour lysis syndrome, prophylactic rasbu­
ricase (a recombinant urate oxidase enzyme) can be 
used. Occasionally, dialysis may be required.
Psychological problems.  Psychological support is a key 
aspect of care. Patients should be kept informed, and 
their questions answered and fears allayed as far as pos­
sible. A multidisciplinary approach to patient care 
involves input from many services, including psychol­
ogy. Key members of the team include haematology 
specialist nurses, who are often the central point of 
contact for patients and families throughout the illness.
Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation
This is described on page 1017. In patients with high-risk 
acute leukaemia, allogeneic HSCT can improve 5-year 
survival from 20% to around 50%.
Prognosis
Without treatment, the median survival of patients with 
acute leukaemia is about 5 weeks. This may be extended 
to a number of months with supportive treatment. 
mercaptopurine. The aim is to reduce the blast count 
without inducing bone marrow failure.
Supportive therapy
Aggressive and potentially curative therapy, which 
involves periods of severe bone marrow failure, would 
not be possible without appropriate supportive care. 
The following problems commonly arise.
Anaemia.  Anaemia is treated with red cell concentrate 
transfusions.
Bleeding.  Thrombocytopenic bleeding requires platelet 
transfusions, unless the bleeding is trivial. Prophylactic 
platelet transfusion should be given to maintain the 
platelet count above 10 × 109/L. Coagulation abnormali­
ties occur and need accurate diagnosis and treatment 
(p. 1050).
Infection.  Fever (> 38°C) lasting over 1 hour in a neu­
tropenic patient indicates possible septicaemia (see also 
p. 296). Parenteral broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy 
is essential. Empirical therapy is given according to 
local bacteriological resistance patterns: for example, 
with a combination of an aminoglycoside (e.g. 
gentamicin) and a broad-spectrum penicillin (e.g. 
piperacillin/tazobactam) or a single-agent beta-lactam 
(e.g. meropenem). The organisms most commonly asso­
ciated with severe neutropenic sepsis are Gram-positive 
bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Staph. epider-
midis, which are present on the skin and gain entry via 
cannulae and central lines. Gram-negative infections 
often originate from the gastrointestinal tract, which is 
affected by chemotherapy-induced mucositis; organ­
isms such as Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas and Klebsiella 
spp. are likely to cause rapid clinical deterioration and 
must be covered with the initial empirical antibiotic 
therapy. Gram-positive infection may require vanco­
mycin therapy. If fever has not resolved after 3–5 days, 
empirical antifungal therapy (e.g. a liposomal amphoter­
icin B preparation, voriconazole or caspofungin) is 
added.
Patients with ALL are susceptible to infection with 
Pneumocystis jirovecii (p. 400), which causes a severe 
pneumonia. Prophylaxis with co-trimoxazole is given 
during chemotherapy. Diagnosis may require either 
bronchoalveolar lavage or open lung biopsy. Treatment 
is with high-dose co-trimoxazole, initially intravenously, 
changing to oral treatment as soon as possible.
Oral and pharyngeal candida infection is common. 
Fluconazole is effective for the treatment of established 
local infection and for prophylaxis against systemic can­
didaemia. Prophylaxis against other systemic fungal 
infections, including Aspergillus, using itraconazole or 
posaconazole, for example, is usual practice during 
high-risk intensive chemotherapy. This is often used 
along with sensitive markers of early fungal infection to 
guide treatment initiation (a ‘pre-emptive approach’).
For systemic fungal infection with Candida or aspergil­
losis, intravenous liposomal amphotericin or voricona­
zole is required.
Reactivation of herpes simplex infection (p. 325) 
occurs frequently around the lips and nose during abla­
tive therapy for acute leukaemia, and is treated with 
aciclovir. This may also be prescribed prophylactically 
to patients with a history of cold sores or elevated anti­
body titres to herpes simplex. Herpes zoster manifesting 
as chickenpox or, after reactivation, as shingles (p. 318) 
Haematological malignancies
24
1039
Clinical features
Symptoms at presentation may include lethargy, weight 
loss, abdominal discomfort and sweating, but about 25% 
of patients are asymptomatic at diagnosis. Splenomeg­
aly is present in 90%; in about 10%, the enlargement is 
massive, extending to over 15 cm below the costal 
margin. A friction rub may be heard in cases of splenic 
infarction. Hepatomegaly occurs in about 50%. Lym­
phadenopathy is unusual.
Investigations
FBC results are variable between patients. There is 
usually a normocytic, normochromic anaemia. The leu­
cocyte count can vary from 10 to 600 × 109/L. In about 
one-third of patients, there is a very high platelet count, 
sometimes as high as 2000 × 109/L. In the blood film, 
the full range of granulocyte precursors, from myelo­
blasts to mature neutrophils, is seen but the predomi­
nant cells are neutrophils and myelocytes (see Fig. 24.3, 
p. 993). Myeloblasts usually constitute less than 10% of 
all white cells. There is often an absolute increase in 
eosinophils and basophils, and nucleated red cells are 
common. If the disease progresses through an acceler­
ated phase, the percentage of more primitive cells 
increases. Blast transformation is characterised by a dra­
matic increase in the number of circulating blasts. In 
patients with thrombocytosis, very high platelet counts 
may persist during treatment, in both chronic and accel­
erated phases, but usually drop dramatically at blast 
transformation. Basophilia tends to increase as the 
disease progresses.
Bone marrow should be obtained to confirm the diag­
nosis and phase of disease by morphology, chromosome 
analysis to demonstrate the presence of the Ph chromo­
some, and RNA analysis to demonstrate the presence of 
the BCR ABL gene product. Blood LDH levels are ele­
vated and the uric acid level may be high due to increased 
cell breakdown.
Management
Chronic phase
Imatinib, dasatinib and nilotinib specifically inhibit BCR 
ABL tyrosine kinase activity and reduce the uncon­
trolled proliferation of white cells. They are recom­
mended as first-line therapy in chronic-phase CML, 
producing complete cytogenetic response (disappear­
ance of the Ph chromosome) in 76% at 18 months of 
therapy (Box 24.51). Patients are monitored by repeated 
bone marrow examination until there is a complete 
cytogenetic response, and then by 3-monthly real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for 
BCR ABL mRNA transcripts in blood. For those failing 
to respond or progress on imatinib, options include 
second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such 
as dasatinib or nilotinib, allogeneic HSCT (p. 1017), or 
Patients who achieve remission with specific therapy 
have a better outlook. Around 80% of adult patients 
under 60 years of age with ALL or AML achieve remis­
sion, although remission rates are lower for older 
patients. However, the relapse rate continues to be high. 
Box 24.50 shows the survival in ALL and AML, and the 
influence of prognostic features.
Advances in treatment have led to steady improve­
ment in survival from leukaemia. Advances include the 
introduction of drugs such as ATRA (all transretinoic 
acid) in acute promyelocytic leukaemia, which has 
greatly reduced induction deaths from bleeding in this 
good-risk leukaemia. Current trials aim to improve sur­
vival, especially in standard and poor-risk disease, with 
strategies that include allogeneic HSCT and targeted 
therapies such as anti-CD33 monoclonal antibodies and 
FLT3 inhibitors.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is a myeloprolifera­
tive stem cell disorder resulting in proliferation of all 
haematopoietic lineages but manifesting predominantly 
in the granulocytic series. Maturation of cells proceeds 
fairly normally. The disease occurs chiefly between the 
ages of 30 and 80 years, with a peak incidence at 
55 years. It is rare, with an annual incidence in the UK 
of 1.8/100 000, and accounts for 20% of all leukaemias. 
It is found in all races.
The defining characteristic of CML is the chromo­
some abnormality known as the Philadelphia (Ph) chro­
mosome. This is a shortened chromosome 22 resulting 
from a reciprocal translocation of material with chromo­
some 9. The break on chromosome 22 occurs in the 
breakpoint cluster region (BCR). The fragment from 
chromosome 9 that joins the BCR carries the abl onco­
gene, which forms a fusion gene with the remains of the 
BCR. This BCR ABL fusion gene codes for a 210 kDa 
protein with tyrosine kinase activity, which plays a 
causative role in the disease as an oncogene (p. 59), 
influencing cellular proliferation, differentiation and 
survival. In some patients in whom conventional chro­
mosomal analysis does not detect a Ph chromosome, the 
BCR ABL gene product is detectable by molecular 
techniques.
Natural history
The disease has three phases:
•	 A chronic phase, in which the disease is responsive to 
treatment and is easily controlled, which used to 
last 3–5 years. With the introduction of imatinib 
therapy, this phase has been prolonged to longer 
than 8 years in many patients.
•	 An accelerated phase (not always seen), in which 
disease control becomes more difficult.
•	 Blast crisis, in which the disease transforms into an 
acute leukaemia, either myeloid (70%) or 
lymphoblastic (30%), which is relatively refractory 
to treatment. This is the cause of death in the 
majority of patients; therefore survival is dictated 
by the timing of blast crisis, which cannot be 
predicted. Prior to imatinib therapy (see below), 
approximately 10% of patients per year would 
transform. In those treated with imatinib for up to  
5 years, only between 0.5 and 2.5% have 
transformed each year.
‘As first-line therapy in CML, imatinib is better tolerated and 
induces a cytogenetic response in ~87% of cases at 18 months, 
compared with ~35% response to interferon plus cytarabine.’
• O’Brien SG for the IRIS Investigators. N Engl J Med 2003; 348:994–1004.
24.51  Tyrosine kinase inhibition in 
chronic myeloid leukaemia
Blood disease
24
1040
poorer prognosis) and to monitor response to therapy. 
The main prognostic factor is stage of disease (Box 
24.52); however, malignant cell characteristics, such as 
CD38 expression, abnormalities of chromosome 11 or 17, 
and absence of mutations of IgVH genes, also indicate a 
poorer prognosis.
Management
No specific treatment is required for most clinical stage 
A patients, unless progression occurs. Life expectancy is 
usually normal in older patients. The patient should be 
offered clear information about CLL, and be reassured 
about the indolent nature of the disease, as the diagnosis 
of leukaemia inevitably causes anxiety.
Treatment is only required if there is evidence of bone 
marrow failure, massive or progressive lymphadeno­
pathy or splenomegaly, systemic symptoms such as 
weight loss or night sweats, a rapidly increasing lym­
phocyte count or autoimmune haemolytic anaemia or 
thrombocytopenia. Initial therapy for those requiring 
treatment (stages B and C) may consist of oral chemo­
therapy with the alkylating agent chlorambucil. This 
will reduce the abnormal lymphocyte mass and produce 
symptomatic improvement in most patients. More 
recently, the purine analogue fludarabine, in combina­
tion with the alkylating agent cyclophosphamide and 
the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab, has 
increased remission rates and disease-free survival, 
although there are increased risks of infection and sec­
ondary malignancies. Bone marrow failure or autoim­
mune cytopenias may respond to corticosteroids.
Supportive care is increasingly required in progres­
sive disease, e.g. transfusions for symptomatic anaemia 
or thrombocytopenia, prompt treatment of infections 
and, for some patients with hypogammaglobulinaemia, 
immunoglobulin replacement. Radiotherapy may be 
used for lymphadenopathy which is causing discomfort 
or local obstruction, and for symptomatic splenomegaly. 
Splenectomy may be required to improve low blood 
counts due to autoimmune destruction or to hypersplen­
ism, and can relieve massive splenomegaly.
Prognosis
The majority of clinical stage A patients have a normal 
life expectancy but patients with advanced CLL are 
more likely to die from their disease or infectious com­
plications. Survival is influenced by prognostic features 
of the leukaemia and whether patients can tolerate 
intensive treatment. In those treated with chemotherapy 
and rituximab, 90% are alive 4 years later (Box 24.53). 
classical cytotoxic drugs such as hydroxycarbamide 
(hydroxyurea) or interferon. Hydroxycarbamide was 
previously used widely for initial control of disease, and 
is still useful in this context or in palliative situations. It 
does not diminish the frequency of the Ph chromosome 
or affect the onset of blast cell transformation. Interferon-
alfa was considered first-line treatment before imatinib 
was developed. It was given alone or with the chemo­
therapy agent Ara-C, and controlled CML chronic phase 
in about 70% of patients.
Accelerated phase and blast crisis
Management is more difficult. For patients presenting in 
accelerated phase, imatinib is indicated if the patient has 
not already received it. Hydroxycarbamide can be an 
effective single agent and low-dose cytarabine can also 
be tried. When blast transformation occurs, the type of 
blast cell should be determined. Response to appropri­
ate acute leukaemia treatment (see Box 24.49) is better if 
disease is lymphoblastic than if it is myeloblastic. Given 
the very poor response in myeloblastic transformation, 
there is a strong case for supportive therapy only, par­
ticularly in older patients.
Patients progressing to advanced-phase disease on 
imatinib may respond to a second-generation tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor and may be considered for allogeneic 
HSCT (p. 1017).
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is the most 
common variety of leukaemia, accounting for 30% of 
cases. The male to female ratio is 2 : 1 and the median 
age at presentation is 65–70 years. In this disease, B 
lymphocytes, which would normally respond to anti­
gens by transformation and antibody formation, fail to 
do so. An ever-increasing mass of immuno-incompetent 
cells accumulates, to the detriment of immune function 
and normal bone marrow haematopoiesis.
Clinical features
The onset is usually insidious. Indeed, in around 70% of 
patients, the diagnosis is made incidentally on a routine 
FBC. Presenting problems may be anaemia, infections, 
painless lymphadenopathy, and systemic symptoms 
such as night sweats or weight loss. However, these 
more often occur later in the course of the disease.
Investigations
The diagnosis is based on the peripheral blood findings 
of a mature lymphocytosis (> 5 × 109/L) with character­
istic morphology and cell surface markers. Immuno­
phenotyping reveals the lymphocytes to be monoclonal 
B cells expressing the B cell antigens CD19 and 
CD23, with either kappa or lambda immunoglobulin 
light chains and, characteristically, an aberrant T cell 
antigen, CD5.
Other useful investigations in CLL include a reticulo­
cyte count and a direct Coombs test, as autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemia may occur (p. 1029). Serum 
immuno­globulin levels should be estimated to establish 
the degree of immunosuppression, which is common 
and progressive. Bone marrow examination by aspirate 
and trephine is not essential for the diagnosis of CLL, 
but may be helpful in difficult cases, for prognosis 
(patients with diffuse marrow involvement have a 
Clinical stage A (60% patients)
• No anaemia or thrombocytopenia and fewer than three areas 
of lymphoid enlargement
Clinical stage B (30% patients)
• No anaemia or thrombocytopenia, with three or more 
involved areas of lymphoid enlargement
Clinical stage C (10% patients)
• Anaemia and/or thrombocytopenia, regardless of the number 
of areas of lymphoid enlargement
24.52  Staging of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Haematological malignancies
24
1041
the subtype of MDS, being slowest in refractory anaemia 
and most rapid in refractory anaemia with excess of 
blasts. An international prognostic scoring system (IPSS) 
predicts clinical outcome based upon karyotype and 
cytopenias in blood, as well as percentage of bone 
marrow blasts. In low-risk patients, median survival is 
5.7 years and time for 25% of patients to develop AML 
is 9.4 years; equivalent figures in high-risk patients are 
0.4 and 0.2 years, respectively.
Management
For the vast majority of patients who are elderly, the 
disease is incurable, and supportive care with red cell 
and platelet transfusions is the mainstay of treatment. A 
trial of erythropoietin and granulocyte–colony-stimulat­
ing factor (G–CSF) is recommended in some patients 
with early disease to improve haemoglobin and white 
cell counts. For younger patients with higher-risk 
disease, allogeneic HSCT may afford a cure. Transplan­
tation should be preceded by intensive chemotherapy in 
those with more advanced disease. More recently, the 
hypomethylating agent azacytidine has improved sur­
vival by a median of 9 months for high-risk patients, and 
in the UK is recommended for those not eligible for 
transplantation.
Lymphomas
These neoplasms arise from lymphoid tissues, and are 
diagnosed from the pathological findings on biopsy as 
Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The majority are 
of B cell origin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are classified 
as low- or high-grade tumours on the basis of their pro­
liferation rate.
•	 High-grade tumours divide rapidly, are typically 
present for a matter of weeks before diagnosis, and 
may be life-threatening.
•	 Low-grade tumours divide slowly, may be present for 
many months before diagnosis, and typically 
behave in an indolent fashion.
Rarely, CLL transforms to an aggressive high-grade 
lymphoma, called Richter’s transformation.
Prolymphocytic leukaemia
This is a variant of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
found mainly in males over the age of 60 years; 25% of 
cases are of the T cell variety. There is typically massive 
splenomegaly with little lymphadenopathy and a very 
high leucocyte count, often in excess of 400 × 109/L; the 
characteristic cell is a large lymphocyte with a promi­
nent nucleolus. Treatment is generally unsuccessful and 
the prognosis very poor. Leukapharesis, splenectomy 
and chemotherapy may be tried.
Hairy cell leukaemia
This is a rare chronic B-cell lymphoproliferative disor­
der. The male to female ratio is 6 : 1 and the median age 
at diagnosis is 50 years. Presenting symptoms are those 
of general ill health and recurrent infections. Spleno­
megaly occurs in 90% but lymph node enlargement is 
unusual.
Severe neutropenia, monocytopenia and the charac­
teristic hairy cells in the blood and bone marrow are 
typical. These cells usually have a B lymphocyte immu­
notype but they also characteristically express CD25 
and CD103. Recently, all patients with hairy cell leu­
kaemia have been found to have a mutation in the 
BRAF gene.
Over recent years, a number of treatments, including 
cladribine and deoxycoformycin, have been shown to 
produce long-lasting remissions.
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) consists of a group of 
clonal haematopoietic disorders which represent steps 
in the progression to the development of leukaemia. 
MDS presents with consequences of bone marrow 
failure (anaemia, recurrent infections or bleeding), 
usually in older people (median age at diagnosis is 
69 years). The overall incidence is 4/100 000 in the 
population, rising to more than 30/100 000 in the over-
seventies. The blood film is characterised by cytopenias 
and abnormal-looking (dysplastic) blood cells, including 
macrocytic red cells and hypogranular neutrophils with 
nuclear hyper- or hyposegmentation. The bone marrow 
is hypercellular, with dysplastic changes in all three cell 
lines. Blast cells may be increased but do not reach the 
20% level that indicates acute leukaemia. Chromosome 
analysis frequently reveals abnormalities, particularly of 
chromosome 5 or 7. The WHO classification of MDS is 
shown in Box 24.54.
Inevitably, MDS progresses to AML, although the 
time to progression varies (from months to years) with 
‘The addition of rituximab (R) to first-line chemotherapy (with 
fludarabine and cyclophosphamide, RFC) improves median 
progression free survival (51.8 compared with 32.8 months) and 
overall survival in CLL. The time to 25% of patients dying was  
62.5 months with RFC and 46.8 months with chemotherapy 
alone.’
• Hallek M, et al. Lancet 2010; 376:21 164–21 174.
24.53  Chemotherapy plus anti-CD20 monoclonal 
antibody therapy in CLL
Disease
Bone marrow findings
Refractory anaemia (RA)
Blasts < 5%
Erythroid dysplasia only
Refractory anaemia with 
sideroblasts (RARS)
Blasts < 5%
Ringed sideroblasts > 15%
Refractory cytopenias with 
multilineage dysplasia (RCMD)
Blasts < 5%
2–3 lineage dysplasia
Refractory anaemia with 
excess blasts (RAEB)
Blasts 5–20%
2–3 lineage dysplasia
Myelodysplastic syndrome 
with 5q−
Myelodysplastic syndrome 
associated with a del (5q) 
cytogenetic abnormality
Blasts < 5%
Often normal or increased 
blood platelet count
Myelodysplastic syndrome 
unclassified
None of the above or 
inadequate material
24.54  WHO classification of myelodysplastic 
syndromes
Blood disease
24
1042
Hodgkin lymphoma
The histological hallmark of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) 
is the presence of Reed–Sternberg cells, large malignant 
lymphoid cells of B cell origin (Fig. 24.28). They are often 
only present in small numbers but are surrounded by 
large numbers of reactive non-malignant T cells, plasma 
cells and eosinophils.
The epidemiology of HL is shown in Box 24.55 and 
its histological WHO classification in Box 24.56.
Nodular lymphocyte-predominant HL is slow-
growing, localised and rarely fatal. Classical HL is 
divided into four histological subtypes from the appear­
ance of the Reed–Sternberg cells and surrounding reac­
tive cells. The nodular sclerosing type is more common 
in young patients and in women. Mixed cellularity is 
more common in the elderly. Lymphocyte-rich HL 
usually presents in men. Lymphocyte-depleted HL is 
rare and probably represents large-cell or anaplastic 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Clinical features
There is painless, rubbery lymphadenopathy, usually in 
the neck or supraclavicular fossae; the lymph nodes may 
Fig. 24.28  Hodgkin lymphoma. In the centre of this lymph node biopsy 
is a large typical Reed–Sternberg cell with two nuclei containing a 
prominent eosinophilic nucleolus. 
Incidence
• ~4 new cases/100 000 population/yr
Sex ratio
• Slight male excess (1.5 : 1)
Age
• Median age 31 yrs; first peak at 20–35 yrs and second at 
50–70 yrs
Aetiology
• Unknown
• More common in patients from well-educated backgrounds 
and small families
• Three times more likely with a past history of infectious 
mononucleosis but no definitive causal link to Epstein–Barr 
virus infection is proven
24.55  Epidemiology and aetiology of 
Hodgkin lymphoma
Stage
Definition
I
Involvement of a single lymph node region (I) or 
extralymphatic* site (IE)
II
Involvement of two or more lymph node regions (II) 
or an extralymphatic site and lymph node regions on 
the same side of (above or below) the diaphragm (IIE)
III
Involvement of lymph node regions on both sides of 
the diaphragm with (IIIE) or without (III) localised 
extralymphatic involvement or involvement of the 
spleen (IIIs), or both (IIISE)
IV
Diffuse involvement of one or more extralymphatic 
tissues, e.g. liver or bone marrow
Each stage is subclassified:
A
No systemic symptoms
B
Weight loss > 10%, drenching sweats, fever
*The lymphatic structures are defined as the lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, 
Waldeyer’s ring, appendix and Peyer’s patches.
24.57  Clinical stages of Hodgkin lymphoma 
(Ann Arbor classification)
Type
Histology 
classification
Proportion 
of HL
Nodular lymphocyte-
predominant HL
5%
Classical HL
Nodular sclerosing
70%
Mixed cellularity
20%
Lymphocyte-rich
5%
Lymphocyte-depleted
Rare
24.56  WHO pathological classification of 
Hodgkin lymphoma
fluctuate in size. Young patients with nodular sclerosing 
disease may have large mediastinal masses which are 
surprisingly asymptomatic but may cause dry cough 
and some breathlessness. Isolated subdiaphragmatic 
nodes occur in fewer than 10% at diagnosis. Hepato­
splenomegaly may be present but does not always 
indicate disease in those organs. Spread is contiguous 
from one node to the next and extranodal disease, such 
as bone, brain or skin involvement, is rare.
Investigations
Treatment of HL depends upon the stage at presenta­
tion; therefore investigations aim not only to diagnose 
lymphoma but also to determine the extent of disease 
(Box 24.57).
•	 FBC may be normal. If a normochromic, normocytic 
anaemia or lymphopenia is present, this is a poor 
prognostic factor. An eosinophilia or a neutrophilia 
may be present.
•	 ESR may be raised.
•	 Renal function tests are required to ensure function is 
normal prior to treatment.
•	 Liver function may be abnormal in the absence of 
disease or may reflect hepatic infiltration. An 
obstructive pattern may be caused by nodes at the 
porta hepatis.
Haematological malignancies
24
1043
Patients with disease which is resistant to therapy 
may be considered for autologous HSCT (p. 1018).
Prognosis
Over 90% of patients with early-stage HL achieve com­
plete remission when treated with chemotherapy fol­
lowed by involved field radiotherapy, and the great 
majority are cured. The major challenge is how to 
reduce treatment intensity, and hence long-term toxic­
ity, without reducing the excellent cure rates in 
this group.
Between 50 and 70% of those with advanced-stage 
HL can be cured. The Hasenclever index (Box 24.58) can 
be helpful in assigning approximate chances of cure 
when discussing treatment plans with patients. Patients 
who fail to respond to initial chemotherapy or relapse 
within a year have a poor prognosis but some may 
achieve long-term survival after autologous HSCT. 
Patients relapsing after 1 year may obtain long-term sur­
vival with further chemotherapy alone.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) represents a mono­
clonal proliferation of lymphoid cells of B cell (70%) or 
T cell (30%) origin. The incidence of these tumours 
increases with age, to 62.8/million population per 
annum at age 75 years, and the overall rate is increasing 
at about 3% per year.
The epidemiology of NHL is shown in Box 24.59. 
Previous classifications were based principally on histo­
logical appearances. The current WHO classification 
stratifies according to cell lineage (T or B cells) and incor­
porates clinical features, histology, chromosomal abnor­
malities and cell surface markers of the malignant cells. 
Clinically, the most important factor is grade, which is 
a reflection of proliferation rate. High-grade NHL has 
high proliferation rates, rapidly produces symptoms, is 
fatal if untreated, but is potentially curable. Low-grade 
NHL has low proliferation rates, may be asymptomatic 
for many months before presentation, runs an indolent 
course, but is not curable by conventional therapy. Of 
all cases of NHL in the developed world, over two-
thirds are either diffuse large B-cell NHL (high-grade) 
or follicular NHL (low-grade) (Fig. 24.30). Other forms 
of NHL, including Burkitt lymphoma, mantle cell lym­
phoma, MALT lymphomas and T-cell lymphomas, are 
less common.
•	 LDH measurements showing raised levels are an 
adverse prognostic factor.
•	 Chest X-ray may show a mediastinal mass.
•	 CT scan of chest, abdomen and pelvis permits 
staging. Bulky disease (> 10 cm in a single node 
mass) is an adverse prognostic feature.
•	 Lymph node biopsy may be undertaken surgically or 
by percutaneous needle biopsy under radiological 
guidance (Fig. 24.29).
Management
Historically, radiotherapy to lymph nodes alone has 
been used to treat localised stage IA or stage IIA disease 
effectively, with no adverse prognostic features. Careful 
planning of radiotherapy is required to limit the doses 
delivered to normal tissues. Fertility is usually preserved 
after radiotherapy. Young women receiving breast irra­
diation during the treatment of chest disease have an 
increased risk of breast cancer and should participate in 
a screening programme. Patients continuing to smoke 
after lung irradiation are at particular risk of lung cancer.
Clinical trials have shown that patients with early-
stage disease have better outcomes if chemotherapy is 
included in their treatment. The majority of HL patients 
are now treated with chemotherapy and adjunctive 
radiotherapy. The ABVD regimen (doxorubicin, vinblas­
tine, bleomycin and dacarbazine) is widely used in the 
UK. Standard therapy of early-stage patients usually 
includes additional treatment with radiotherapy to the 
involved lymph nodes after four courses of ABVD. 
Treatment response is assessed clinically and by repeat 
CT and newer scanning modalities such as positron 
emission tomography (PET). ABVD chemotherapy can 
cause cardiac and pulmonary toxicity, due to doxoru­
bicin and bleomycin, respectively. The incidence of 
infertility and secondary myelodysplasia/AML is low 
with this regime.
Patients with advanced-stage disease are most com­
monly managed with chemotherapy alone. Standard 
treatment in the UK is 6–8 cycles of ABVD, followed by 
an assessment of response. As with early disease, achiev­
ing PET-negative remission predicts a better long-term 
remission rate. Overall, the long-term disease control/
cure rates are lower with advanced disease.
Fig. 24.29  CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy of 
retroperitoneal nodes involved by lymphoma. 
Biopsy
needle
Enlarged
lymph nodes
Score 1 for each of the following risk factors present at diagnosis:
• Age > 45 yrs
• Male gender
• Serum albumin < 40 g/L
• Haemoglobin < 105 g/L
• Stage IV disease
• White blood count > 15 × 
109/L
• Lymphopenia < 0.6 × 109/L
Score
5-yr rate of freedom 
from progression (%)
5-yr rate of overall 
survival (%)
0–1
79
90
> 2
60
74
> 3
55
70
> 4
47
59
24.58  The Hasenclever prognostic index for 
advanced Hodgkin lymphoma
Blood disease
24
1044
Clinical features
Unlike Hodgkin lymphoma, NHL is often widely dis­
seminated at presentation, including in extranodal sites. 
Patients present with lymph node enlargement, which 
may be associated with systemic upset: weight loss, 
sweats, fever and itching. Hepatosplenomegaly may be 
present. Sites of extranodal involvement include the 
bone marrow, gut, thyroid, lung, skin, testis, brain and, 
more rarely, bone. Bone marrow involvement is more 
common in low-grade (50–60%) than high-grade (10%) 
disease. Compression syndromes may occur, including 
gut obstruction, ascites, superior vena cava obstruction 
and spinal cord compression.
The same staging system (see Box 24.57) is used for 
both HL and NHL, but NHL is more likely to be stage 
III or IV at presentation.
Investigations
These are as for HL, but in addition the following should 
be performed:
•	 Bone marrow aspiration and trephine.
•	 Immunophenotyping of surface antigens to distinguish T 
from B cell tumours. This may be done on blood, 
marrow or nodal material.
•	 Cytogenetic analysis to detect chromosomal 
translocations and molecular testing for T cell 
receptor or immunoglobulin gene rearrangements, 
if available.
•	 Immunoglobulin determination. Some lymphomas are 
associated with IgG or IgM paraproteins, which 
serve as markers for treatment response.
•	 Measurement of uric acid levels. Some very aggressive 
high-grade NHLs are associated with very high 
urate levels, which can precipitate renal failure 
when treatment is started.
•	 HIV testing. This may be appropriate if risk factors 
are present (p. 392).
Management
Low-grade NHL
Asymptomatic patients may not require therapy. Indica­
tions for treatment include marked systemic symptoms, 
lymphadenopathy causing discomfort or disfigurement, 
bone marrow failure or compression syndromes. In fol­
licular lymphoma, the options are:
•	 Radiotherapy. This can be used for localised stage I 
disease, which is rare.
•	 Chemotherapy. Most patients will respond to oral 
therapy with chlorambucil, which is well tolerated 
but not curative. More intensive intravenous 
chemotherapy in younger patients produces better 
quality of life but no survival benefit. Humanised 
monoclonal antibodies (‘biological’ therapy; see  
p. 1102) can be used to target surface antigens on 
tumour cells, and induce tumour cell apoptosis 
directly. The anti-CD20 antibody rituximab has 
been shown to induce durable clinical responses in 
up to 60% of patients when given alone, and acts 
synergistically when given with chemotherapy. 
Rituximab (R) in combination with 
cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone 
(R-CVP) is commonly used as first-line therapy.
•	 Transplantation. Particular interest centres on the 
role of high-dose chemotherapy and HSCT in 
Fig. 24.30  Histology of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. A (Low-grade) 
follicular or nodular pattern. B (High-grade) diffuse pattern. 
A
B
Incidence
• 12 new cases/100 000 people/year
Sex ratio
• Slight male excess
Age
• Median age 65–70 yrs
Aetiology
• No single causative abnormality described
• Lymphoma is a late manifestation of HIV infection  
(p. 405)
• Specific lymphoma types are associated with viruses: e.g. 
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) with post-transplant NHL, human 
herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) with a primary effusion lymphoma, and 
human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) with adult T-cell 
leukaemia lymphoma
• Gastric lymphoma can be associated with Helicobacter pylori 
infection
• Some lymphomas are associated with specific chromosomal 
translocations; the t(14;18) in follicular lymphoma results in 
the dysregulated expression of the BCL-2 gene product, 
which inhibits apoptotic cell death. The t(8;14) found in 
Burkitt lymphoma and the t(11;14) in mantle cell lymphoma 
alter function of c-myc and cyclin D1, respectively, resulting 
in malignant proliferation
• Lymphoma occurs in congenital immunodeficiency states  
and in immunosuppressed patients after organ 
transplantation
24.59  Epidemiology and aetiology of 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Haematological malignancies
24
1045
single immunoglobulin class may occur in association 
with normal or reduced levels of the other immunoglob­
ulins. Such monoclonal proteins (also called M-proteins, 
paraproteins or monoclonal gammopathies) occur as a 
feature of myeloma, lymphoma and amyloidosis, in con­
nective tissue disease such as rheumatoid arthritis or 
polymyalgia rheumatica, in infection such as HIV, and 
in solid tumours. In addition, they may be present with 
no underlying disease. Gammopathies are detected by 
plasma immunoelectrophoresis.
Monoclonal gammopathy of 
uncertain significance
In monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance 
(MGUS, also known as benign monoclonal gammopa­
thy), a paraprotein is present in the blood but with no 
other features of myeloma, Waldenström macroglobuli­
naemia (see below), lymphoma or related disease. It is a 
common finding associated with increasing age; a para­
protein can be found in 1% of the population aged over 
50 years, increasing to 5% over 80 years.
Clinical features and investigations
Patients are usually asymptomatic, and the paraprotein 
is found on blood testing for other reasons. The routine 
blood count and biochemistry are normal, the parapro­
tein is usually present in small amounts with no associ­
ated immune paresis, and there are no lytic bone 
lesions. The bone marrow may have increased plasma 
cells but these usually constitute less than 10% of nucle­
ated cells.
Prognosis
After follow-up of 20 years, only one-quarter of cases 
will progress to myeloma or a related disorder (i.e. 
around 1% per annum). Patients with low-level IgG 
paraproteins without reductions in IgM and IgA levels 
and with normal serum free light chain level are highly 
unlikely to progress at any time.
Waldenström macroglobulinaemia
This is a low-grade lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma 
associated with an IgM paraprotein, causing clinical fea­
tures of hyperviscosity syndrome. It is a rare tumour 
occurring in the elderly and affects males more 
commonly.
Patients classically present with features of hypervis­
cosity, such as nosebleeds, bruising, confusion and 
visual disturbance. However, presentation may be with 
anaemia, systemic symptoms, splenomegaly or lym­
phadenopathy. Patients are found on investigation to 
have an IgM paraprotein associated with a raised plasma 
viscosity. The bone marrow has a characteristic appear­
ance, with infiltration of lymphoid cells and prominent 
mast cells.
Management
If patients show symptoms of hyperviscosity and 
anaemia, plasmapheresis is required to remove IgM and 
make blood transfusion possible. Chemotherapy with 
alkylating agents, such as chlorambucil, has been the 
mainstay of treatment, controlling disease in over 50%. 
Fludarabine may be more effective but has more side-
effects. Rituximab can also be effective. The median sur­
vival is 5 years.
patients with relapsed disease. Such high-dose 
therapy improves disease-free survival but longer 
follow-up is awaited before conclusions can be 
drawn about cure.
High-grade NHL
Patients with diffuse large B-cell NHL need treatment at 
initial presentation:
•	 Chemotherapy. The majority (> 90%) are treated with 
intravenous combination chemotherapy, typically 
with the CHOP regimen (cyclophosphamide, 
doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone). When 
combined with CHOP chemotherapy, the biological 
therapy rituximab (R) increases the complete 
response rates and improves overall survival. 
R-CHOP is currently recommended as first-line 
therapy for those with stage II or greater diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma (Box 24.60).
•	 Radiotherapy. A few stage I patients without bulky 
disease may be suitable for radiotherapy. 
Radiotherapy is also indicated for a residual 
localised site of bulk disease after chemotherapy, 
and for spinal cord and other compression 
syndromes.
•	 HSCT. Autologous HSCT (p. 1018) benefits patients 
with relapsed chemosensitive disease.
Prognosis
Low-grade NHL runs an indolent remitting and relaps­
ing course, with an overall median survival of 10 years. 
Transformation to a high-grade NHL occurs in 3% per 
annum and is associated with poor survival.
In diffuse large B-cell high-grade NHL treated with 
R-CHOP, some 75% of patients overall respond initially 
to therapy and 50% will have disease-free survival at 
5 years. The prognosis for patients with NHL is further 
refined according to the international prognostic index 
(IPI). For high-grade NHL, 5-year survival ranges from 
75% in those with low-risk scores (age < 60 years, stage 
I or II, one or fewer extranodal sites, normal LDH and 
good performance status) to 25% in those with high-risk 
scores (increasing age, advanced stage, concomitant 
disease and a raised LDH).
Relapse is associated with a poor response to further 
chemotherapy (< 10% 5-year survival), but in patients 
under 65 years, HSCT improves survival.
Paraproteinaemias
A gammopathy refers to over-production of one or more 
classes of immunoglobulin. It may be polyclonal in asso­
ciation with acute or chronic inflammation, such as 
infection, sarcoidosis, autoimmune disorders or some 
malignancies. Alternatively, a monoclonal increase in a 
‘The addition of rituximab to CHOP chemotherapy in diffuse large 
B-cell NHL improved the 10-year overall survival from 27.6% to 
43.5%.’
• Coiffier B, et al. Blood 2010; 116:2040–2045.
24.60  Chemotherapy plus anti-CD20 therapy in 
high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Blood disease
24
1046
the bone marrow. The malignant plasma cells produce 
cytokines, which stimulate osteoclasts and result in net 
bone reabsorption. The resulting lytic lesions cause bone 
pain, fractures and hypercalcaemia. Marrow involve­
ment can result in anaemia or pancytopenia.
Clinical features and investigations
The incidence of myeloma is 4/100 000 new cases per 
annum, with a male to female ratio of 2 : 1. The median 
age at diagnosis is 60–70 years and the disease is more 
common in Afro-Caribbeans. The clinical features are 
demonstrated in Figure 24.31.
Diagnosis of myeloma requires two of the following 
criteria:
•	 increased malignant plasma cells in the bone 
marrow
•	 serum and/or urinary M-protein
•	 skeletal lytic lesions.
Bone marrow aspiration, plasma and urinary electro­
phoresis, and a skeletal survey are thus required. Other 
investigations are listed in Box 24.62. Normal immu­
noglobulin levels, i.e. the absence of immunoparesis, 
should cast doubt on the diagnosis. Paraproteinaemia 
can cause an elevated ESR (p. 85) but this is a non-
specific test; only approximately 5% of patients with a 
persistently elevated ESR above 100 mm/hr have under­
lying myeloma.
Multiple myeloma
This is a malignant proliferation of plasma cells. Normal 
plasma cells are derived from B cells and produce 
immunoglobulins which contain heavy and light chains. 
Normal immunoglobulins are polyclonal, which means 
that a variety of heavy chains are produced and each 
may be of kappa or lambda light chain type (p. 77). In 
myeloma, plasma cells produce immunoglobulin of a 
single heavy and light chain, a monoclonal protein com­
monly referred to as a paraprotein. In some cases, only 
light chain is produced and this appears in the urine as 
Bence Jones proteinuria. The frequency of different 
isotypes of monoclonal protein in myeloma is shown in 
Box 24.61.
Although a small number of malignant plasma cells 
are present in the circulation, the majority are present in 
Fig. 24.31  Clinical and laboratory features of multiple myeloma. 
Spinal cord compression
Bony collapse
Extradural mass
Amyloid
‘Panda’ eyes
Nephrotic syndrome
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Abnormal blood tests
Bone pain/fracture
Retinal bleeds
Bruising
Heart failure
Cerebral ischaemia
Engorged retinal veins
in hyperviscosity
Hyperviscosity
Renal failure due to:
Paraprotein deposition
Hypercalcaemia
Infection
NSAIDs
Amyloid
Lytic lesions
Lytic lesions in
skull
Anaemia
Normo- or macrocytic
Pancytopenia
Raised ESR
Bone marrow
Plasmacytosis > 30%
Bence Jones proteinuria
Paraproteinaemia
Immune paresis
Plasma cells in bone marrow
Lytic lesion eroding
right superior pubic
ramus and acetabulum
Hypercalcaemia
Renal impairment
Type of monoclonal (M)-protein
Relative frequency (%)
IgG
55
IgA
21
Light chain only
22
Others (D, E, non-secretory)
2
24.61  Classification of multiple myeloma
Haematological malignancies
24
1047
of life and prolongs survival (Box 24.63) but does not 
cure myeloma. The role of allogeneic transplantation 
(p. 1017) and of reduced-intensity allografting after 
autologous transplantation in younger patients is under 
evaluation.
When myeloma progresses, treatment is given to 
induce a further plateau phase. In the UK at present, 
bortezomib is recommended, followed by lenalidomide 
if there is subsequent progression.
Radiotherapy
This is effective for localised bone pain not responding 
to simple analgesia and for pathological fractures. It is 
also useful for the emergency treatment of spinal cord 
compression complicating extradural plasmacytomas.
Bisphosphonates
Long-term bisphosphonate therapy reduces bone pain 
and skeletal events. These drugs protect bone (p. 1123) 
and may cause apoptosis of malignant plasma cells. 
There is evidence that intravenous zoledronate in com­
bination with anti-myeloma therapy confers a survival 
advantage over oral bisphosphonates. Osteonecrosis of 
the jaw may be associated with long-term use; therefore 
regular dental review is advisable.
Prognosis
The international staging system (ISS) identifies poor 
prognostic features, including a high β2-microglobulin 
and low albumin at diagnosis (ISS stage 3, median sur­
vival 29 months). Those with a normal albumin and a 
low β2-microglobulin (ISS stage 1) have a median 
survival of 62 months. Use of autologous HSCT and 
Management
If patients are asymptomatic with no evidence of end 
organ damage (e.g. to kidneys, bone marrow or bone), 
treatment may not be required.
Immediate support
•	 High fluid intake to treat renal impairment and 
hypercalcaemia (p. 767).
•	 Analgesia for bone pain.
•	 Bisphosphonates for hypercalcaemia and to delay 
other skeletal related events (p. 1123).
•	 Allopurinol to prevent urate nephropathy.
•	 Plasmapheresis, if necessary, for hyperviscosity.
Chemotherapy with or without HSCT
Myeloma therapy has improved with the addition of 
novel agents, initially thalidomide and more recently 
the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, to first-line treat­
ments. In older patients, thalidomide combined with 
the alkylating agent melphalan and prednisolone has 
increased the median overall survival to more than 
4 years. Thalidomide has both anti-angiogenic effects 
against tumour blood vessels and immunomodulatory 
effects. It can cause somnolence, constipation, peripheral 
neuropathy and thrombosis. It is vital that females of 
child-bearing age use adequate contraception, as tha­
lidomide is teratogenic. Treatment is administered until 
paraprotein levels have stopped falling. This is termed 
‘plateau phase’ and can last for weeks or years.
In younger, fitter patients, standard treatment 
includes first-line chemotherapy to maximum response 
and then an autologous HSCT, which improves quality 
‘The addition of autologous HSCT to conventional intravenous 
chemotherapy improves survival from 42 to 54 months.’
• Child JA, et al. N Engl J Med 2003; 348:1875–1883.
For further information: 
 www.ukmf.org.uk
24.63  Autologous haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation in multiple myeloma
Question
Investigations
Presence of lytic lesions, 
bone fractures?
X-rays (skeletal survey)1
Alkaline phosphatase1
Spinal cord compression?
MRI spine2
Presence of urine or plasma 
M-protein?
Blood and urine protein 
electrophoresis
Type of M-protein?
Blood and urine 
immunoelectrophoresis
Amount of M-protein?
Quantification of M-protein
Degree of immune paresis?
Plasma immunoglobulins
Presence of plasma cells in 
bone marrow?
Bone marrow aspiration and 
trephine
Degree of bone marrow 
failure?
Full blood count
Renal function?
Urea and electrolytes, 
creatinine, urate
Presence of hypercalcaemia?
Blood calcium and albumin
Poor prognostic factors at 
diagnosis?
β2 microglobulin > 5.5 mg/L, 
albumin < 35 g/L
1ln the absence of fractures, the plasma alkaline phosphatase and isotope 
bone scan will be normal despite the lytic lesions.
2All investigations shown above are routine in myeloma, except MRI of the 
spine, which is reserved for those with clinical indications.
24.62  Rationale for investigations in 
multiple myeloma
• Median age: approximately 70 yrs for most haematological 
malignancies.
• Poor-risk biological features: adverse cytogenetics or the 
presence of a multidrug resistance phenotype are more 
frequent.
• Prognosis: increasing age is an independent adverse 
variable in acute leukaemia and aggressive lymphoma.
• Chemotherapy: may be less well tolerated. Older people are 
more likely to have antecedent cardiac, pulmonary or 
metabolic problems, tolerate systemic infection less well and 
metabolise cytotoxic drugs differently.
• Cure rates: similar to those in younger patients, in those 
who do tolerate treatment.
• Decision to treat: should be based on the individual’s 
biological status, the level of social support available, and the 
patient’s wishes and those of the immediate family, but not 
on chronological age alone.
24.64  Haematological malignancy in old age
Blood disease
24
1048
underlying cause should be treated or removed but 
otherwise management is as for the idiopathic form.
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS
These make up a group of chronic conditions character­
ised by clonal proliferation of marrow precursor cells, 
and include polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV), essential 
thrombocythaemia, myelofibrosis, and chronic myeloid 
leukaemia (p. 1039). Although the majority of patients 
are classifiable as having one of these disorders, some 
have overlapping features and there is often progression 
from one to another, e.g. PRV to myelofibrosis. The 
recent discovery of the molecular basis of these disor­
ders will lead to changes in classification and treatment; 
a mutation in the gene on chromosome 9 encoding the 
signal transduction molecule JAK-2 has been found in 
more than 90% of PRV cases and 50% of those with 
essential thrombocythaemia and myelofibrosis.
Myelofibrosis
In myelofibrosis, the marrow is initially hypercellular, 
with an excess of abnormal megakaryocytes which 
release growth factors, e.g. platelet-derived growth 
factor, to the marrow microenvironment, resulting in a 
reactive proliferation of fibroblasts. As the disease 
progresses, the marrow becomes fibrosed.
Most patients present over the age of 50 years, with 
lassitude, weight loss and night sweats. The spleen can 
be massively enlarged due to extramedullary haemato­
poiesis (blood cell formation outside the bone marrow), 
and painful splenic infarcts may occur.
The characteristic blood picture is leucoerythroblastic 
anaemia, with circulating immature red blood cells 
(increased reticulocytes and nucleated red blood 
cells) and granulocyte precursors (myelocytes). The red 
cells are shaped like teardrops (teardrop poikilocytes), 
and giant platelets may be seen in the blood. The white 
count varies from low to moderately high, and the plate­
let count may be high, normal or low. Urate levels may 
be high due to increased cell breakdown, and folate 
deficiency is common. The marrow is often difficult to 
advances in drug therapy have increased survival, with 
over one-third of patients now surviving for 5 years, 
compared with only one-quarter 10 years ago. The 
outlook may improve further with new drugs and com­
binations of treatments.
APLASTIC ANAEMIA
Primary idiopathic acquired 
aplastic anaemia
This is a rare disorder in Europe and North America, 
with 2–4 new cases per million population per annum. 
The disease is much more common in certain other parts 
of the world: for example, east Asia. The basic problem 
is failure of the pluripotent stem cells, producing hypo­
plasia of the bone marrow with a pancytopenia in the 
blood. The diagnosis rests on exclusion of other causes 
of secondary aplastic anaemia (see below) and rare con­
genital causes, such as Fanconi’s anaemia.
Clinical features and investigations
Patients present with symptoms of bone marrow failure, 
usually anaemia or bleeding, and less commonly, infec­
tions. An FBC demonstrates pancytopenia, low reticulo­
cytes and often macrocytosis. Bone marrow aspiration 
and trephine reveal hypocellularity.
Management
All patients will require blood product support and 
aggressive management of infection. The prognosis of 
severe aplastic anaemia managed with supportive 
therapy only is poor and more than 50% of patients die, 
usually in the first year. The curative treatment for 
patients under 30 years of age with severe idiopathic 
aplastic anaemia is allogeneic HSCT if there is an avail­
able donor (p. 1017). Those with a compatible sibling 
donor should proceed to transplantation as soon as 
possible; they have a 75–90% chance of long-term 
cure. In older patients, immunosuppressive therapy 
with ciclosporin and antithymocyte globulin gives 
5-year survival rates of 75%. Such patients may 
relapse or other clonal disorders of haematopoiesis may 
evolve, such as paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria 
(p. 1031), myelodysplastic syndrome (p. 1041) and acute 
myeloid leukaemia (p. 1036). They must be followed up 
long-term.
Secondary aplastic anaemia
Causes of this condition are listed in Box 24.65. It is not 
practical to list all the drugs which have been suspected 
of causing aplasia. It is important to check the reported 
side-effects of all drugs taken over the preceding months. 
In some instances, the cytopenia is more selective and 
affects only one cell line, most often the neutrophils. 
Frequently, this is an incidental finding, with no ill 
health. It probably has an immune basis but this is dif­
ficult to prove.
The clinical features and methods of diagnosis are the 
same as for primary idiopathic aplastic anaemia. An 
• Drugs
Cytotoxic drugs
Antibiotics – chloramphenicol, sulphonamides
Antirheumatic agents – penicillamine, gold, 
phenylbutazone, indometacin
Antithyroid drugs
Anticonvulsants
Immunosuppressants – azathioprine
• Chemicals
Benzene toluene solvent misuse – glue-sniffing
Insecticides – chlorinated hydrocarbons (DDT), 
organophosphates and carbamates (pp. 220 and 222)
• Radiation
• Viral hepatitis
• Pregnancy
• Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
24.65  Causes of secondary aplastic anaemia
Bleeding disorders
24
1049
Management and prognosis
Aspirin reduces the risk of thrombosis. Venesection 
gives prompt relief of hyperviscosity symptoms. 
Between 400 and 500 mL of blood (less if the patient is 
elderly) are removed and the venesection is repeated 
every 5–7 days until the haematocrit is reduced to below 
45%. Less frequent but regular venesection will maintain 
this level until the haemoglobin remains reduced 
because of iron deficiency.
Suppression of marrow proliferation with hydroxy­
carbamide or interferon-alfa may reduce the risk 
of vascular occlusion, control spleen size and reduce 
transformation to myelofibrosis. Radioactive phospho­
rus (5 mCi of 32P IV) is reserved for older patients, as it 
increases the risk of transformation to acute leukaemia 
by 6- to 10-fold.
Median survival after diagnosis in treated patients 
exceeds 10 years. Some patients survive more than 
20 years; however, cerebrovascular or coronary events 
occur in up to 60% of patients. The disease may convert 
to another myeloproliferative disorder, with about 25% 
developing acute leukaemia or myelofibrosis.
BLEEDING DISORDERS
Disorders of primary haemostasis
The initial formation of the platelet plug (see Fig. 24.6A, 
p. 996; also known as ‘primary haemostasis’) may fail 
in thrombocytopenia (p. 1007), von Willebrand disease 
(p. 1053), and also in platelet function disorders and 
diseases affecting the vessel wall.
Vessel wall abnormalities
Vessel wall abnormalities may be:
•	 congenital, such as hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia
•	 acquired, as in a vasculitis (p. 1115) or scurvy.
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is a dom­
inantly inherited condition caused by mutations in the 
genes encoding endoglin and activin receptor-like 
kinase, which are endothelial cell receptors for trans­
forming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), a potent angio­genic 
cytokine. Telangiectasia and small aneurysms are found 
on the fingertips, face and tongue, and in the nasal pas­
sages, lung and gastrointestinal tract. A significant pro­
portion of these patients develop larger pulmonary 
arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs) that cause arte­
rial hypoxaemia due to a right-to-left shunt. These pre­
dispose to paradoxical embolism, resulting in stroke or 
cerebral abscess. All patients with HHT should be 
screened for PAVMs; if these are found, ablation by 
percutaneous embolisation should be considered.
Patients present either with recurrent bleeds, particu­
larly epistaxis, or with iron deficiency due to occult gas­
trointestinal bleeding. Treatment can be difficult because 
of the multiple bleeding points but regular iron therapy 
often allows the marrow to compensate for blood loss. 
Local cautery or laser therapy may prevent single lesions 
from bleeding. A variety of medical therapies have 
been tried but none has been found to be universally 
effective.
aspirate and a trephine biopsy shows an excess of 
mega­karyocytes, increased reticulin and fibrous tissue 
replacement. The presence of a JAK-2 mutation supports 
the diagnosis.
Management and prognosis
Median survival is 4 years from diagnosis, but ranges 
from 1 year to over 20 years. Treatment is directed at 
control of symptoms, e.g. red cell transfusions for 
anaemia. Folic acid should be given to prevent defi­
ciency. Cytotoxic therapy with hydroxycarbamide may 
help control spleen size, the white cell count or systemic 
symptoms. Splenectomy may be required for a grossly 
enlarged spleen or symptomatic pancytopenia second­
ary to splenic pooling of cells and hypersplenism. HSCT 
may be considered for younger patients. Ruxolitinib, an 
inhibitor of JAK-2, has recently been licensed for use.
Essential thrombocythaemia
Increased proliferation of megakaryocytes results in a 
raised level of circulating platelets that are often dysfunc­
tional. Prior to making a diagnosis of essential thrombo­
cythaemia (ET), reactive causes of thrombocytosis must 
be excluded (p. 1008). The presence of a JAK-2 mutation 
supports the diagnosis but is not universal. Patients 
present at a median age of 60 years with vascular occlu­
sion or bleeding, or with an asymptomatic isolated raised 
platelet count. A small percentage transform to acute 
leukaemia and others to myelofibrosis.
It is likely that most patients with ET benefit from 
low-dose aspirin to reduce the risk of occlusive vascular 
events. Low-risk patients (age < 40 years, platelet count 
< 1000 × 109/L and no bleeding or thrombosis) may not 
require treatment to reduce the platelet count. For those 
with a platelet count above 1000 × 109/L, with symp­
toms, or with other risk factors for thrombosis such as 
diabetes or hypertension, treatment to control platelet 
counts should be given. Agents include oral hydroxycar­
bamide or anagrelide, an inhibitor of megakaryocyte 
maturation. Intravenous radioactive phosphorus (32P) 
may be useful in old age.
Polycythaemia rubra vera
Polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV) occurs mainly in 
patients over the age of 40 years and presents either as 
an incidental finding of a high haemoglobin, or with 
symptoms of hyperviscosity, such as lassitude, loss of 
concentration, headaches, dizziness, blackouts, pruritus 
and epistaxis. Some patients present with manifestations 
of peripheral arterial disease or a cerebrovascular acci­
dent. Venous thromboembolism may also occur. Peptic 
ulceration is common, sometimes complicated by bleed­
ing. Patients are often plethoric and many have a palpa­
ble spleen at diagnosis.
Investigation of polycythaemia is discussed on page 
1002. The diagnosis of PRV now rests upon the demon­
stration of a high haematocrit and the presence of the 
JAK-2 mutation. In the occasional JAK-2-negative cases, 
a raised red cell mass and absence of causes of a second­
ary erythrocytosis must be established. The spleen is 
enlarged, neutrophil and platelet counts are frequently 
raised, an abnormal karyotype may be found in the 
marrow, and in vitro culture of the marrow can be used 
to demonstrate autonomous growth in the absence of 
added growth factors.
Blood disease
24
1050
certain drug therapies. However, the clinical presenta­
tion and pathogenesis are similar, whatever the cause 
of ITP.
Clinical features and investigations
The presentation depends on the degree of thrombo­
cytopenia. Spontaneous bleeding typically occurs only 
when the platelet count is below 20 × 109/L. At higher 
counts, the patient may complain of easy bruising or 
sometimes epistaxis or menorrhagia. Many cases with 
counts of more than 50 × 109/L are discovered by chance.
In adults, ITP more commonly affects females and 
may have an insidious onset. Unlike ITP in children, it 
is unusual for there to be a history of a preceding viral 
infection. Symptoms or signs of a connective tissue 
disease may be apparent at presentation or emerge 
several years later. Patients aged over 65 years should 
have a bone marrow examination to look for an accom­
panying B cell malignancy and appropriate autoanti­
body testing performed if a diagnosis of connective 
tissue disease is likely. HIV testing should be consid­
ered. The peripheral blood film is normal, apart from a 
greatly reduced platelet number, whilst the bone marrow 
reveals an obvious increase in megakaryocytes.
Management
Many patients with stable compensated ITP and a plate­
let count of more than 30 × 109/L do not require treat­
ment to raise the platelet count, except at times of 
increased bleeding risk, such as surgery and biopsy. 
First-line therapy for patients with spontaneous bleed­
ing is with prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily to suppress anti­
body production and inhibit phagocytosis of sensitised 
platelets by reticuloendothelial cells. Administration of 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) can raise the plate­
let count by blocking antibody receptors on reticulo­
endothelial cells, and is combined with corticosteroid 
therapy if there is severe haemostatic failure or a slow 
response to steroids alone. Persistent or potentially life-
threatening bleeding should be treated with platelet 
transfusion in addition to the other therapies.
The condition may become chronic, with remissions 
and relapses. Relapses should be treated by re- 
introducing corticosteroids. If a patient has two relapses, 
or primary refractory disease, splenectomy is considered, 
with the precautions shown in Box 24.40 (p. 1028). 
Splenectomy produces complete remission in about 70% 
of patients and improvement in a further 20–25%, so that, 
following splenectomy, only 5–10% of patients require 
further medical therapy. If severe thrombocytopenia 
with or without significant bleeding persists despite 
splenectomy, second-line therapy with the thrombopoie­
tin analogue romiplostim or the thrombopoietin receptor 
agonist eltrombopag should be considered. Low-dose 
corticosteroid therapy, immunosuppressants such as 
rituximab, ciclosporin and tacrolimus should be consid­
ered in cases where the approaches above are ineffective.
Coagulation disorders
Normal coagulation is explained in Figure 24.6 (p. 996). 
Coagulation factor deficiency may be congenital or 
acquired, and may affect one or several of the coagula­
tion factors (Box 24.66). Inherited disorders are almost 
uniformly related to decreased synthesis, as a result of 
Ehlers–Danlos disease
Vascular Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (type 4) is a rare auto­
somal dominant disorder (1/100 000) caused by a defect 
in type 3 collagen which results in fragile blood vessels 
and organ membranes, leading to bleeding and organ 
rupture. Classical joint hypermobility (p. 1134) is often 
limited in this form of the disease but skin changes and 
facial appearance are typical. The diagnosis should be 
considered when there is a history of bleeding but 
normal laboratory tests.
Scurvy
Vitamin C deficiency affects the normal synthesis of col­
lagen and results in a bleeding disorder characterised by 
perifollicular and petechial haemorrhage, bruising and 
subperiosteal bleeding. The key to diagnosis is the 
dietary history (p. 129).
Platelet function disorders
Bleeding may result from thrombocytopenia (see Box 
24.14, p. 1007) or from congenital or acquired abnormali­
ties of platelet function. The most common acquired 
disorders are iatrogenic, resulting from the use of 
aspirin, clopidogrel, dipyridamole and the IIb/IIIa 
inhibitors to prevent arterial thrombosis (see Box 24.29, 
p. 1019). Inherited platelet function abnormalities are 
relatively rare. Congenital abnormalities may be due to 
deficiency of the membrane glycoproteins, e.g. Glanz­
mann’s thrombasthenia (IIb/IIIa) or Bernard–Soulier 
disease (Ib), or due to the presence of defective platelet 
granules, e.g. a deficiency of dense (delta) granules (see 
Fig. 24.7, p. 998) giving rise to storage pool disorders. 
The congenital macrothrombocytopathies that are due 
to mutations in the myosin heavy chain gene MYH-9 
are characterised by large platelets, inclusion bodies in 
the neutrophils (Döhle bodies) and a variety of other 
features, including sensorineural deafness and renal 
abnormalities.
Apart from Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia, these con­
ditions are mild disorders, with bleeding typically 
occurring after trauma or surgery but rarely spontane­
ously. Glanzmann’s is an autosomal recessive condition 
associated with a variable but often severe bleeding dis­
order. These conditions are usually managed by local 
mechanical measures, but antifibrinolytics, such as tran­
examic acid, may be useful and, in severe bleeding, 
platelet transfusion may be required. Recombinant VIIa 
is licensed for the treatment of resistant bleeding in 
Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia.
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia occurs in many disease processes, as 
listed in Box 24.14 (p. 1007), many of which are dis­
cussed elsewhere in this chapter.
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is mediated 
by autoantibodies, most often directed against the plate­
let membrane glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, which sensitise the 
platelet, resulting in premature removal from the circu­
lation by cells of the reticulo-endothelial system. It is not 
a single disorder; some cases occur in isolation while 
others are associated with underlying immune dysregu­
lation in conditions such as connective tissue diseases, 
HIV infection, B cell malignancies, pregnancy and 
Bleeding disorders
24
1051
baby, a normal male baby, a carrier female or a normal 
female. Antenatal diagnosis by chorionic villous sam­
pling is possible in families with a known mutation.
Haemophilia ‘breeds true’ within a family; all 
members have the same factor VIII gene mutation and 
a similarly severe or mild phenotype. Female carriers of 
haemophilia may have reduced factor VIII levels because 
of random inactivation of their normal X chromosome 
in the developing fetus (lyonisation). This can result in 
a mild bleeding disorder; thus all known or suspected 
carriers of haemophilia should have their factor VIII 
level measured.
Clinical features
The extent and patterns of bleeding are closely related 
to residual factor VIII levels. Patients with severe hae­
mophilia (< 1% of normal factor VIII levels) present with 
spontaneous bleeding into skin, muscle and joints. 
Retro­peritoneal and intracranial bleeding is also a 
feature. Babies with severe haemophilia have an 
increased risk of intracranial haemorrhage and, although 
there is insufficient evidence to recommend routine 
caesarean section for these births, it is appropriate to 
avoid head trauma and to perform imaging of the 
newborn within the first 24 hours of life. Individuals 
with moderate and mild haemophilia (factor VIII levels 
1–40%) present with the same pattern of bleeding, but 
usually after trauma or surgery, when bleeding is greater 
than would be expected from the severity of the insult.
The major morbidity of recurrent bleeding in severe 
haemophilia is musculoskeletal. Bleeding is typically 
into large joints, especially knees, elbows, ankles and 
hips. Muscle haematomas are also characteristic, most 
commonly in the calf and psoas muscles. If early treat­
ment is not given to arrest bleeding, a hot, swollen and 
very painful joint or muscle haematoma develops. 
Recurrent bleeding into joints leads to synovial hyper­
trophy, destruction of the cartilage and secondary 
osteoarthrosis (Fig. 24.32). Complications of muscle hae­
matomas depend on their location. A large psoas bleed 
may extend to compress the femoral nerve; calf hae­
matomas may increase pressure within the inflexible 
fascial sheath, causing a compartment syndrome with 
ischaemia, necrosis, fibrosis, and subsequent contraction 
and shortening of the Achilles tendon.
Management
In severe haemophilia A, bleeding episodes should be 
treated by raising the factor VIII level, usually by 
mutation in the gene encoding a key protein in coagu­
lation. Von Willebrand disease is the most common 
inherited bleeding disorder. Haemophilia A and B are 
the most common single coagulation factor deficiencies, 
but inherited deficiencies of all the other coagulation 
factors are seen. Acquired disorders may be due to 
under-production (e.g. in liver failure), increased con­
sumption (e.g. in disseminated intravascular coagula­
tion) or inhibition of function (such as heparin therapy 
or immune inhibitors of coagulation, e.g. acquired 
haemophilia A).
Haemophilia A
Factor VIII deficiency resulting in haemophilia A affects 
1/10 000 individuals. It is the most common congenital 
coagulation factor deficiency. Factor VIII is primarily 
synthesised by the liver and endothelial cells, and has a 
half-life of about 12 hours. It is protected from pro­
teolysis in the circulation by binding to von Willebrand 
factor (vWF).
Genetics
The factor VIII gene is located on the X chromosome. 
Severe haemophilia is associated with large deletions, 
while single-base changes more often result in moderate 
or mild disease (Box 24.67). As the gene is on the 
X chromosome, haemophilia A is a sex-linked disorder 
(p. 53). Thus all daughters of haemophiliacs are obligate 
carriers and they, in turn, have a 1 in 4 chance of each 
pregnancy resulting in the birth of an affected male 
Congenital
X-linked
• Haemophilia A and B
Autosomal
• Von Willebrand disease
• Factor II, V, VII, X, XI 
and XIII deficiencies
• Combined II, VII, IX and 
X deficiency
• Combined V and VIII 
deficiency
• Hypofibrinogenaemia
• Dysfibrinogenaemia
Acquired
Under-production
• Liver failure
Increased consumption
• Coagulation activation
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
• Immune-mediated
Acquired haemophilia and von Willebrand syndrome
• Others
Acquired factor X deficiency (in amyloid)
Acquired von Willebrand syndrome in Wilms tumour
Drug-induced
Inhibition of function
• Heparins
• Argatroban
• Fondaparinux
• Rivaroxaban
• Apixaban
• Dabigatran
Inhibition of synthesis
• Warfarin
24.66  Causes of coagulopathy
Severity
Factor VIII or IX 
level
Clinical presentation
Severe
< 0.01 U/mL
Spontaneous 
haemarthroses and 
muscle haematomas
Moderate
0.01–0.05 U/mL
Mild trauma or surgery 
causes bleeding
Mild
> 0.05 to 0.4 U/mL
Major injury or surgery 
results in excess bleeding
(ISTH = International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis)
24.67  Severity of haemophilia (ISTH criteria)
Blood disease
24
1052
purpose is higher than that used in diabetes insipidus, 
usually 0.3 µg/kg given intravenously or subcutane­
ously. Alternatively, the same effect can be achieved by 
intranasal administration of 300 µg. Following repeated 
administration of DDAVP, patients need to be moni­
tored for evidence of water retention, which can result 
in significant hyponatraemia. DDAVP is contra­indicated 
in patients with a history of severe arterial disease 
because of a propensity to provoke a thrombotic event.
In addition to treatment ‘on demand’ for bleeding, 
factor VIII can be administered 2 or 3 times per week as 
‘prophylaxis’ to prevent bleeding in severe haemo­
philia. This is most appropriate in children, but its wide­
spread use is limited by the high cost of factor VIII 
preparations. New concentrates of factor VIII (and 
factor IX) will soon add to the treatment options for 
these conditions.
Complications of coagulation factor therapy
Before 1986, coagulation factor concentrates from human 
plasma were not virally inactivated with heat or chemi­
cals, and many patients became infected with HIV and 
hepatitis viruses HBV and HCV. In exposed patients 
with severe haemophilia, infection with HCV is almost 
intravenous infusion of factor VIII concentrate. Factor 
VIII concentrates are freeze-dried and stable at 4°C and 
can therefore be stored in domestic refrigerators, allow­
ing patients to treat themselves at home at the earliest 
indication of bleeding. Factor VIII concentrate prepared 
from blood donor plasma is now screened for HBV, 
HCV and HIV, and undergoes two separate virus inac­
tivation processes during manufacture; these prepara­
tions have a good safety record. However, factor VIII 
concentrates prepared by recombinant technology are 
now widely available and, although more expensive, 
are perceived as being safer than those derived from 
human plasma. In addition to raising factor VIII con­
centrations, resting of the bleeding site by either bed 
rest or a splint reduces continuing haemorrhage. Once 
bleeding has settled, the patient should be mobilised 
and physiotherapy used to restore strength to the sur­
rounding muscles. All non-immune potential recipients 
of pooled blood products should be offered hepatitis A 
and B immunisation.
The vasopressin receptor agonist DDAVP (p. 794) 
raises the vWF and factor VIII levels by 3–4-fold, which 
is useful in arresting bleeding in patients with mild or 
moderate haemophilia A. The dose required for this 
Fig. 24.32  Clinical manifestations of haemophilia. On the knee X-ray, repeated bleeds have led to broadening of the femoral epicondyles, and there 
is no cartilage present, as evidenced by the close proximity of the femur and tibia (A); sclerosis (B), osteophyte (C) and bony cysts (D) are present. (HCV = 
hepatitis C virus). Inset (Massive bruising) From Hoffbrand 2000 – see p. 1056.
D
B
C
A
Haemophilia B in the descendants of Queen Victoria
Albert
Victoria
Haemophilia (male)
Age at death
23
33
31
21
20
2
56 4
14
31
#
Carrier for haemophilia (female)
Chronic haemophilic
arthropathy with joint swelling
and muscle wasting on left
Left thigh muscle haematoma
in severe haemophilia
Massive bruising
X-ray of advanced
haemophilic arthropathy
Massive retroperitoneal haemorrhage
Hepatoma in cirrhotic liver
secondary to HCV infection
contracted from coagulation
factor concentrate
X-linked inheritance of haemophilia B
Bleeding disorders
24
1053
those with mutations in the platelet glycoprotein Ib 
binding site have type 2B, those with mutations in the 
factor VIII binding site have type 2N disease, and those 
with other abnormalities in platelet binding have type 
2M. The patterns of laboratory abnormality accompany­
ing these types are described in Box 24.68. The gene for 
vWF is located on chromosome 12 and the disease is 
usually inherited as an autosomal dominant, except in 
cases of type 2N and type 3, when it is recessive.
Clinical features
Patients present with haemorrhagic manifestations 
similar to those in individuals with reduced platelet 
function. Superficial bruising, epistaxis, menorrhagia 
and gastrointestinal haemorrhage are common. Bleed­
ing episodes are usually much less common than in 
severe haemophilia and excessive haemorrhage may 
only be observed after trauma or surgery. Within a 
single family, the disease has variable penetrance, so 
that some members may have quite severe and frequent 
bleeds, whereas others are relatively asymptomatic.
Investigations
The disorder is characterised by reduced activity of vWF 
and factor VIII. The disease can be classified using a 
combination of assays which include functional and 
antigenic measures of vWF, multimeric analysis of the 
protein, and specific tests of function to determine 
binding to platelet glycoprotein Ib (RIPA) and factor VIII 
(see Box 24.68). In addition, analysis for mutations in the 
vWF gene is informative in most cases.
Management
Many episodes of mild haemorrhage can be successfully 
treated by local means or with DDAVP, which raises the 
vWF level, resulting in a secondary increase in factor VIII. 
universal, 80–90% have evidence of HBV exposure, and 
60% became HIV-positive. Management is described in 
Chapters 23 and 14. Since 1989, viral inactivation of 
these blood products has eradicated the risk of viral 
infection.
Concern that the infectious agent that causes vCJD 
(p. 1211) might be transmissible by blood and blood 
products has been confirmed in recipients of red cell 
transfusion, and in one recipient of factor VIII. Pooled 
plasma products, including factor VIII concentrate, 
are now manufactured from plasma collected in 
countries with a low incidence of bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy.
Another serious complication of factor VIII infusion 
is the development of anti-factor VIII antibodies, which 
arise in about 20% of severe haemophiliacs. Such anti­
bodies rapidly neutralise therapeutic infusions, making 
treatment relatively ineffective. Infusions of activated 
clotting factors, e.g. VIIa or factor VIII inhibitor bypass 
activity (FEIBA), may stop bleeding.
Haemophilia B (Christmas disease)
Aberrations of the factor IX gene, which is also present 
on the X chromosome, result in a reduction of the plasma 
factor IX level, giving rise to haemophilia B. This disorder 
is clinically indistinguishable from haemophilia A but is 
less common. The frequency of bleeding episodes is 
related to the severity of the deficiency of the plasma 
factor IX level. Treatment is with a factor IX concentrate, 
used in much the same way as factor VIII for haemophilia 
A. Although factor IX concentrates shared the problems 
of virus transmission seen with factor VIII, they do not 
commonly induce inhibitor antibodies (< 1% patients); 
when this does occur, however, it may be heralded by 
the development of a severe allergic-type reaction.
Von Willebrand disease
Von Willebrand disease is a common but usually mild 
bleeding disorder caused by a quantitative (types 1 and 
3) or qualitative (type 2) deficiency of von Willebrand 
factor (vWF), a protein synthesised by endothelial cells 
and megakaryocytes, which is involved in both platelet 
function and coagulation. It normally forms a multi­
meric structure which is essential for its interaction 
with subendothelial collagen and platelets (see Fig. 24.7, 
p. 998). vWF acts as a carrier protein for factor VIII, to 
which it is non-covalently bound; deficiency of vWF 
lowers the plasma factor VIII level. vWF also forms 
bridges between platelets and subendothelial compo­
nents (e.g. collagen; see Fig. 24.6, p. 996), allowing plate­
lets to adhere to damaged vessel walls; deficiency of 
vWF therefore leads to impaired platelet plug formation. 
Blood group antigens (A and B) are expressed on vWF, 
reducing its susceptibility to proteolysis; as a result, 
people with blood group O have lower circulating vWF 
levels than individuals with non-O groups. This needs 
to be borne in mind when making a diagnosis of von 
Willebrand disease.
Most patients with von Willebrand disease have a 
type 1 disorder, characterised by a quantitative decrease 
in a normal functional protein. Patients with type 2 dis­
orders inherit vWF molecules that are functionally 
abnormal. The type of abnormality depends on the 
site of the mutation in the vWD gene. Patients with 
mutations in platelet binding have type 2A disease, 
Type
Defect
Inheritance
Investigations
1
Partial 
quantitative
AD
Parallel decrease in vWF: 
Ag and VIII:c
2A
Qualitative
AD
Absent HWM of vWF
Ratio of vWF activity to 
antigen < 0.7
2B
Qualitative
AD
Reduced HWM of vWF
Enhanced platelet 
agglutination (RIPA)
2M
Qualitative
AD
Normal multimers of vWF
Abnormal platelets
Interactions
2N
Qualitative
AR
Defective binding of vWF 
to VIII
Low VIII
3
Severe 
quantitative
AR or CH
Very low vWF activity and 
VIII:c
Absent multimers
(AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; CH = compound 
heterozygote; HWM = high-weight multimers of vWF; RIPA = ristocetin-
induced platelet agglutination; VIII:c = coagulation factor VIII activity in 
functional assay; vWF = von Willebrand factor; vWF:Ag = vWF antigen 
measured by ELISA)
24.68  Classification of von Willebrand disease
Blood disease
24
1054
patients with the most common presentation, deep 
venous thrombosis of the leg, is described on page 1008.
Pulmonary embolism is discussed on page 721. Anti­
coagulant therapy is discussed on page 1010. Predispos­
ing factors for VTE are listed in Box 24.17 (p. 1009). In a 
small proportion of cases, there is an underlying haema­
tological disorder predisposing to venous thrombosis, 
detected using the tests described in Boxes 24.4 and 24.5 
(p. 1001). These disorders include myeloproliferative 
disorders and paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, 
which are discussed above (pp. 1048 and 1031). They 
also include inherited and acquired conditions, described 
below.
Inherited abnormalities  
of coagulation
Several inherited conditions predispose to VTE, and 
have several points in common that are worth noting:
•	 None of them is strongly associated with arterial 
thrombosis.
•	 All are associated with a slightly increased 
incidence of adverse outcome of pregnancy, 
including recurrent early fetal loss, but there are no 
data to indicate that any specific intervention 
changes that outcome.
•	 Apart from in antithrombin deficiency and 
homozygous factor V Leiden, most carriers of these 
genes will never have an episode of VTE; if they do, 
it will be associated with the presence of an 
additional temporary risk factor.
•	 There is little evidence that detection of these 
abnormalities predicts recurrence of VTE.
•	 None of these conditions per se requires treatment 
with anticoagulants. Patients with thrombosis 
should receive anticoagulation, as discussed on 
page 1009. Patients who are deemed to be at high 
risk of thrombosis, e.g. those with antithrombin 
deficiency in pregnancy, should receive treatment 
or prophylactic doses of heparin to cover the period 
of risk only.
Antithrombin deficiency
Antithrombin (AT) is a serine protease inhibitor 
(SERPIN) which inactivates the activated coagulation 
factors IIa, IXa, Xa and XIa. Heparins, fondaparinux and 
idraparinux achieve their therapeutic effect by potentiat­
ing the activity of AT. Familial deficiency of AT is inher­
ited as an autosomal dominant; homozygosity for 
mutant alleles is not compatible with life. Around 70% 
of affected individuals will have an episode of VTE 
before the age of 60 years and the relative risk for throm­
bosis compared with the background population is 
10–20. Pregnancy is a high-risk period for VTE and this 
requires fairly aggressive management with doses of 
LMWH which are greater than the usual prophylactic 
doses (≥ 100 U/kg/day). AT concentrate (either plasma-
derived or recombinant) is available; this is required for 
cardiopulmonary bypass and may be used as an adjunct 
to heparin in surgical prophylaxis.
Protein C and S deficiencies
Protein C and S are vitamin K-dependent natural 
anticoagulants involved in switching off coagulation 
factor activation (factors Va and VIIIa) and thrombin 
generation (see Fig. 24.6E, p. 997). Inherited deficiency 
Tranexamic acid may be useful in mucosal bleeding. For 
more serious or persistent bleeds, haemostasis can be 
achieved with selected factor VIII concentrates which 
contain considerable quantities of vWF in addition to 
factor VIII. Young children and patients with severe arte­
rial disease should not receive DDAVP, and patients with 
type 2B disease develop thrombocytopenia which may 
be troublesome following DDAVP. Bleeding in type 3 
patients responds to nothing apart from concentrate.
Rare inherited bleeding disorders
Severe deficiencies of factor VII, X and XIII occur as 
autosomal recessive disorders. They are rare but are 
associated with severe bleeding. Typical features include 
haemorrhage from the umbilical stump and intracranial 
haemorrhage. Factor XIII deficiency is typically associ­
ated with female infertility.
Factor XI deficiency may occur in heterozygous or 
homozygous individuals. Bleeding is very variable and 
is not accurately predicted by coagulation factor levels. 
In general, severe bleeding is confined to patients with 
levels below 15% of normal.
Acquired bleeding disorders
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an 
important cause of bleeding which begins with exagger­
ated and inappropriate intravascular coagulation. It is 
discussed under thrombotic disease on page 1055.
Liver disease
In severe parenchymal liver disease (Ch. 23), bleeding 
may arise from many different causes. Pathological 
sources of potential major bleeding, such as oesophageal 
varices or peptic ulcer, are more likely. There is reduced 
hepatic synthesis: for example, of factors V, VII, VIII, IX, 
X, XI, prothrombin and fibrinogen. Clearance of plas­
minogen activator is reduced. Thrombocytopenia may 
occur secondary to hypersplenism in portal hyperten­
sion. In cholestatic jaundice, there is reduced vitamin K 
absorption, leading to deficiency of factors II, VII, IX and 
X. Treatment with plasma products or platelet transfu­
sion should be reserved for acute bleeds or to cover 
interventional procedures such as liver biopsy. Vitamin 
K deficiency can be readily corrected with parenteral 
administration of vitamin K.
Renal failure
The severity of the haemorrhagic state in renal failure 
is proportional to the plasma urea concentration (p. 478). 
Bleeding manifestations are those of platelet dysfunc­
tion, with gastrointestinal haemorrhage being particu­
larly common. The causes are multifactorial, including 
anaemia, mild thrombocytopenia and the accumulation 
of low molecular weight waste products, normally 
excreted by the kidney, which inhibit platelet function. 
Treatment is by dialysis to reduce the urea concentration. 
Rarely, in severe or persistent bleeding, platelet concen­
trate infusions and red cell transfusions are indicated. 
Increasing the concentration of vWF, either by cryo­
precipitate or by DDAVP, may promote haemostasis.
THROMBOTIC DISORDERS
Venous thromboembolic disease (VTE) and its treatment 
have many clinical manifestations. The approach to 
Thrombotic disorders
24
1055
•	 those which interfere with phospholipid-dependent 
coagulation tests like the APTT or the dilute Russell 
viper venom time (DRVVT; called a lupus 
anticoagulant test).
The term antiphospholipid antibody encompasses both 
a lupus anticoagulant and an anticardiolipin antibody; 
individuals may be positive for one or both of these 
activities.
Clinical features and management
APS may present in isolation (primary APS) or in asso­
ciation with one of the conditions shown in Box 24.69, 
most typically systemic lupus erythematosus (secondary 
APS). Most patients present with a single manifestation 
and APS is now most frequently diagnosed in women 
with adverse outcomes of pregnancy. It is extremely 
important to make the diagnosis in patients with APS, 
whatever the manifestation, because it affects the prog­
nosis and management of arterial thrombosis, VTE and 
pregnancy.
Arterial thrombosis, typically stroke, associated with 
APS should be treated with warfarin, as opposed to 
aspirin. APS-associated VTE is one of the situations in 
which the predicted recurrence rate is high enough to 
indicate long-term anticoagulation after a first event. In 
women with APS, it is likely that intervention with 
heparin and possibly aspirin increases the chance of a 
successful pregnancy outcome.
Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may com­
plicate a range of illnesses (Box 24.70). It is characterised 
by systemic activation of the pathways involved in 
coagulation and its regulation. This may result in the 
generation of intravascular fibrin clots causing multi-
organ failure, with simultaneous coagulation factor and 
platelet consumption causing bleeding. The systemic 
coagulation activation is induced either through cytokine 
pathways, which are activated as part of a systemic 
inflammatory response, or by the release of procoagu­
lant substances such as tissue factor. In addition, sub­
optimal function of the natural anticoagulant pathways 
and dysregulated fibrinolysis contribute to DIC. There 
is consumption of platelets, coagulation factors (notably 
factors V and VIII) and fibrinogen. The lysis of fibrin clot 
results in production of fibrin degradation products 
(FDPs), including D-dimers.
Investigations
DIC should be suspected when any of the conditions 
listed in Box 24.70 are met. Measurement of coagulation 
times (APTT and PT; p. 1000), along with fibrinogen, 
platelet count and FDPs, helps in the assessment of 
prognosis and aids clinical decision-making with regard 
to both bleeding and thrombotic complications.
Management
Therapy is primarily aimed at the underlying cause. 
These patients will often require intensive care to deal 
with concomitant issues, such as acidosis, dehydration, 
renal failure and hypoxia. Blood component therapy, 
such as fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate and plate­
lets, should be given if the patient is bleeding or to cover 
interventions with high bleeding risk, but should not be 
of either protein C or S results in a prothrombotic state 
with a fivefold relative risk of VTE compared with the 
background population.
Factor V Leiden
Factor V Leiden results from a gain-of-function, single-
base pair mutation which prevents the cleavage and 
hence inactivation of activated factor V. This results in a 
relative risk of venous thrombosis of 5 in heterozygotes 
and 50 or more in rare homozygotes. The mutation is 
found in about 5% of Northern Europeans, 2% of His­
panics, 1.2% of African-Americans, 0.5% of Asian-
Americans and 1.25% of Native Americans, and is rare 
in Chinese and Malay people.
Prothrombin G20210A
This gain-of-function mutation in the non-coding 3′ end 
of the prothrombin gene is associated with an increased 
plasma level of prothrombin. It is present in about 2% 
of Northern Europeans but is rare in native populations 
of Korea, China, India and Africa. In the heterozygous 
state, it is associated with a 2–3-fold increase in risk of 
VTE compared with the background population.
Antiphospholipid syndrome
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is a clinicopathologi­
cal entity in which a constellation of clinical conditions, 
alone or in combination, is found in association with a 
persistently positive test for an antiphospholipid anti­
body. The antiphospholipid antibodies are heterogene­
ous and typically are directed against proteins which 
bind to phospholipids (Box 24.69). Although causal roles 
for these antibodies have been proposed, the mecha­
nisms underlying the clinical features of APS are not 
clear. In clinical practice, two types of test are used, 
which detect:
•	 antibodies which bind to negatively charged 
phospholipid on an ELISA plate (called an 
anticardiolipin antibody test)
Clinical manifestations
• Adverse pregnancy outcome
Recurrent first trimester abortion (≥ 3)
Unexplained death of morphologically normal fetus after  
10 wks’ gestation
Severe early pre-eclampsia
• Venous thromboembolism
• Arterial thromboembolism
• Livedo reticularis, catastrophic APS, transverse myelitis, skin 
necrosis, chorea
Conditions associated with secondary APS
• Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Systemic sclerosis
• Behçet’s syndrome
• Temporal arteritis
• Sjögren’s syndrome
Targets for antiphospholipid antibodies
• β2-glycoprotein 1
• Protein C
• Annexin V
• Prothrombin (may result in 
haemorrhagic presentation)
24.69  Antiphospholipid syndrome
Blood disease
24
1056
prescribed routinely based on coagulation tests and 
platelet counts alone. Prophylactic doses of heparin 
should be given, unless there is a clear contraindication. 
Established thrombosis should be treated cautiously 
with therapeutic doses of unfractionated heparin, unless 
clearly contraindicated. Patients with DIC should not, in 
general, be treated with antifibrinolytic therapy, e.g. 
tranexamic acid.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
Like DIC and also heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
(p. 1018), thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) 
is a disorder in which thrombosis is accompanied by 
paradoxical thrombocytopenia. TTP is characterised by 
a pentad of findings, although few patients have all five 
components:
•	 thrombocytopenia
•	 microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia
•	 neurological sequelae
•	 fever
•	 renal impairment.
Underlying conditions
• Infection/sepsis
• Trauma
• Obstetric, e.g. amniotic fluid embolism, placental abruption, 
pre-eclampsia
• Severe liver failure
• Malignancy, e.g. solid tumours and leukaemias
• Tissue destruction, e.g. pancreatitis, burns
• Vascular abnormalities, e.g. vascular aneurysms, liver 
haemangiomas
• Toxic/immunological, e.g. ABO incompatibility, snake bites, 
recreational drugs
ISTH scoring system for diagnosis of DIC
Presence of an 
associated disorder
Essential
Platelets
> 100 = 0
< 100 = 1
< 50 = 2
Elevated fibrin 
degradation 
products
No increase = 0
Moderate = 2
Strong = 3
Prolonged 
prothrombin time
< 3 sec = 0
> 3 sec but < 6 sec = 1
> 6 sec = 2
Fibrinogen
> 1 g/L = 0
< 1 g/L = 1
Total score
≥ 5 = Compatible with overt DIC
< 5 = Repeat monitoring over 1–2 days
(ISTH = International Society for Thrombosis and Haemostasis)
24.70  Disseminated intravascular coagulation
• Thrombocytopenia: not uncommon because of the rising 
prevalence of disorders in which it may be a secondary 
feature, and also because of the greater use of drugs that 
can cause it.
• ‘Senile’ purpura: presumed to be due to an age-associated 
loss of subcutaneous fat and the collagenous support of 
small blood vessels, making them more prone to damage 
from minor trauma.
• Thrombosis: more frequent in old age. This may be due to 
stasis, to which older people are prone; some studies show 
increased platelet aggregation with age, and others 
age-associated hyperactivity of the haemostatic system 
which could create a prothrombotic state.
24.71  Haemostasis and thrombosis in old age
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Websites
www.bcshguidelines.com British Committee for Standards in 
Haematology guidelines.
www.cibmtr.org International Bone Marrow Transplant 
Registry.
www.transfusionguidelines.org.uk Contains the UK 
Transfusion Services’ Handbook of Transfusion Medicine and 
links to other relevant sites.
www.ukhcdo.org UK Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ 
Organisation.
Figure acknowledgements
Page 990 insets (Glossitis) Hoffbrand VA, John E, Pettit JE, 
Vyas P. Hypochromic anemias. In: Color atlas of clinical 
hematology. 4th edn. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2010; Fig. 5.12; 
(Petechiae) Young NS, Gerson SL, High KA (eds). Clinical 
hematology. St Louis: Mosby; 2006.
Fig. 24.23 Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE. Essential haematology. 
3rd edn. Edinburgh: Blackwell Science; 1992.
Fig. 24.32 inset (Massive bruising) Hoffbrand VA. Color atlas 
of clinical hematology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Mosby; 
2000; pp. 281–283.
It is an acute autoimmune disorder mediated by anti­
bodies against ADAMTS-13 (a disintegrin and metallo­
proteinase with a thrombospondin type-1 motif).
This enzyme normally cleaves vWF multimers to 
produce normal functional units, and its deficiency 
results in large vWF multimers which cross-link plate­
lets. The features are of microvascular occlusion by 
platelet thrombi affecting key organs, principally brain 
and kidneys. It is a rare disorder (1 in 750 000 per 
annum), which may occur alone or in association with 
drugs (ticlopidine, ciclosporin), HIV, shiga toxins and 
malignancy. It should be treated by emergency plasma 
exchange. Corticosteroids, aspirin and rituximab also 
have a role in management. Untreated mortality rates 
are 90% in the first 10 days, and even with appropriate 
therapy, the mortality rate is 20–30% at 6 months.
1057
25 
Clinical examination of the musculoskeletal 
system 1058
Functional anatomy and physiology 1060
Investigation of musculoskeletal  
disease 1064
Joint aspiration 1064
Imaging 1064
Blood tests 1066
Tissue biopsy 1068
Electromyography 1068
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal 
disease 1069
Acute monoarthritis 1069
Polyarthritis 1069
Fracture 1071
Generalised musculoskeletal pain 1071
Back pain 1072
Regional musculoskeletal pain 1074
Neck pain 1074
Shoulder pain 1074
Elbow pain 1075
Hand and wrist pain 1075
Hip pain 1075
Knee pain 1075
Ankle and foot pain 1076
Muscle pain and weakness 1076
Principles of management of 
musculoskeletal disorders 1077
Education and lifestyle interventions 1077
Pharmacological treatment 1078
Non-pharmacological interventions 1080
Osteoarthritis 1081
Crystal-induced arthritis 1086
Gout 1087
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal 
deposition disease 1090
Basic calcium phosphate deposition  
disease 1091
Rheumatology and 
bone disease
Diseases of bone 1120
Osteoporosis 1120
Osteomalacia and rickets 1125
Paget’s disease of bone 1128
Other bone diseases 1130
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy  
syndrome 1130
Osteonecrosis 1130
Scheuermann’s osteochondritis 1130
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia 1131
Osteogenesis imperfecta 1131
Osteopetrosis 1131
Sclerosing bone dysplasias 1131
Bone and joint tumours 1131
Osteosarcoma 1132
Metastatic bone disease 1132
Rheumatological involvement in other 
diseases 1132
Malignant disease 1132
Endocrine disease 1132
Haematological disease 1133
Neurological disease 1133
Miscellaneous conditions 1133
Spondylolisis and spondylolisthesis 1133
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis 1133
Pigmented villonodular synovitis 1134
Joint hypermobility 1134
Dupuytren’s contracture 1134
Carpal tunnel syndrome 1134
Trigger finger 1134
Periodic fever syndromes 1135
Anterior tibial compartment syndrome 1135
Synovitis–acne–pustulosis–hyperostosis–
osteitis syndrome 1135
S.H. Ralston
I.B. McInnes
Fibromyalgia 1092
Bone and joint infection 1094
Septic arthritis 1094
Viral arthritis 1095
Osteomyelitis 1095
Tuberculosis 1096
Rheumatoid arthritis 1096
Pathophysiology 1096
Clinical features 1097
Investigations 1100
Management 1100
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis 1103
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies 1104
Ankylosing spondylitis 1105
Reactive arthritis 1107
Psoriatic arthritis 1108
Enteropathic arthritis 1109
Connective tissue diseases 1109
Systemic lupus erythematosus 1109
Systemic sclerosis 1112
Mixed connective tissue disease 1113
Sjögren’s syndrome 1114
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis 1114
Inclusion body myositis 1115
Vasculitis 1115
Takayasu’s disease 1116
Kawasaki disease 1116
Polyarteritis nodosa 1117
Giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia  
rheumatica 1117
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated 
vasculitis 1118
Churg–Strauss syndrome 1118
Henoch–Schönlein purpura 1119
Cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis 1119
Behçet’s syndrome 1119
Relapsing polychondritis 1119
Rheumatology and bone disease
1058
4
3
5
1
6
2
Observation
Extensor surfaces
Rheumatoid nodules
Swollen bursa
Psoriasis rash
Face
Rash
Alopecia
Mouth ulcers
Eyes
Trunk
Kyphosis
Scoliosis
Tender spots
• General appearance
• Gait
• Deformity
• Swelling
• Redness
• Rash
Hands
Swelling
Deformity
Nail changes
Tophi
Raynaud’s
Feet
Deformity
Swelling
Redness
Rheumatoid nodules
Heberden and Bouchard
nodes in osteoarthritis
Synovitis and deformity
in rheumatoid arthritis
Butterfly rash in systemic
lupus erythematosus
Scleritis in rheumatoid
arthritis
Acute gout
Legs
Deformity
Swelling
Restricted movement
Bone deformity in
Paget’s disease
Nail dystrophy in
psoriatic arthritis
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM 
Clinical examination of the musculoskeletal system 
1059
Ask patient to put hands behind
head (tests shoulder movements)
Inspect
hands for
swelling or
deformity
2 Arms
Ask patient to
make a fist and
open and close
fingers (tests
hand function)
Squeeze
metacarpals
(tests for
inflammation)
A normal screen
G
A
M
A
L
S
= gait
= arms
= legs
= spine
G
A
L
S
Example of an abnormal screen
G
A
M
A
L
S
Antalgic gait
Right knee
  Varus
  ↓Flexion
  Crepitus++
  Effusion
Diagnosis: osteoarthritis right knee
3 Legs
Flex each hip
with hand on knee.
Rotate hips
internally and
externally (tests
hip movements
and detects
knee crepitus)
Inspect ankles and feet.
Squeeze forefoot (tests for
metatarsophalangeal synovitis)
Palpate each knee for warmth
and swelling
(tests for synovitis and effusion)
4 Spine
5 Record results
Patient slides hand down
leg to knee (tests lateral
spine flexion)
Ask patient to try to put
ear on shoulder (tests
lateral flexion cervical
spine)
Patient looks at ceiling
and then puts chin on
chest (tests flexion and
extension cervical spine)
Stand behind
patient and hold
their pelvis.
Ask them to turn
from side to side
without moving
their feet (tests
thoracolumbar
rotation)
Inspect spine from behind and side,
looking for scoliosis, kyphosis or
localised deformity. Ask patient to
touch toes
1 Gait
Ask patient to walk for a
few steps, then come back.
Look for pain or limp
Press over supraspinatus
(tests for hyperalgesia)
Patient turns palms up and
down with elbows at side (tests
supination and pronation
of wrists and elbow)
Patient flexes elbows to touch
shoulder (tests elbow flexion)
= appearance
= movement
A
M
General Assessment of Locomotor System (GALS)
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1060
Disorders of the musculoskeletal system affect all ages 
and ethnic groups. In the UK, about 25% of new consul­
tations in general practice are for musculoskeletal symp­
toms. Musculoskeletal diseases may arise from processes 
affecting bones, joints, muscles, or connective tissues 
such as skin and tendon. The principal manifestations 
are pain and impairment of locomotor function.
Fig. 25.1  Structure of the major musculoskeletal tissues. 
Osteocytes
Osteoblasts
Osteoclasts
Trabecular bone
Haversian system
Blood
vessels
Collagen
lamellae
Osteocytes
Cortical bone
Synovium
Articular cartilage
Growth
plate
Calcified zone
Hypertrophic zone
Proliferative zone
Bone
Synovial
lining cells
Joint
capsule
Myofilament
Myofibril
Fascicle
Chondrocytes
Calcified
cartilage
Subchondral
bone
Muscle
Epiphyseal plate 
 
 
 
Enthesis
Tendon
Bone
Prevalence
Gender 
ratio
Age 
association
‘Non-inflammatory’ conditions
Neck and back pain
20%
F = M
–
Osteoarthritis
Knee
10%
F > M
++
Hip
4%
F = M
+
Osteoporosis
15%
F > M
++
Regional ‘soft tissue’ pain
10%
F > M
++
Fibromyalgia
3%
F > M
++
‘Inflammatory’ conditions
Rheumatoid arthritis
1%
F > M
+
Gout
1.5%
M > F
–
Seronegative 
spondyloarthritis
0.8%
F = M
–
Polymyalgia rheumatica
0.04%
F > M
++
Connective tissue 
diseases (mainly lupus)
0.02%
F > M
–
25.1  Relative prevalence of musculoskeletal 
disorders
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system tend to be 
more common in women and most increase in frequency 
with increasing age. The two most common disorders 
are osteoarthritis and osteoporosis (Box 25.1). Osteo­
arthritis is the most common type of arthritis and affects 
up to 80% of people over the age of 75. Osteoporosis is 
the most common bone disease and affects 50% of 
women and 20% of men by their eighth decade. Diseases 
of the musculoskeletal system are the most common 
cause of physical disability in older people and account 
for one-third of physical disability at all ages.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY
The musculoskeletal system is responsible for move­
ment of the body, provides a structural framework to 
protect internal organs, and acts as a reservoir for storage 
of calcium and phosphate in the regulation of mineral 
homeostasis. The main components of the musculo­
skeletal system are depicted in Figure 25.1.
Bone
Bones fall into two main types based on their embry­
onic development. Flat bones, such as the skull, develop 
by intramembranous ossification, in which embry­
onic fibroblasts differentiate directly into bone within 
Functional anatomy and physiology
25
1061
centre of the bone and consists of an interconnecting 
meshwork of trabeculae, separated by spaces filled with 
bone marrow.
There are three main cell types in bone:
•	 Osteoclasts: multinucleated cells of haematopoietic 
origin, responsible for bone resorption.
•	 Osteoblasts: mononuclear cells of mesenchymal 
origin, responsible for bone formation.
•	 Osteocytes: these differentiate from osteoblasts 
during bone formation and become embedded in 
bone matrix. Osteocytes are responsible for sensing 
and responding to mechanical loading of the 
skeleton and play a critical role in regulating bone 
formation and bone resorption, by producing 
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand 
(RANKL) and sclerostin (SOST). They also play a 
central role in regulating phosphate metabolism by 
producing the hormone fibroblast growth factor 23 
(FGF23), which acts on the kidney to promote 
phosphate excretion (Fig. 25.2).
condensations of mesenchymal tissue during early fetal 
life. Long bones, such as the femur and radius, develop 
by endochondral ossification from a cartilage template. 
During development, the cartilage is invaded by vascu­
lar tissue containing osteoprogenitor cells and is gradu­
ally replaced by bone from centres of ossification 
situated in the middle and at the ends of the bone. 
A thin remnant of cartilage called the growth plate or 
epiphysis remains at each end of long bones, and 
chondrocyte proliferation here is responsible for skeletal 
growth during childhood and adolescence. During 
puberty, the rise in levels of sex hormones halts cell divi­
sion in the growth plate. The cartilage remnant then dis­
appears as the epiphysis fuses and longitudinal bone 
growth ceases.
The normal skeleton has two forms of bone tissue (see 
Fig. 25.1). Cortical bone is formed from Haversian 
systems, comprising concentric lamellae of bone tissue 
surrounding a central canal that contains blood vessels. 
Cortical bone is dense and forms a hard envelope around 
the long bones. Trabecular or cancellous bone fills the 
Fig. 25.2  Regulation of bone remodelling. Bone is renewed and repaired during the bone remodelling cycle, in which old and damaged bone is 
removed by osteoclasts and replaced by osteoblasts. Osteocytes play a central role in bone remodelling by secreting RANKL, which promotes osteoclast 
differentiation and activity by binding to RANK. Osteocytes regulate bone formation by producing SOST, which binds to the LRP5 receptor and prevents  
its activation by members of the Wnt family. Osteocytes also regulate phosphate homeostasis by producing fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), which  
is a circulating hormone that acts on the kidney to promote phosphate excretion. (CatK = cathepsin K; LRP5 = lipoprotein receptor protein 5; OPG = 
osteoprotegerin; RANK = receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B; RANKL = RANK ligand; SOST = sclerostin) 
Bone-lining cells
Osteoclasts
Microdamage
Formation
Quiescence
Resorption
Reversal
Apoptotic
osteoclast
Osteoblasts
Osteoid
Osteocyte
Osteocyte
Osteocyte
FGF23
Phosphate
excretion ↑
Osteoblast
precursor
Osteoclast
precursor
Osteoblast
Osteoclast
Proton pump
Chloride pump
Stromal cell
T cell
Stromal
cell
Mineralisation
OPG
RANKL
RANK
SOST
Wnt
LRP5
H+Cl-
Cl-
H+
CatK
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1062
Factor
Bone 
resorption
Bone 
formation
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
↑
↑
Receptor activator of nuclear 
factor kappa B ligand (RANKL)
↑
↔
Osteoprotegerin (OPG)
↓
↔
Sclerostin (SOST)
↔
↓
Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
↑
↓
Tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
↑
↓
Thyroid hormone
↑
↑
Glucocorticoids
↑
↓↓
Oestrogen/testosterone
↓
↑
Mechanical loading
↓
↑
25.2  Regulators of bone remodelling
Type
Range of 
movement
Examples
Fibrous
Minimal
Skull sutures
Fibrocartilaginous
Limited
Symphysis pubis
Costochondral junctions
Intervertebral discs
Sacroiliac joints
Synovial
Large
Most limb joints
Temporomandibular
Costovertebral
25.3  Types of joint
Bone matrix and mineral
The most abundant protein of bone is type I collagen, 
which is formed from two α1 peptide chains and one α2 
chain wound together in a triple helix. Type I collagen 
is proteolytically processed inside the cell before being 
laid down in the extracellular space, releasing propep­
tide fragments that can be used as biochemical markers 
of bone formation (p. 1066). Subsequently, the collagen 
fibrils become ‘cross-linked’ to one another by pyridin­
ium molecules, a process that enhances bone strength. 
When bone is broken down by osteoclasts, the cross-
links are released, providing biochemical markers of 
bone resorption. Bone is normally laid down in an 
orderly fashion, but when bone turnover is high, as in 
Paget’s disease or severe hyperparathyroidism, it is laid 
down in a chaotic pattern, giving rise to ‘woven bone’, 
which is mechanically weak. Bone matrix also contains 
growth factors, other structural proteins and proteo­
glycans, thought to be involved in helping bone cells 
attach to bone matrix and in regulating bone cell activity. 
The other major component of bone is mineral, com­
prised of calcium and phosphate crystals deposited 
between the collagen fibrils in the form of hydroxyapa­
tite [Ca10 (PO4)6 (OH)2]. Mineralisation is essential for 
bone’s rigidity and strength, but over-mineralisation can 
increase brittleness, which contributes to bone fragility 
in diseases like osteogenesis imperfecta (p. 1131).
Bone remodelling
Bone remodelling is required for renewal and repair of 
the skeleton throughout life (see Fig. 25.2). It starts with 
the attraction of osteoclast precursors in peripheral 
blood to the target site, probably by local release of 
chemotactic factors from areas of microdamage. The 
osteoclast precursors differentiate into mature osteo­
clasts in response to RANKL, which is produced by 
osteocytes, activated T cells and bone marrow stromal 
cells. RANKL activates the RANK receptor, which is 
expressed on osteoclasts and precursors. This is blocked 
by osteoprotegerin (OPG), a decoy receptor for RANKL 
that inhibits osteoclast formation. Mature osteoclasts 
attach to the bone surface by a tight sealing zone, and 
secrete hydrochloric acid and proteolytic enzymes such 
as cathepsin K into the space underneath. The acid dis­
solves the mineral and cathepsin K degrades collagen. 
When resorption is complete, osteoclasts undergo pro­
grammed cell death, and bone formation begins with 
the attraction of osteoblast precursors to the resorption 
site. These differentiate into mature osteoblasts, which 
deposit new bone matrix in the resorption lacuna, until 
the hole is filled. Some osteoblasts become trapped in 
bone matrix and differentiate into osteocytes. These act 
as biomechanical sensors and produce several molecules 
that influence bone remodelling and phosphate metabol­
ism. Bone formation is stimulated by Wnt proteins, 
which bind to and activate lipoprotein-related receptor 
protein 5 (LRP5), expressed on osteoblasts. This process 
is inhibited by SOST, which is produced by osteocytes 
(see Fig. 25.2). Initially, the newly formed bone matrix 
(osteoid) is uncalcified but subsequently becomes min­
eralised to form mature bone. Alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP), produced by osteoblasts, plays an important role 
in bone mineralisation by degrading pyrophosphate, an 
inhibitor of mineralisation. Bone remodelling is regu­
lated by circulating hormones such as parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) and oestrogen, and locally produced 
factors such as cytokines (Box 25.2). Many systemic hor­
mones exert effects on bone turnover by affecting local 
expression of RANK, RANKL, OPG, SOST and mole­
cules in the Wnt/LRP5 pathway (Fig. 25.2, Box 25.2).
Joints
Bones are linked by joints. There are three main subtypes: 
fibrous, fibrocartilaginous and synovial (Box 25.3).
Fibrous and fibrocartilaginous joints
These comprise a simple bridge of fibrous or fibrocarti­
laginous tissue joining two bones together where there 
is little requirement for movement. The intervertebral 
disc is a special type of fibrocartilaginous joint in which 
an amorphous area, called the nucleus pulposus, lies in 
the centre of the fibrocartilaginous bridge. The nucleus 
has a high water content and acts as a cushion to improve 
the disc’s shock-absorbing properties.
Synovial joints
Complex structures containing several cell types, these 
are found where a wide range of movement is needed 
(Fig. 25.3).
Articular cartilage
This avascular tissue covers the bone ends in synovial 
joints. Cartilage cells (chondrocytes) are responsible for 
synthesis and turnover of cartilage, which consists of a 
mesh of type II collagen fibrils that extend through a 
hydrated ‘gel’ of proteoglycan molecules. The most 
Functional anatomy and physiology
25
1063
Fig. 25.3  Structure of a synovial joint. 
Bone
Skin and
subcutaneous
tissue
Fibrocartilage
pad
Hyaline articular
cartilage
Joint space
Synovium
Capsule
Bursa
Tendon
Tendon
sheath
Ligamentous
thickening
of capsule
Muscle
Bursa
Fig. 25.4  Ultrastructure of articular cartilage. 
Aggrecan
Core protein
Link protein
Chondroitin
sulphate
Keratan
sulphate
Type II collagen
fibrils
Hyaluronan
important proteoglycan is aggrecan, which consists of a 
core protein to which several glycosaminoglycan (GAG) 
side-chains are attached (Fig. 25.4). The GAGs are 
polysaccharides that consist of long chains of disaccha­
ride repeats comprising one normal sugar and an amino 
sugar. The most abundant GAGs in aggrecan are chon­
droitin sulphate and keratan sulphate. Hyaluronan 
is another important GAG that binds to aggrecan 
molecules to form very large complexes with a total 
molecular weight of more than 100 million. Aggrecan 
has a strong negative charge and avidly binds water 
molecules to assume a shape that occupies the maximum 
possible volume available. The expansive force of 
the hydrated aggrecan, combined with the restrictive 
strength of the collagen mesh, gives articular cartilage 
excellent shock-absorbing properties.
With ageing, the concentration of chondroitin sul­
phate decreases, whereas that of keratan sulphate 
increases, resulting in reduced water content and shock-
absorbing properties. These changes differ from those 
found in osteoarthritis (p. 1081), where there is abnormal 
chondrocyte division, loss of proteoglycan from matrix 
and an increase in water content. Cartilage matrix is 
constantly turning over and in health there is a perfect 
balance between synthesis and degradation. Degrada­
tion of cartilage matrix is carried out by aggrecanases 
and matrix metalloproteinases, responsible for the 
breakdown of proteins and proteoglycans, and by 
glycosidases, responsible for the breakdown of GAGs. 
Pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) 
and tumour necrosis factor (TNF), stimulate production 
of aggrecanase and metalloprotein­ases, which contrib­
ute to cartilage degradation in inflammatory arthritis.
Synovial fluid
The surfaces of articular cartilage are separated by 
a space filled with synovial fluid, a viscous liquid 
that lubricates the joint. It is an ultrafiltrate of plasma, 
into which synovial cells secrete hyaluronan and 
proteoglycans.
Intra-articular discs
Some joints contain fibrocartilaginous discs within the 
joint space that act as shock absorbers. The most clini­
cally important are the menisci of the knee. These are 
avascular structures that remain viable by diffusion of 
oxygen and nutrients from the synovial fluid.
The synovial membrane, joint capsule and bursae
The bones of synovial joints are connected by the 
joint capsule, a fibrous structure richly supplied with 
blood vessels, nerves and lymphatics, which encases the 
joint. Ligaments are discrete, regional thickenings of 
the capsule that act to stabilise joints (see Fig. 25.3). The 
inner surface of the joint capsule is the synovial mem­
brane, comprising an outer layer of blood vessels and 
loose connective tissue that is rich in type I collagen, and 
an inner layer 1–4 cells thick consisting of two main 
cell types. Type A synoviocytes are phagocytic cells 
derived from the monocyte/macrophage lineage and 
are responsible for removing particulate matter from the 
joint cavity; type B synoviocytes are fibroblast-like cells 
that secrete synovial fluid. Most inflammatory and 
degenerative joint diseases associate with thickening of 
the synovial membrane and infiltration by lymphocytes, 
polymorphs and macrophages.
Bursae are hollow sacs lined with synovium and 
contain a small amount of synovial fluid. They help 
tendons and muscles move smoothly in relation to bones 
and other articular structures.
Skeletal muscle
Skeletal muscles are responsible for body movements 
and respiration. Muscle consists of bundles of cells 
(myocytes) embedded in fine connective tissue con­
taining nerves and blood vessels. Myocytes are large, 
elongated, multinucleated cells formed by fusion of 
mononuclear precursors (myoblasts) in early embryonic 
life. The nuclei lie peripherally and the centre of the cell 
contains actin and myosin molecules, which interdigi­
tate with one another to form the myofibrils that are 
responsible for muscle contraction. The mol­ecular mech­
anisms of skeletal muscle contraction are the same as for 
cardiac muscle (p. 531). Myocytes contain many mito­
chondria that provide the large amounts of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) necessary for muscle contraction, 
and are rich in the protein my­o­globin, which acts as a 
reservoir for oxygen during contraction.
Individual myofibrils are organised into bundles 
(fasciculi) that are bound together by a thin layer of 
connective tissue (the perimysium). The surface of the 
muscle is surrounded by a thicker layer of connective 
tissue, the epimysium, which merges with the peri­
mysium to form the muscle tendon. Tendons are tough, 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1064
fibrous structures that attach muscles to a point of inser­
tion on the bone surface called the enthesis.
INVESTIGATION OF MUSCULOSKELETAL 
DISEASE
Clinical history and examination usually provide suffi­
cient information for the diagnosis and management 
of most musculoskeletal diseases. Investigations are 
helpful in confirming the diagnosis, assessing disease 
activity and indicating prognosis.
Joint aspiration
Joint aspiration with examination of synovial fluid (SF) 
is pivotal in patients suspected of having septic arthritis, 
crystal arthritis or intra-articular bleeding. It should be 
done in all patients with acute monoarthritis, and 
samples sent for microbiology and clinical chemistry.
It is possible to obtain SF by aspiration from most 
peripheral joints, and only a small volume is required 
for diagnostic purposes. Normal SF is present in small 
volume, and is clear and either colourless or pale yellow 
with a high viscosity. It contains few cells. With joint 
inflammation, the volume increases, the cell count and 
the proportion of neutrophils rise (causing turbidity), 
and the viscosity reduces (due to enzymatic degradation 
of hyaluronan and aggrecan). Turbid fluid with a high 
neutrophil count occurs in sepsis, crystal arthritis and 
reactive arthritis. High concentrations of urate crystals 
or cholesterol can make SF appear white. Non-uniform 
blood-staining usually reflects needle trauma to the syn­
ovium. Uniform blood-staining is most commonly due 
to a bleeding diathesis, trauma or pigmented villonodu­
lar synovitis (p. 1134), but can occur in severe inflamma­
tory synovitis. A lipid layer floating above blood-stained 
fluid is diagnostic of intra-articular fracture and is 
caused by release of bone marrow fat into the joint.
Crystals can be identified by compensated polarised 
light microscopy of fresh SF (to avoid crystal dissolution 
and post-aspiration crystallisation). Urate crystals are 
long and needle-shaped, and show a strong light inten­
sity and negative birefringence (Fig. 25.5A). Calcium 
Fig. 25.5  Compensated polarised light microscopy of synovial 
fluids (× 400). A Monosodium urate crystals showing bright negative 
birefringence under polarised light and needle-shaped morphology. 
 B Calcium pyrophosphate crystals showing weak positive birefringence 
under polarised light and are few in number. They are more difficult to 
detect than urate crystals. 
A
B
Rheumatoid arthritis
•	 Periarticular osteoporosis
•	 Bone erosions
•	 Joint space narrowing
Osteoporosis
•	 Osteopenia
•	 Vertebral fractures
•	 Non-vertebral fractures
Paget’s disease
•	 Bone expansion
•	 Abnormal trabecular pattern
•	 Osteolysis
•	 Osteosclerosis
•	 Pseudofractures
Spondyloarthritis
•	 Sacroiliitis
•	 Syndesmophytes
•	 Ligament calcification
•	 Squaring of vertebral bodies
Osteoarthritis
•	 Joint space narrowing
•	 Osteophytes
•	 Subchondral sclerosis
•	 Peaking of tibial spines
•	 Subchondral cysts
25.4  X-ray abnormalities in selected 
rheumatic diseases
pyrophosphate crystals are smaller, rhomboid in shape 
and usually less numerous than urate, and have weak 
intensity and positive birefringence (Fig. 25.5B).
Imaging
Plain radiography
Radiographs show anatomical changes that are of value 
in the differential diagnosis of many bone and joint dis­
eases (Box 25.4). The bones and joints to be X-rayed are 
usually selected on the basis of symptoms or patterns of 
involvement identified at clinical assessment.
Radiographs are of diagnostic value in osteoarthritis 
(OA), where they demonstrate joint space narrowing 
that tends to be focal rather than widespread, as in 
inflammatory arthritis. Other features of OA detected on 
X-ray include osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis, bone 
cysts and calcified loose bodies within the synovium (see 
Fig. 25.20, p. 1084). Radiographs may show erosions and 
sclerosis of the sacroiliac joints and syndesmophytes in 
the spine in patients with seronegative spondyloarthritis 
(see Fig. 25.36, p. 1106). In peripheral joints, so-called 
proliferative erosions, associated with new bone forma­
tion and a periosteal reaction, may be observed. In 
tophaceous gout, well-defined punched-out erosions 
may occur (see Fig. 25.26, p. 1089). Calcification of carti­
lage, tendons and soft tissues or muscle may occur in 
chondrocalcinosis (see Fig. 25.27, p. 1090), calcific peri­
arthritis and connective tissue diseases.
Radiographs are of limited value in the diagnosis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) since features such as ero­
sions, joint space narrowing and periarticular osteoporo­
sis may only be detectable after several months or even 
years. The main indication for radiographs in RA is in 
the assessment of advanced disease, when structural 
damage of the joints is suspected and arthroplasty is 
being considered. Early evidence of articular damage in 
RA is more usually obtained using magnetic resonance 
imaging or ultrasonography.
Investigation of musculoskeletal disease
25
1065
Radionuclide bone scan
This is useful in patients suspected of having metastatic 
bone disease and Paget’s disease. It involves gamma-
camera imaging following an intra­venous injection of 
99mTc-bisphosphonate. Early post-injection images reflect 
vascularity and can show increased perfusion of 
inflamed synovium, Pagetic bone, or primary or second­
ary bone tumours. Delayed images taken a few hours 
later reflect bone remodelling as the bisphosphonate 
localises to sites of active bone turnover. Scintigraphy 
has a high sensitivity for detecting important bone and 
joint pathology that is not apparent on plain X-rays (Box 
25.5). Single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) combines radionuclide imaging with computed 
tomography. It can provide accurate anatomical locali­
sation of abnormal tracer uptake within the bone and is 
of particular value in the assessment of patients with 
chronic low back pain of unknown cause.
•	 Paget’s disease of bone
•	 Bone metastases
•	 Stress fractures
•	 Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (algodystrophy, p. 1130)
•	 Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (p. 1132)
25.5  Conditions detected by isotope 
bone scanning
•	 Osteonecrosis
•	 Intervertebral disc 
disease
•	 Nerve root entrapment
•	 Spinal cord compression
•	 Spinal stenosis
•	 Sepsis
•	 Reflex sympathetic 
dystrophy syndrome
•	 Malignancy
•	 Fractures
•	 Meniscal disease
•	 Synovitis
•	 Sacroiliitis and enthesitis
•	 Inflammatory myositis
•	 Rotator cuff tears, bursitis 
and tenosynovitis
25.6  Conditions detected by magnetic 
resonance imaging
Fig. 25.6  Magnetic resonance image showing synovitis. Coronal 
fat-saturated post-contrast T1-weighted image shows extensive 
enhancement consistent with synovitis (white areas, arrowed) in both wrists 
and at the second metacarpophalangeal joint and proximal interphalangeal 
joints of the right hand. 
Fig. 25.7  Ultrasound image showing synovitis. Lateral image of a 
metacarpophalangeal joint in inflammatory arthritis. The periosteum (P) of 
the phalanx shows as a white line. The dark, hypo-echoic area indicates  
an effusion. The coloured areas demonstrated by power Doppler indicate 
increased vascularity. The inset shows a transverse image of the same joint. 
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is a useful investigation for confirma­
tion of small joint synovitis and erosion, for anatomical 
confirmation of periarticular lesions, and for guided 
aspiration and injection of joints and bursae. Ultrasound 
is more sensitive than clinical examination for the 
detection of early synovitis and is used increasingly 
in the diagnosis and assessment of patients with sus­
pected inflammatory arthritis. In addition to locating 
synovial thickening and effusions, ultrasound can detect 
increased blood flow within synovium using power 
Doppler imaging, an option that is available on most 
modern ultrasound machines (Fig. 25.7).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) gives detailed infor­
mation on anatomy, allowing three-dimensional visuali­
sation of bone and soft tissues that cannot be adequately 
assessed by plain X-rays. The technique is valuable in 
the assessment and diagnosis of many musculoskeletal 
diseases (Box 25.6). T1-weighted sequences are useful 
for defining anatomy, whereas T2-weighted sequences 
are useful for assessing tissue water content, which is 
often increased in synovitis and other inflammatory dis­
orders (Fig. 25.6). Contrast agents, such as gadolinium, 
can be administered to increase sensitivity in detecting 
erosions and synovitis.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) can be used in the as­
sessment of patients with bone and joint disease but 
has largely been superseded by MRI, which gives 
better visualisation of soft tissue structures. CT may be 
used when MRI is contraindicated, or for evaluation 
of articular regions in which an adjacent joint replace­
ment creates image artefacts on MRI.
Bone mineral density
Bone mineral density (BMD) measurements play a key 
role in the diagnosis and management of osteoporosis. 
The technique of choice is dual energy X-ray absorptio­
metry (DEXA), which is usually performed at the lumbar 
spine and hip, and provides images of the region studied. 
This technique works on the principle that calcium in 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1066
Fig. 25.8  Typical output from a dual energy X-ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA) scanner. A DEXA scan of the hip. B Bone mineral density 
(BMD) values plotted in g/cm2 (left axis) and as the T-score values (right 
axis). The solid line represents the population average plotted against age, 
and the interrupted lines are ± 2 standard deviations from the average. 
The patient shown, aged 72, has an osteoporotic T-score of −3.0 but a 
Z-score of −1.0, which is within the ‘normal range’ for that age, reflecting 
the fact that bone is lost with age. 
Z
T
1.3
+2.0
+1.0
0.0
−1.0
−2.0
−3.0
−4.0
1.0
0.7
0.4
20
40
Age (years)
T-score
BMD (g/cm2)
60
80
A
B
Osteoporosis
T-score −3.0
Z-score −1.0
number of standard deviations by which the BMD devi­
ates from that of age-matched controls (Fig. 25.8). Osteo­
porosis is defined by a T-score value of 2.5 or below 
(shaded red in the figure), whereas osteopenia is diag­
nosed when the T-score lies between −1.0 and −2.5 
(shaded pink). Many healthy people, especially above 
the age of 50, have BMD values in the osteopenic range. 
Values of BMD above −1.0 and below +2.5 are considered 
normal, whereas values above +2.5 can be found in osteo­
sclerotic diseases and OA. Results need to be interpreted 
carefully. It is possible for BMD values to lie in the 
normal or osteopenic range in patients who have osteo­
porosis, due to coexisting conditions such as aortic calci­
fication, vertebral compression fractures, degenerative 
disc disease and OA. These can sometimes be suspected 
on the basis of antero-posterior or lateral DEXA images, 
but abnormal appearances should be confirmed by X-ray 
or other imaging as appropriate.
Blood tests
Haematology
Abnormalities in the full blood count (FBC) often occur 
in inflammatory rheumatic diseases but changes are 
usually non-specific. Examples include neutrophilia in 
vasculitis, acute gout and sepsis; neutropenia in lupus; 
and a raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) in 
many inflammatory diseases. Reduced levels of haemo­
globin are a common and important finding in a range 
of rheumatological disorders. Many disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) cause marrow toxicity 
and require regular monitoring of the FBC.
Biochemistry
Routine biochemistry is useful for assessing meta­bolic 
bone disease, muscle diseases and gout. Several bone 
diseases, including Paget’s disease, renal bone disease 
and osteomalacia, give a characteristic pattern that can 
be helpful diagnostically (Box 25.7). Serum levels of uric 
acid are usually raised in gout but a normal level does 
not exclude it, especially during an acute attack, when 
urate levels temporarily fall. Equally, an elevated serum 
uric acid does not confirm the diagnosis, since most 
hyperuri­caemic people never develop gout. Levels of 
C-reactive protein (CRP) are a useful marker of infection 
and inflammation, and are more specific than the ESR. 
An exception is in connective tissue diseases such as 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and systemic scle­
rosis, where CRP may be normal but ESR raised in active 
Serum calcium
Serum phosphate
Serum ALP
Serum PTH
Serum 25(OH)D
Osteoporosis
N
N
N
N
N or ↓
Paget’s disease
N
N
↑↑
N or ↑
N
Renal osteodystrophy
↓
↑↑
↑
↑↑
N
Vitamin D-deficient osteomalacia
N or ↓
N or ↓
↑↑
↑↑
↓
Hypophosphataemic rickets
N
↓↓
↑
N or ↑
N
(ALP = alkaline phosphatase; N = normal; PTH = parathyroid hormone; single arrow = increased or decreased; double arrow = greatly increased or decreased)
25.7  Biochemical abnormalities in bone disease
bone attenuates passage of X-ray beams through the 
tissue in proportion to the amount of mineral present. 
The greater the amount of bone mineral present, the 
higher the BMD value. Most DEXA scanners give a BMD 
readout expressed as grams of hydroxyapatite/cm2, and 
as a T-score and Z-score value. The T-score is a measure 
of the number of standard deviations by which the 
patient’s BMD value differs from that in a young healthy 
control, whereas the BMD Z-score is a measure of the 
Investigation of musculoskeletal disease
25
1067
Anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies
Anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPA) recognise 
peptides in which the amino acid arginine has been con­
verted to citrulline by peptidylarginine deiminase, an 
enzyme abundant in inflamed synovium and in a variety 
of mucosal structures. ACPA have similar sensitivity to 
RF for RA (70%) but much higher specificity (> 95%), 
and are increasingly being used in preference to RF in 
the diagnosis of RA. ACPA are associated with more 
severe disease progression, and can be detected in 
asymptomatic patients several years before the develop­
ment of RA. Their pathological role is still debated but 
it is likely that they amplify the synovial response at an 
inflammatory stimulus.
Antinuclear antibodies
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are directed against one 
or more components of the cell nucleus, including 
nucleic acids themselves, and the proteins concerned 
with processing of DNA or RNA. They occur in many 
inflammatory rheumatic diseases but are also found at 
low titre in normal individuals and in other diseases 
(Box 25.10). High titres of ANA are of greater diagnostic 
significance but circulating levels are not associated with 
disease severity or activity. The most common indica­
tion for ANA testing is in patients suspected of having 
SLE or connective tissue diseases. ANA has high sensi­
tivity for SLE (virtually 100%) but low specificity (10–
40%). A negative ANA virtually excludes SLE but a 
positive result does not confirm it.
Anti-DNA antibodies bind to double-stranded DNA 
and are highly specific for SLE (95%) but sensitivity is 
poor (30%). They can be useful in disease monitoring 
since very high titres are associated with more severe 
disease, including renal or central nervous system (CNS) 
involvement, and an increase in antibody titre may 
precede relapse.
Antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens (ENA) act 
as markers for certain connective tissue diseases and 
some complications of SLE, but sensitivity and specifi­
city are poor (Box 25.11). For example, antibodies to Sm 
are found in a minority of patients with SLE but are 
associated with renal involvement. Antibodies to Ro 
occur in SLE and in Sjögren’s syndrome (in association 
with anti-La antibodies), and are associated with a 
inflammatory disease. Accordingly, an elevated CRP in 
a patient with lupus or scleroderma suggests an inter­
current illness such as sepsis rather than active disease. 
More detail on the interpretation of CRP and ESR 
changes is given on page 84. Serum creatine kinase (CK) 
levels are useful in the diagnosis of myopathy or myosi­
tis, but specificity and sensitivity are poor and raised 
levels may occur in some conditions (Box 25.8). Bio­
chemical monitoring of renal and hepatic function is 
important in ongoing care of patients on DMARD 
therapy.
Autoantibodies
Autoantibody tests are widely used in the diagnosis of 
rheumatic diseases. False-positive results are common 
but high antibody titres or concentrations are generally 
of greater clinical significance. Whatever test is used, the 
results must be interpreted in light of the clinical picture 
and the different detection and assay systems used in 
different hospitals.
Rheumatoid factor
Rheumatoid factor (RF) is an antibody directed against 
the Fc fragment of human immunoglobulin. In routine 
clinical practice, IgM rheumatoid factor is usually meas­
ured, although different methodologies allow measure­
ment of IgG and IgA RFs too. Positive RF occurs in 
a wide variety of diseases and some normal adults 
(Box 25.9), particularly with increasing age. Although 
the specificity is poor, about 70% of patients with RA 
test positive. High RF titres are associated with more 
severe disease and extra-articular disease.
•	 Inflammatory myositis  
± vasculitis
•	 Muscular dystrophy
•	 Motor neuron disease
•	 Alcohol, drugs (N.B.  
statins)
•	 Trauma, strenuous exercise, 
long lie after a fall
•	 Myocardial infarction*
•	 Hypothyroidism, metabolic 
myopathy
•	 Viral myositis
*The CK-MB cardiac-specific isoform is disproportionately elevated 
compared with total CK.
25.8  Causes of an elevated serum 
creatine kinase
Disease
Frequency (%)
Rheumatoid arthritis with nodules and 
extra-articular manifestations
100
Rheumatoid arthritis (overall)
70
Sjögren’s syndrome
90
Mixed essential cryoglobulinaemia
90
Primary biliary cirrhosis
50
Infective endocarditis
40
Systemic lupus erythematosus
30
Tuberculosis
15
Age > 65 yrs
20
Normal healthy people can be positive for rheumatoid factor.
25.9  Conditions associated with a 
positive rheumatoid factor
Condition
Approximate frequency
Diseases where ANA is useful in diagnosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
100%
Systemic sclerosis
60–80%
Sjögren’s syndrome
40–70%
Dermatomyositis or polymyositis
30–80%
Mixed connective tissue disease
100%
Autoimmune hepatitis
100%
Diseases where ANA is not useful in diagnosis
Rheumatoid arthritis
30–50%
Autoimmune thyroid disease
30–50%
Malignancy
Varies widely
Infectious diseases
Varies widely
N.B. 5% of healthy individuals have an ANA titre > 1:80.
25.10  Conditions associated with a positive 
antinuclear antibody
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1068
Antibody (target/other 
name)
Disease association
Anti-centromere 
antibody
CREST variant of systemic sclerosis 
(sensitivity 60%, specificity 98%)
Occasionally found in primary 
Raynaud’s syndrome
Anti-histone antibody
Drug-induced lupus (80%)
Anti-Jo-1
(anti-histidyl-tRNA 
synthetase)
Polymyositis, dermatomyositis or 
polymyositis–systemic sclerosis 
overlap (20–30%). Particularly 
associated with interstitial lung 
disease
Anti-La antibody
(anti-SS-B)
Sjögren’s syndrome (60%)
SLE (20–60%)
Anti-
ribonucleoprotein 
antibody
(anti-RNP)
Mixed connective tissue disease 
(100%)
SLE (25–50%), usually in conjunction 
with anti-Sm antibodies
Anti-Ro antibody
(anti-SS-A)
SLE (35–60%): associated with 
photosensitivity, thrombocytopenia 
and subacute cutaneous lupus
Maternal anti-Ro antibodies 
associated with neonatal lupus  
and congenital heart block
Sjögren’s syndrome (40–80%)
Anti-RNA polymerase
Diffuse systemic sclerosis (15%)
Anti Sm
(anti-Smith antibody)
SLE (15–30%); associated with renal 
disease
Anti-Scl-70
(anti-topoisomerase I 
antibody)
Diffuse systemic sclerosis (15%); 
associated with more severe organ 
involvement, including pulmonary 
fibrosis
(CREST = calcinosis, Raynaud’s, oesophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, 
telangiectasia)
25.11  Conditions associated with antibodies to 
extractable nuclear antigens
fluorescence (c-ANCA), which is caused by antibodies 
to proteinase-3 (PR3); and perinuclear fluorescence 
(p-ANCA), which is caused by antibodies to myeloper­
oxidase (MPO) and other proteins such as lactoferrin 
and elastase. These antibodies are not specific for vascu­
litis and positive results may be found in autoimmune 
liver disease, malignancy, infection (bacterial and human 
immunodeficiency virus, HIV), inflammatory bowel 
disease, rheumatoid arthritis, SLE and pulmonary 
fibrosis.
Tissue biopsy
Tissue biopsy is useful in confirming the diagnosis in 
certain musculoskeletal diseases.
Synovial biopsy can be useful in selected patients 
with chronic inflammatory monoarthritis or tenosynov­
itis to rule out chronic infectious causes, especially 
mycobacterial infections. Characteristic changes on MRI 
can obviate the need for biopsy in many cases of sus­
pected tumour. Whatever the indication, synovial biopsy 
can be obtained arthroscopically (by conventional means 
or via use of needle arthroscope) or using ultrasound 
guidance under local anaesthetic.
Temporal artery biopsy can be of value in patients 
suspected of having temporal arteritis, especially when 
the presentation is atypical, but a negative result does 
not exclude the diagnosis. Biopsies of affected tissues, 
such as skin, lung, nasopharynx, gut, kidney and muscle, 
can be of value in the diagnosis of systemic vasculitis 
and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (also known as 
Wegener’s granulomatosis).
Muscle biopsy plays an important role in the investi­
gation of myopathy and inflammatory myositis. It is 
usually taken from the quadriceps or deltoid through a 
small skin incision under local anaesthetic. Since myosi­
tis can be patchy in nature, MRI is sometimes used to 
localise the best site for biopsy. Immunohistochemical 
staining, together with plain histology, gives informa­
tion on primary and secondary muscle and neuromus­
cular disease. Repeat biopsies are sometimes used to 
monitor the response to treatment.
Bone biopsy is occasionally required where non-
invasive tests give inconclusive results and in the diag­
nosis of infiltrative disorders, chronic infections and 
malignancy. If a systemic disorder of mineralisation, 
such as osteomalacia, is suspected, the biopsy can be 
taken from the iliac crest using a large-diameter (8-mm) 
trephine needle under local anaesthetic, and processed 
without demineralisation. For focal lesions, the biopsy 
should be taken under X-ray guidance or at open 
surgery, from an affected site.
Electromyography
Electromyography (p. 1152) is of value in the investiga­
tion of suspected myopathy and inflammatory myositis, 
when it shows the diagnostic triad of:
•	 spontaneous fibrillation
•	 short-duration action potentials in a polyphasic 
disorganised outline
•	 repetitive bouts of high-voltage oscillations on 
needle contact with diseased muscle.
photo­sensitive rash and congenital heart block. Anti­
bodies to ribonuclear protein (RNP) occur in SLE 
and also in mixed connective tissue disease, where 
features of lupus, myositis and systemic sclerosis 
coexist. Anti-topoisomerase 1 (also termed Scl-70) anti­
bodies occur in diffuse systemic sclerosis, whereas 
anti-centromere antibodies are more specific for limited 
systemic sclerosis.
Antiphospholipid antibodies
Antiphospholipid antibodies bind to a number of phos­
pholipid binding proteins, but the most clinically rele­
vant are those that target beta2-glycoprotein 1 (β2GP1). 
They may be detected in SLE and other connective 
tissue diseases or can be present in isolation or in the 
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (p. 1055).
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) are IgG 
antibodies directed against the cytoplasmic constituents 
of granulocytes and are useful in the diagnosis and 
monitoring of systemic vasculitis. Two common pat­
terns are described by immunofluorescence: cytoplasmic 
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease
25
1069
Common
•	 Septic arthritis
•	 Gout
•	 Pseudogout
•	 Reactive arthritis
•	 Trauma
•	 Haemarthrosis
•	 Seronegative spondyloarthritis
Psoriatic arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Enteropathic arthritis
Less common
•	 Erythema nodosum
•	 Rheumatoid arthritis
•	 Juvenile idiopathic  
arthritis
•	 Pigmented villonodular  
synovitis
•	 Foreign body reaction
•	 Other infection
Gonococcal
Tuberculosis
•	 Leukaemia*
•	 Osteomyelitis*
*In children, both leukaemia and osteomyelitis may present with 
monoarthritis.
25.12  Causes of acute monoarthritis
microscopy for crystals. Blood cultures should also be 
taken in patients suspected of having septic arthritis. 
CRP levels and ESR are raised in sepsis, crystal arthritis 
and reactive arthritis, and this can be useful in assessing 
the response to treatment. Serum uric acid measure­
ments may be raised in gout but a normal level does not 
exclude the diagnosis.
Management
If there is any suspicion of sepsis, intravenous antibiotics 
(Box 25.52, p. 1095) should be given promptly, pending 
the results of cultures. Otherwise, management should 
be directed towards the underlying cause.
Polyarthritis
This term is used to describe pain and swelling affecting 
five or more joints or joint groups. The possible causes 
are listed in Box 25.13.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN 
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISEASE
Acute monoarthritis
This term is used to describe sudden pain and swelling 
in a single joint. The most important causes are crystal 
arthritis, sepsis and reactive arthritis. Other potential 
causes are shown in Box 25.12.
Clinical assessment
The clinical history, pattern of joint involvement, speed 
of onset, and age and gender of the patient all give clues 
to the most likely diagnosis. Reactive arthritis (p. 1107) 
is the most common cause in young men, gout in middle-
aged men and pseudogout in older women. Gout clas­
sically affects the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint, 
whereas the wrist and shoulder are typical sites for 
pseudogout. A very rapid onset (6–12 hours) is sugges­
tive of gout or pseudogout; joint sepsis develops more 
slowly and continues to progress until treated. Haemar­
throsis typically causes a large effusion, in the absence 
of periarticular swelling or skin change, in a patient who 
has suffered an injury. Pigmented villonodular synovitis 
(p. 1134) also presents with synovial swelling and a large 
effusion, although the onset is gradual. A previous diar­
rhoeal illness or recent sexual contact suggests reactive 
arthritis, whereas intercurrent illness, dehydration or 
surgery may act as a trigger for crystal-induced arthritis. 
Rheumatoid arthritis seldom presents with monoarthri­
tis and a sudden increase in pain and swelling involving 
a single joint in a patient with pre-existing RA is strongly 
suggestive of sepsis. Osteoarthritis can present with 
pain and stiffness affecting a single joint, but the onset 
is gradual and there is seldom evidence of significant 
joint swelling.
Investigations
Aspiration of the affected joint is mandatory. The fluid 
should be sent for culture and Gram stain to seek the 
presence of organisms, and should be checked by 
Cause
Characteristics
Common
Rheumatoid arthritis
Symmetrical, small and large joints, 
upper and lower limbs
Viral arthritis
Symmetrical, small joints; may be 
associated with rash and prodromal 
illness; self-limiting
Osteoarthritis
Symmetrical, targets PIP, DIP and first 
CMC joints in hands, knees, hips, back 
and neck; associated with Heberden’s 
and Bouchard’s nodes
Psoriatic arthritis
Asymmetrical, targets PIP and DIP joints 
of hands and feet (sausage appearance 
on examination), nail pitting, large joints 
also affected
Ankylosing 
spondylitis and 
enteropathic arthritis
Tends to affect large joints, lower more 
than upper limbs, possible history of 
inflammatory back pain
SLE
Symmetrical, typically affecting small 
joints, clinical evidence of synovitis 
unusual
Less common
Juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis
Symmetrical, small and large joints, 
upper and lower limbs
Chronic gout
Affects distal more than proximal joints, 
history of acute attacks
Chronic sarcoidosis 
(p. 709)
Symmetrical, small and large joints
Polymyalgia 
rheumatica
Symmetrical, small and large joints
Rare
Systemic sclerosis 
and polymyositis
Small and large joints
Hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy
Small joints, clubbing
Haemochromatosis 
(p. 972)
Small and large joints
Acromegaly (p. 792)
Mainly large joints and spine
(CMC = carpometacarpal; DIP = distal interphalangeal; PIP = proximal 
interphalangeal)
25.13  Causes of polyarthritis
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1070
Clinical feature
Disease association
Skin, nails and mucous membranes
Psoriasis, nail pitting and 
dystrophy
Psoriatic arthritis
Raynaud’s phenomenon
SLE, systemic  
sclerosis
Photosensitivity
SLE
Livedo reticularis
SLE
Splinter haemorrhages, 
nail-fold infarcts
Vasculitis
Oral ulcers
SLE, reactive arthritis, 
Behçet’s syndrome
Large nodules (mainly extensor 
surfaces)
RA, gout
Clubbing
Enteropathic arthritis, 
metastatic lung cancer, 
endocarditis
Eyes
Uveitis
Seronegative  
spondyloarthritis
Conjunctivitis
Reactive arthritis
Episcleritis, scleritis
RA, vasculitis
Heart, lungs
Pleuro-pericarditis
SLE, RA
Fibrosing alveolitis
RA, SLE, other connective 
tissue disease
Abdominal organs
Hepatosplenomegaly
RA, SLE
Haematuria, proteinuria
SLE, vasculitis, systemic 
sclerosis
Urethritis
Reactive arthritis
Fever, lymphadenopathy
Infection, systemic  
juvenile idiopathic  
arthritis
25.14  Extra-articular features of 
inflammatory arthritis
Fig. 25.9  Patterns of joint involvement in different forms of polyarthritis. A Rheumatoid arthritis typically targets the metacarpophalangeal and 
proximal interphalangeal joints of the hands and metatarsophalangeal joints of the feet, as well as other joints, in a symmetrical pattern. B Psoriatic 
arthritis targets proximal and distal interphalangeal joints of the hands and larger joints in an asymmetrical pattern. Sacroiliitis (often asymmetrical) may 
occur. C Ankylosing spondylitis targets the spine, sacroiliac joints and large peripheral joints in an asymmetrical pattern. D Osteoarthritis targets the 
proximal and distal interphalangeal joints of the hands, first carpometacarpal joint at the base of the thumb, knees, hips, lumbar and cervical spine. 
A
B
C
D
Clinical assessment
The hallmarks of inflammatory arthritis are early morn­
ing stiffness and worsening of symptoms with inactiv­
ity, along with synovial swelling and tenderness on 
examination. Clinical features in other systems can 
be helpful in determining the under­lying cause (Box 
25.14). The most important diagnosis to consider is 
rheumatoid arthritis, which is characterised by sym­
metrical involvement of the small joints of the hands 
and feet, often in association with other joints. Viral 
arthritis should also be considered. This presents with 
an acute symmetrical inflammatory polyarthritis affect­
ing small and large joints of upper and lower limbs, 
often with a rash.
The pattern of involvement can be helpful in reaching 
a diagnosis (Fig. 25.9). Asymmetry, lower limb pre­
dominance and greater involvement of large joints are 
characteristic of seronegative spondyloarthritis. Other 
extra-articular features may also be present, giving a 
clue to the diagnosis. In psoriatic arthritis, the small 
joints of the hand and feet are often affected, but 
with involvement of the proximal and distal inter­
phalangeal (PIP and DIP) joints, as opposed to the meta­
carpophalangeal (MCP) and PIP joints in RA. The 
pattern of involvement also tends to be asymmetrical in 
psoriatic arthritis, and other clues such as nail pitting 
and a rash may be present. SLE can be associated with 
polyarthritis but more usually causes polyarthralgia and 
tenosynovitis (p. 1110).
Investigations
Blood samples should be taken for routine haematol­
ogy, biochemistry, ESR, CRP, viral serology and an 
immunological screen, including ANA, RF and ACPA. 
Ultrasound examination or MRI may be required to 
confirm the presence of synovitis if this is not obvious 
clinically.
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease
25
1071
Fracture type
Precipitation 
factor
Disease
Fragility fracture
Fall from standing 
height or less
Osteoporosis
Osteopenia
Vertebral fracture
Bending, lifting, 
falling
Osteoporosis
Stress fracture
Running, 
excessive training
Normal
High-energy fracture
Major trauma
Normal
Pathological fracture
Spontaneous, 
minimal trauma
Malignancy
Paget’s disease
Osteomalacia
25.15  Characteristics of different fracture types
•	 Order X-rays in two projections at right angles to one another
•	 Include the whole bone and the joints at either end (this may 
reveal an additional unsuspected fracture)
•	 Check for evidence of displacement
•	 Check for a break in the cortex
•	 In suspected vertebral fracture, check for depression of the 
end plate
•	 If clinical suspicion is high but no fracture is seen, request 
MRI
25.16  How to investigate a suspected fracture
Management
Management should be directed at the underlying 
condition, but treatment with non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and analgesics may be 
required for symptom control until a diagnosis has 
been made.
Fracture
Fractures are a common presenting symptom of osteo­
porosis, but they also occur in other bone diseases, in 
osteopenia and in some patients with normal bone.
Clinical assessment
The presentation is with localised bone pain, which is 
worsened by movement of the affected limb or region. 
There is usually a history of trauma but spontaneous 
fractures can occur in the absence of trauma in those 
with severe osteoporosis. Fractures can be divided into 
several subtypes, based on the precipitating event and 
presence or absence of an underlying disease (Box 25.15). 
The main differential diagnosis is soft tissue injury, but 
fracture should be suspected when there is marked pain 
and swelling, abnormal movement of the affected limb, 
crepitus or deformity. Femoral neck fractures typically 
produce a shortened, externally rotated leg that is 
painful to move.
Investigations
Radiographs of the affected site should be taken in at 
least two planes and examined for discontinuity of the 
cortical outline (Box 25.16). In addition to demonstrating 
the fracture, X-rays may also show evidence of an under­
lying disorder, such as osteoporosis, Paget’s disease or 
osteomalacia. If the X-ray fails to show evidence of a 
fracture but clinical suspicion remains high, MRI should 
be performed, since this can demonstrate fractures that 
are radiographically occult. Patients who are over the 
age of 50 and present with fragility fractures should be 
screened for the presence of osteoporosis by DEXA.
Management
Management of fracture in the acute stage requires 
adequate pain relief, with opiates if necessary, reduction 
of the fracture to restore normal anatomy, and immobi­
lisation of the affected limb to promote healing. This can 
be achieved either by the use of an external cast or splint 
or by internal fixation. Femoral neck fractures present a 
special management problem since non-union and avas­
cular necrosis are common. This is especially true with 
intracapsular hip fractures, which should be treated by 
joint replacement surgery. Following the fracture, reha­
bilitation is required with physiotherapy and a super­
vised exercise programme (this is especially important 
in older patients to prevent muscle-wasting and loss of 
mobility). Elderly patients with hip fracture also benefit 
from nutritional supplementation. Patients with high-
energy and fatigue fractures generally require no further 
investigation or treatment once the fracture has healed. 
If the DEXA examination or other investi­gation shows 
evidence of osteoporosis or other metabolic bone disease, 
this should be treated appropriately (p. 172).
Generalised musculoskeletal pain
Clinical assessment
Clinical history and examination can often indicate the 
underlying cause (Box 25.17). Relentlessly progressive 
pain occurring in association with weight loss suggests 
malignant disease with bone metastases. Generalised 
bone pain may also occur in Paget’s disease if the disease 
is widespread, but Pagetic pain is usually more focal and 
localised to the site of involvement (p. 1128). Wide­
spread pain can occur in OA but this also tends to be 
localised to sites of involvement, such as the lumbar 
spine, hips, knees and hands. Signs of OA may be appar­
ent on clinical examination. Osteomalacia (p. 1125) can 
cause generalised bone pain that is associated with bone 
tenderness and limb girdle weakness. Fibromyalgia can 
present with generalised pain particularly affecting the 
trunk, back and neck. Accompanying features include 
fatigue, poor concentration and focal areas of hyper­
algesia. Another potential cause is joint hypermobility, 
the features of which should be apparent on clinical 
examination (p. 1134).
•	 Metastatic bone disease
•	 Fibromyalgia (p. 1092)
•	 Joint hypermobility
•	 Osteomalacia (p. 1125)
•	 Osteoarthritis
•	 Paget’s disease
•	 Polymyalgia rheumatica  
(p. 1117)
•	 Myositis (p. 1114)
25.17  Causes of generalised pain
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1072
•	 Mechanical back pain
•	 Prolapsed intervertebral  
disc
•	 Osteoarthritis
•	 Vertebral fracture (p. 1071)
•	 Spinal stenosis
•	 Paget’s disease
•	 Spondylolysis (p. 1133)
•	 Bone metastases
•	 Spondylolisthesis (p. 1133)
•	 Arachnoiditis
•	 Scheuermann’s disease  
(p. 1130)
25.18  Causes of low back pain
Investigations
Radionuclide bone scanning is of value in patients sus­
pected of having bone metastases and Paget’s disease, 
along with further imaging as appropriate. Myeloma 
(p. 1046) should be excluded by plasma and urinary 
protein electrophoresis. If these results are positive, a 
radiological skeletal survey should be performed, since 
the isotope bone scan may be normal in myeloma. 
Routine biochemistry, vitamin D levels and PTH meas­
urement should be performed if osteomalacia is sus­
pected. In Paget’s disease, ALP may be elevated but can 
be normal in localised disease. Laboratory investigations 
are normal in patients with fibromyalgia and benign 
hypermobility.
Management
Management should be directed towards the underlying 
cause. Chronic pain of unknown cause and that associ­
ated with fibromyalgia responds poorly to analgesics 
and NSAID, but may respond partially to antineuro­
pathic agents such as amitriptyline, duloxetine, gaba­
pentin and pregabalin.
Back pain
Back pain is a common symptom that affects 60–80% of 
people at some time in their lives. Although the preva­
lence has not increased, reported disability from back 
pain has risen significantly in the last 30 years. In 
Western countries, back pain is the most common cause 
of sickness-related work absence. In the UK, 7% of adults 
consult their GP each year with back pain. The most 
important causes are summarised in Box 25.18.
Clinical assessment
The main purpose of clinical assessment is to differenti­
ate the self-limiting disorder of acute mechanical back 
pain from serious spinal pathology, as summarised in 
Figure 25.10. Mechanical back pain is the most common 
cause of acute back pain in people aged 20–55. This 
accounts for more than 90% of episodes, and is usually 
acute and associated with lifting or bending. It is exac­
erbated by activity and is generally relieved by rest (Box 
25.19). It is usually confined to the lumbar–sacral region, 
buttock or thigh, is asymmetrical, and does not radiate 
beyond the knee (which would imply nerve root irrita­
tion). On examination, there may be asymmetric local 
paraspinal muscle spasm and tenderness, and painful 
restriction of some but not all movements. Low back 
pain is more common in manual workers, particularly 
those in occupations that involve heavy lifting and 
twisting. The prognosis is generally good. After 2 days, 
Fig. 25.10  Initial triage assessment of back pain. 
Back pain
Mechanical
Common,
Acute onset
Self-limiting
Other
Prolapsed disc
Spinal stenosis
Paget’s disease
Fracture
Inflammatory
Ankylosing spondylitis
Psoriasis
Spondyloarthritis
Clinical assessment
(Box 25.21)
Destructive
Malignancy
Infection
Persistent pain
Fever/weight loss
Inflammatory features
Cauda equina
syndrome
Nerve root pain
persisting > 4 wks
Further investigation
and imaging
Urgent investigation
± neurosurgical referral
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease
25
1073
osteophytes can have the same effect. Patients may 
adopt a characteristic simian posture, with a forward 
stoop and slight flexion at hips and knees.
Degenerative disc disease is a common cause of 
chronic low back pain. Prolapse of an intervertebral 
disc presents with nerve root pain, which can be accom­
panied by a sensory deficit, motor weakness, and asym­
metrical reflexes. Examination may reveal a positive 
sciatic or femoral stretch test. About 70% of patients 
improve by 4 weeks. Inflammatory back pain due to 
seronegative spondyloarthritis has a gradual onset and 
almost always occurs before the age of 40. It is associated 
with morning stiffness and improves with movement. 
Spondylolisthesis (p. 1133) may cause back pain that is 
typically aggravated by standing and walking. Occa­
sionally, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH; 
p. 1133) can cause back pain but it is usually asympto­
matic. Arachnoiditis is a rare cause of chronic severe low 
back pain. It is due to chronic inflammation of the nerve 
root sheaths in the spinal canal and can complicate men­
ingitis, spinal surgery, or myelography with oil-based 
contrast agents.
Investigations
Investigations are not required in patients with acute 
mechanical back pain. Those with persistent pain 
(> 6 weeks) or red flags (see Box 25.20) should undergo 
further investigation. MRI is the investigation of choice 
since it can demonstrate spinal stenosis, cord compres­
sion or nerve root compression, as well as inflammatory 
changes in spondyloarthropathy, and infectious causes 
such as spinal abscess. Plain radiographs can be of value 
in patients suspected of having vertebral compression 
fractures, OA and degenerative disc disease. If meta­
static disease is suspected, radionuclide bone scan or 
SPECT should be considered. Additional investigations 
that may be required include routine biochemistry and 
haematology with measurement of ESR and CRP (to 
screen for sepsis and inflammatory disease), protein and 
urinary electrophoresis (for myeloma) and prostate spe­
cific antigen (for prostate carcinoma).
Management
Education is important in patients with mechanical back 
pain. It should emphasise the self-limiting nature of the 
condition and the fact that exercise is helpful rather than 
damaging. Regular analgesia and/or NSAIDs may be 
required to improve mobility and facilitate exercise. 
Return to work and normal activity should take place as 
soon as possible. Bed rest is not helpful and may increase 
the risk of chronic disability. Referral for physiotherapy 
or manipulation should be considered if a return to 
normal activities has not been achieved by 6 weeks. 
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressant drugs may help pain, 
sleep and mood.
Other treatment modalities that are occasionally used 
include epidural and facet joint injection, traction and 
lumbar supports, though there is little evidence to 
support their use (Box 25.22). Malignant disease, osteo­
porosis, Paget’s disease and spondyloarthropathies 
require specific treatment of the underlying condition.
Surgery is required in less than 1% of patients with 
low back pain but may be needed in spinal stenosis, in 
spinal cord compression and in some patients with 
nerve root compression.
•	 Pain varies with physical activity (improved with rest)
•	 Sudden onset, precipitated by lifting or bending
•	 Recurrent episodes
•	 Pain limited to back or upper leg
•	 No clear-cut nerve root distribution
•	 No systemic features
•	 Prognosis good (90% recovery at 6 wks)
25.19  Features of mechanical low back pain
Nerve root pain
•	 Unilateral leg pain worse than low back pain
•	 Pain radiates beyond knee
•	 Paraesthesia in same distribution
•	 Nerve irritation signs (reduced straight leg raising that 
reproduces leg pain)
•	 Motor, sensory or reflex signs (limited to one nerve root)
•	 Prognosis reasonable (50% recovery at 6 wks)
Cauda equina syndrome
•	 Difficulty with micturition
•	 Loss of anal sphincter tone or faecal incontinence
•	 Saddle anaesthesia
•	 Gait disturbance
•	 Pain, numbness or weakness affecting one or both legs
25.21  Clinical features of radicular pain
History
•	 Age: presentation < 20 yrs or > 55 yrs
•	 Character: constant, progressive pain unrelieved by rest
•	 Location: thoracic pain
•	 Past medical history: carcinoma, tuberculosis, HIV, systemic 
corticosteroid use, osteoporosis
•	 Constitutional: systemic upset, sweats, weight loss
•	 Major trauma
Examination
•	 Painful spinal deformity
•	 Severe/symmetrical spinal deformity
•	 Saddle anaesthesia
•	 Progressive neurological signs/muscle-wasting
•	 Multiple levels of root signs
25.20  Red flags for possible spinal pathology
30% are better and 90% have recovered by 6 weeks. 
Recurrences of pain may occur and about 10–15% of 
patients go on to develop chronic back pain that may be 
difficult to treat. Psychological elements, such as job dis­
satisfaction, depression and anxiety, are important risk 
factors for the transition to chronic pain and disability.
Back pain secondary to serious spinal pathology has 
different characteristics (Box 25.20). If there is clinical 
evidence of spinal cord or nerve root compression, or a 
cauda equina lesion (Box 25.21), urgent investigation is 
needed. Spinal stenosis presents with leg discomfort on 
walking that is relieved by rest (pseudoclaudication). 
Bending forwards or walking uphill may also relieve the 
pain. Common causes include Paget’s disease, in which 
enlargement of the vertebrae may encroach on the 
spinal canal, and osteoarthritis of the spine, in which 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1074
Regional musculoskeletal pain
Regional musculoskeletal pain is a common presenting 
complaint, usually occurring as the result of age-related 
degenerative disease of tendons and ligaments, OA and 
repetitive strain injuries due to overuse.
Neck pain
Neck pain is a common symptom that can occur follow­
ing injury (for example, whiplash), after falling asleep in 
an awkward position, as a result of stress, or in associa­
tion with OA of the spine. The causes are shown in Box 
25.23. Most cases resolve spontaneously or with a short 
course of NSAID or analgesics, and a soft collar. Patients 
with persistent pain that follows a nerve root distribu­
tion and those with neurological signs and symptoms 
should be investigated by MRI scan, and if necessary 
referred for a neurosurgical opinion.
Mechanical
•	 Postural
•	 Whiplash injury
•	 Disc prolapse
•	 Cervical spondylosis
Inflammatory
•	 Infections
•	 Spondylitis
•	 Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
•	 RA
•	 Polymyalgia rheumatica
Metabolic
•	 Osteoporosis
•	 Osteomalacia
•	 Paget’s disease
Neoplasia
•	 Metastases
•	 Myeloma
•	 Lymphoma
•	 Intrathecal tumours
Other
•	 Fibromyalgia
•	 Torticollis
Referred pain
•	 Pharynx
•	 Cervical lymph nodes
•	 Teeth
•	 Angina pectoris
•	 Aortic aneurysm
•	 Pancoast tumour
•	 Diaphragm
25.23  Causes of neck pain
Fig. 25.11  Pain patterns around the shoulder. The dark shading 
indicates sites of maximum pain. 
Rotator cuff and
glenohumeral
arthritis
Acromioclavicular
joint disease
Bicipital
tendinitis
Rotator cuff lesion
•	 Pain reproduced by resisted active movement:
Abduction: supraspinatus
External rotation: infraspinatus, teres minor
Internal rotation: subscapularis
Subacromial bursitis
•	 Pain on full abduction but no pain on resisted active 
abduction
Bicipital (long head) tendinitis
•	 Tender over bicipital groove
•	 Pain reproduced by resisted active wrist supination or elbow 
flexion
25.24  Clinical findings in shoulder pain
Shoulder pain
Shoulder pain is a common complaint in both genders 
over the age of 40, and is most often due to degenerative 
disease of tendons in the rotator cuff (Box 25.24). Varying 
pain patterns associated with common lesions are 
shown in Figure 25.11. Management is symptomatic, 
with analgesics, NSAID, local corticosteroid injections 
and physiotherapy aimed at restoring normal move­
ment and function. Surgery may be required in patients 
who have debilitating symptoms in association with 
rotator cuff tears. Adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder) 
presents with upper arm pain that can progress over 
4–10 weeks before subsiding over a similar time course. 
Restriction of glenohumeral movement is characteristic. 
In the early phase, there is marked anterior joint/
capsular tenderness and stress pain in a capsular pattern; 
later there is painless restriction, often of all movements. 
Frozen shoulder is more common in diabetes mellitus, 
but may also be triggered by a rotator cuff tear, local 
trauma, myocardial infarction or hemiplegia. Treatment 
in the early stage is with analgesia, intra- and extracap­
sular steroid injection, and regular ‘pendulum’ exercises 
of the arm to prevent the capsule from over-tightening. 
Mobilising and strengthening exercises are the sole 
treatment in the painless ‘frozen’ stage. The natural 
•	 Reassure patients (favourable prognosis)
•	 Advise patients to stay active
•	 Prescribe medication if necessary (preferably at fixed time 
intervals)
•	 Paracetamol
•	 NSAID
•	 Consider opioids, muscle relaxants
•	 Discourage bed rest
•	 Consider spinal manipulation for pain relief
•	 Do not advise lumbar supports, back-specific exercises, 
traction, acupuncture, epidural or facet injections.
•	 Koes BW. BMJ 2006; 332:1430–1434.
25.22  Management of low back pain
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease
25
1075
Lesion
Pain
Examination findings
Tennis 
elbow
Lateral epicondyle
Tender over epicondyle
Radiation to 
extensor forearm
Pain reproduced by resisted 
active wrist extension
Golfer’s 
elbow
Medial epicondyle
Tender over epicondyle
Radiation to flexor 
forearm
Pain reproduced by resisted 
active wrist flexion
Olecranon 
bursitis
Olecranon
Fluctuant tender swelling 
over olecranon
25.25  Local causes of elbow pain
history is for slow but complete recovery, sometimes 
taking up to 2 years.
Elbow pain
The most common causes are repetitive strain injury 
affecting the lateral epicondyle (tennis elbow) and 
medial epicondyle (golfer’s elbow) (Box 25.25). Manage­
ment is by rest, analgesics and topical or systemic 
NSAID. Symptoms may also respond to local applica­
tion of glyceryl trinitrate patches. Local corticosteroid 
injections may be required in resistant cases. Olecranon 
bursitis can also follow local repetitive trauma but other 
causes include infections, gout and RA.
Fig. 25.12  Pain patterns of hip disease and trochanteric bursitis. 
The dark shading indicates sites of maximum pain. 
Trochanteric
bursitis
Hip
disease
Lesion
Pain
Examination findings
Trochanteric 
bursitis
Upper lateral thigh, 
worse on lying on 
that side at night
Tender over greater 
trochanter
Gluteal 
enthesopathy
Upper lateral thigh, 
worse on lying on 
that side at night
Tender over greater 
trochanter
Pain reproduced by 
resisted active hip 
abduction
Adductor 
tendinitis
Upper inner thigh
Usually clearly 
sports-related
Tender over adductor 
origin/tendon/muscle
Pain reproduced by 
resisted active hip 
adduction
Ischiogluteal 
bursitis
Buttock, worse on 
sitting
Tender over ischial 
prominence
lliopectineal 
bursitis
Anterior groin
Tender (± fluctuant 
swelling) lateral to 
femoral pulse, not 
worsened by internal 
rotation of hip (cf. 
hip pain)
25.26  Local causes of hip pain
abscess, retroperitoneal haemorrhage or pelvic inflam­
mation, which can cause inguinal and lateral thigh pain 
that is aggravated by resisted hip flexion.
Knee pain
The most common cause of knee pain is OA, the features 
of which are described on page 1082. Pain that is associ­
ated with locking of the knee (sudden painful inability 
to extend fully) is usually due to a meniscal tear or 
osteochondritis dissecans. Referred pain from the hip 
Hand and wrist pain
Pain from hand or wrist joints is well localised to the 
affected joint, except for pain from the first metacarpal 
joint, commonly targeted by OA; although maximal at 
the thumb base, the pain often radiates down the thumb 
and to the radial aspect of the wrist. Non-articular causes 
of hand pain include:
•	 Tenosynovitis: flexor or extensor (pain and swelling, 
with or without fine crepitus on volar or extensor 
aspect). De Quervain’s tenosynovitis involves the 
tendon sheaths of abductor pollicis longus and 
extensor pollicis brevis, and produces pain maximal 
over the radial aspect of the distal forearm and 
wrist. It usually occurs as the result of a repetitive 
strain injury. There is tenderness (with or without 
warmth, linear swelling and fine crepitus) over the 
distal radius and marked pain on forced ulnar 
deviation of the wrist with the thumb held across 
the patient’s palm (Finkelstein’s sign).
•	 Raynaud’s phenomenon (p. 602).
•	 C8/T1 radiculopathy.
•	 Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (p. 1130).
Hip pain
Pain from the hip joint is usually maximal deep in the 
anterior groin, with variable radiation to the buttock, 
anterolateral thigh, knee or shin (Fig. 25.12). Trochanteric 
bursitis is a common cause (Box 25.26), typically affect­
ing obese women, and occurring in isolation or second­
ary to an abnormal gait, such as in hip or knee OA. Pain 
in the hip region may also be referred from the back. 
Root entrapment can cause pain in the lateral thigh 
(T12–L1) or the inguinal region and lateral thigh (L2–4), 
but is worsened by coughing and straining more than 
by movement and is often accompanied by sensory 
disturbance. Other less common causes include psoas 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1076
may present at the knee and is reproduced by hip not 
knee movement. Pain from periarticular lesions is well 
localised to the involved structure (Box 25.27). Anterior 
knee pain may be due to bursitis occurring as the result 
of repetitive occupational kneeling, as well as infection 
and gout. Anterior knee pain, aggravated by sports, may 
occur in adolescent girls but is usually self-limiting. 
Rarely, anterior knee pain may be the result of chondro­
malacia patellae, in which degenerative changes of the 
articular cartilage occur.
Ankle and foot pain
Pain from the mortice joint of the ankle (the tibiofibular–
talar joint) is felt between the malleoli and is worse on 
weight-bearing. Pain from the subtalar joint is also worse 
on weight-bearing on uneven surfaces. The mortice joint 
is commonly affected by OA, whereas RA tends to affect 
the subtalar joint. Pain under the heel can arise from 
plantar fasciitis or subcalcaneal bursitis. Pain affecting 
the back of the heel may be due to Achilles tendinitis or 
bursitis. Patients with seronegative spondyloarthritis 
may develop enthesopathy affecting this region, result­
ing in plantar fasciitis, which presents with pain and 
tenderness under the heel, or as Achilles enthesitis, 
which presents with pain at the tendon insertion into the 
calcaneus. The MTP joints of the feet are commonly 
involved in RA. The presentation is with pain on walking 
below the metatarsal heads, often described as ‘walking 
on marbles’. Patients with active inflammation of the 
MTP joints have pain when the forefoot is squeezed 
(p. 1059). Involvement of the first MTP joint is common 
in OA and is associated with a valgus deformity (hallux 
valgus). This joint is also a classical target in acute gout. 
Claw foot (pes cavus) can be associated with anterior foot 
Lesion
Pain
Examination findings
Pre-patellar 
bursitis
Anterior 
patella
Tender fluctuant 
swelling in front of 
patella
Superficial and 
deep infrapatellar 
bursitis
Anterior 
knee, inferior 
to patella
Tender fluctuant 
swelling in front of 
(superficial) or behind 
(deep) patella tendon
Anserine bursitis
Upper medial 
tibia
Tenderness (± warmth, 
swelling) over upper 
medial tibia
Inferior medial 
collateral 
ligament 
enthesopathy
Upper medial 
tibia
Localised tenderness of 
upper medial tibia
Pain reproduced by 
valgus stress on partly 
flexed knee
Popliteal cyst 
(Baker’s cyst)
Popliteal 
fossa
Tender swelling of 
popliteal fossa, usually 
reducible by massage 
with knee in mid-flexion
Patella tendon 
enthesopathy
Anterior 
upper tibia
Tenderness and firm 
swelling of tibial tubercle
Osteochondritis
(Osgood–
Schlatter disease)
Anterior 
upper tibia
Affects adolescents
Pain on resisted active 
knee extension
25.27  Local causes of knee pain
pain and is characterised by a high arch and clawing of 
the toes. It may be an isolated phenomenon or secondary 
to neurological disorders such as Friedreich’s ataxia 
(p. 1199) or spina bifida (p. 1222). Management should 
follow the general principles outlined on page 1077. Bur­
sitis and enthesitis resistant to standard measures may 
respond to local steroid injections. Morton’s neuroma is 
the name given to an entrapment neuropathy of the 
interdigital nerves of the feet, which presents with shoot­
ing pain that is usually located between the third and 
fourth metatarsal heads. Women are most commonly 
affected. Local sensory loss and a palpable tender swell­
ing between the metatarsal heads may be detected. Foot­
wear adjustment, with or without a local corticosteroid 
injection, often helps but surgical decompression may be 
required if symptoms persist.
Muscle pain and weakness
Muscle pain and weakness can arise from a variety of 
causes. It is important to distinguish between a subjec­
tive feeling of generalised weakness or fatigue, and an 
objective weakness with loss of muscle power and func­
tion. The former is a non-specific manifestation of many 
diseases, including depression, whereas the latter is 
often a sign of primary muscle disease.
Clinical assessment
Proximal muscle weakness suggests the presence of a 
myopathy or myositis, which typically causes difficulty 
with standing from a seated position, squatting and 
lifting overhead. The causes are shown in Box 25.28. 
Worsening of symptoms on exercise and post-exertional 
cramps suggest a metabolic myopathy, such as glycogen 
storage disease (p. 450). A strong family history and 
onset in childhood or early adulthood suggests muscular 
dystrophy (p. 1228). Alcohol excess can cause an inflam­
matory myositis and atrophy of type 2 muscle fibres. 
Proximal myopathy may be a complication of cortico­
steroid therapy and of osteomalacia. Myopathy and 
myositis can also occur in association with statin use and 
viral infections, including HIV infection, when it may be 
due to HIV itself or treatment with zidovudine. Clinical 
examination should document the presence, pattern and 
severity of muscle weakness, and the latter should be 
assessed using the Medical Research Council (MRC) 
scale, in which muscle strength is graded on a six-point 
scale ranging from no power (0) to full power (5).
Investigations
Investigations should include routine biochemistry and 
haematology, ESR, and measurement of CRP and CK. 
Serum 25(OH) vitamin D levels and PTH should be 
checked in suspected osteomalacia. Raised CK levels 
suggest muscle pathology but do not establish the cause. 
The ESR and CRP may be raised in inflammatory myo­
sitis. Muscle biopsy and electromyography (EMG) are 
usually required to make the diagnosis, but MRI can be 
used to identify focal areas of muscle abnormality and 
increase the diagnostic yield from muscle biopsies.
Management
Management is determined by the cause but all patients 
with muscle disease may benefit from physiotherapy 
and graded exercises to maximise muscle function.
Principles of management of musculoskeletal disorders
25
1077
Simple and safe interventions should be tried first. 
Symptoms and signs will change with time, so the plan 
requires regular review and re-adjustment. Effective 
management may require the expertise of a variety of 
health professionals, with a coordinated multidiscipli­
nary team approach.
Core interventions that should be considered for 
everyone with a painful musculoskeletal condition 
are listed in Box 25.29. There are also other non-
pharmacological and drug options, the choice depend­
ing largely on the nature and severity of the diagnosis.
Education and lifestyle interventions
Education
Patients must always be informed about the nature of 
their condition and its investigation, treatment and 
prognosis, as education can improve outcome. Informa­
tion and therapist contact can reduce pain and disability, 
improve self-efficacy and reduce the health-care costs 
of many musculoskeletal conditions, including OA and 
RA. The mechanisms are unclear but in part may 
result from improved adherence. Benefits are modest 
but potentially long-lasting, safe and cost-effective (Box 
25.30). Education can be provided through one-to-one 
discussion, written literature, patient-led group educa­
tion classes and interactive computer programs. Inclu­
sion of the patient’s partner or carer is often appropriate; 
this is essential for childhood conditions but also helps 
in many chronic adult conditions, such as RA or 
fibromyalgia.
Exercise
Two types of exercise should be prescribed (Box 25.30):
•	 Aerobic fitness training can produce long-term 
reduction in pain and disability. It improves 
well-being, encourages restorative sleep and 
benefits common comorbidity such as obesity, 
diabetes, chronic heart failure and hypertension.
•	 Local strengthening exercise for muscles that act 
over compromised joints also reduces pain and 
disability, with improvements in the reduced 
muscle strength, proprioception, coordination and 
PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT OF 
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS
Although management of musculoskeletal disease 
depends on the underlying diagnosis, certain aspects of 
management are common to many disorders. The 
general aims of management are to:
•	 educate the patient
•	 control pain
•	 optimise function
•	 modify the disease process where this is  
possible
•	 identify and treat related comorbidity.
These aims are interrelated and success in one area often 
benefits others. Successful management requires careful 
assessment of the person as a whole, as well as his 
or her musculoskeletal system. The management plan 
should be individualised and patient-centred, should 
involve all necessary members of the multidisciplinary 
team, and should be agreed and understood by both the 
patient and involved practitioners. It must also take into 
account:
•	 the person’s daily activity requirements, and work 
and recreational aspirations
•	 risk factors and associations of the musculoskeletal 
condition (obesity, muscle weakness, non-
restorative sleep)
•	 the person’s perceptions and knowledge of the 
condition
•	 medications and coping strategies already tried by 
the patient
•	 comorbid disease and its therapy
•	 the availability, costs and logistics of appropriate 
evidence-based interventions.
Inflammatory
•	 Polymyositis
•	 Dermatomyositis
•	 Inclusion body myositis
•	 Polymyalgia rheumatica
Endocrine (Ch. 20)
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Hyperthyroidism
•	 Cushing’s syndrome
•	 Addison’s disease
Metabolic (Ch. 16)
•	 Myophosphorylase  
deficiency
•	 Phosphofructokinase 
deficiency
•	 Hypokalaemia
•	 Carnitine deficiency
•	 Myoadenylate deaminase 
deficiency
•	 Osteomalacia (p. 1125)
Drugs/toxins
•	 Alcohol
•	 Cocaine
•	 Fibrates
•	 Statins
•	 Penicillamine
•	 Zidovudine
Infections (Ch. 13)
•	 Viral (HIV, cytomegalovirus, 
rubella, Epstein–Barr, echo)
•	 Parasitic (schistosomiasis, 
cysticercosis, toxoplasmosis)
•	 Bacterial (Clostridium 
perfringens, staphylococci, 
tuberculosis, Mycoplasma)
25.28  Causes of proximal muscle pain 
or weakness
Core
•	 Education
•	 Exercise
Aerobic conditioning
Strengthening
•	 Simple analgesia
•	 Reduction of adverse 
mechanical factors
Pacing of activities
Appropriate footwear
•	 Weight reduction if obese
Other options
•	 Other analgesic drugs
Oral NSAIDs
Topical agents
Opioid analgesics
Amitriptyline
Gabapentin/pregabalin
•	 Disease-modifying  
therapy
•	 Local corticosteroid injections
•	 Physical treatments
Heat, cold, aids, appliances
•	 Surgery
•	 Coping strategies
25.29  Core interventions for patients with 
rheumatic diseases
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1078
Fig. 25.13  COX-1 and COX-2 pathways. 
Membrane
phospholipid
Arachidonic
acid
Lipoxygenase
Phospholipase A2
COX-2
‘inflammatory’
(inducible)
Mitogenesis and growth
Regulation of female
reproduction
Bone formation
Renal function
Traditional
NSAID
COX-1
‘house-keeping’
(constitutive)
Gut mucosal integrity
Platelet aggregation
Renal function
COX-2 selective
NSAID
balance that associate with chronic arthritis. ‘Small 
amounts often’ of strengthening exercise are better 
than protracted sessions performed infrequently.
Joint protection
Excessive impact-loading and adverse repetitive use of 
a compromised joint or periarticular tissue can often be 
reduced: for example, cessation of contact sports, or 
altered use of machinery or tools at the workplace. 
Simple ‘pacing’ of activities – dividing physically 
onerous tasks into shorter segments with brief breaks in 
between – is helpful. Use of shock-absorbing footwear 
with thick soft soles can reduce impact-loading through 
feet, knees, hips and back, and improve symptoms at 
these sites. A walking stick held on the contralateral side 
takes the weight off a painful hip, knee or foot.
Weight loss
Obesity aggravates pain at most sites of the body 
through increased mechanical strain and is a risk factor 
for more rapid progression of joint damage in patients 
with arthritis. This should be explained to obese patients 
and strategies offered on how to lose and then maintain 
an appropriate weight (p. 117).
Pharmacological treatment
Analgesics
Paracetamol (1 g up to 4 times daily) is the oral analgesic 
of first choice and, if successful, the preferred long-term 
oral analgesic. It inhibits prostaglandin synthesis in the 
brain but has less effect on peripheral prostaglandin 
production. It is generally well tolerated and has few 
adverse effects and drug interactions. There is a possible 
increased risk of both gastrointestinal events and car­
diovascular disease with chronic usage, but it is uncer­
tain whether this is due to the underlying disease or 
the drug itself. If paracetamol fails to achieve an ade­
quate response, it can be used in combination with 
opioids such as codeine and dihydrocodeine in com­
pound analgesic preparations like co-codamol (codeine 
and paracetamol) or co-dydramol (dihydrocodeine and 
paracetamol). Although these are more effective than 
paracetamol, side-effects include constipation, headache 
and confusion, especially in the elderly. The centrally 
acting analgesics tramadol and meptazinol may be 
useful for temporary control of severe pain unrespon­
sive to other measures. Both may cause nausea, bowel 
upset, dizziness and somnolence, and withdrawal 
symptoms after chronic use. The non-opioid analgesic 
nefopam (30–90 mg 3 times daily) can help moderate 
pain, though side-effects (nausea, anxiety, dry mouth) 
often limit its use. Patients with severe or intractable 
pain may require stronger opioid analgesics such as oxy­
codon and morphine.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
These are among the most widely prescribed drugs, but 
their use has declined over recent years because of con­
cerns about an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. 
Oral NSAIDs are particularly useful in the management 
of pain that has an inflammatory component, and a 
long-acting NSAID taken in the evening may help 
reduce early morning stiffness. There is marked vari­
ability in individual tolerance and response; patients 
who do not respond to one NSAID may still gain 
relief from another. The mechanism of NSAID action 
is through inhibition of prostaglandin H synthase 
and cyclo-oxygenase (COX) enzymes. Arachidonic acid, 
derived from membrane phospholipids, is metabolised 
to produce prostaglandins and leukotrienes by the COX 
and 5-lipoxygenase pathways respectively (Fig. 25.13). 
There are two isoforms of COX, encoded by different 
genes. COX-1 is constitutively expressed and fulfils a 
‘housekeeping’ function in the gastric mucosa, platelets 
and kidneys. The COX-2 enzyme is largely induced at 
sites of inflammation, producing prostaglandins that 
cause local pain and inflammation, but COX-2 is also 
up-regulated in the CNS, where it plays a role in 
the central mediation of pain and fever. Traditional 
NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen, diclofenac and naproxen, 
inhibit both COX enzymes, whereas newer NSAIDs, 
such as celecoxib and etoricoxib, selectively inhibit 
COX-2. Whilst NSAIDs have anti-inflammatory activity, 
they are not thought to have a disease-modifying effect 
in either OA or inflammatory rheumatic diseases.
‘Both patient education and exercise regimens have a modest, 
yet clinically important influence on patients’ well-being.’
‘Both aerobic walking and home-based quadriceps-
strengthening exercises reduce pain and disability from knee 
osteoarthritis.’
•	 Devos-Combey L, et al. J Rheumatol 2006; 33:744–756.
•	 Roddy E, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2005; 64:544–548.
25.30  Education and exercise in the management 
of arthritis
Principles of management of musculoskeletal disorders
25
1079
with all NSAIDs, including COX-2 selective NSAIDs, 
even though the risk of gastrointestinal events with 
these is low. Since chronic PPI therapy is associated 
with an increased risk of hip fracture, the merits of 
giving PPI therapy with a COX-2 selective drug need 
to be weighed up carefully.
Other side-effects of NSAID include fluid retention 
and renal impairment due to inhibition of renal prosta­
glandin production, non-ulcer-associated dyspepsia, 
abdominal pain and altered bowel habit, and rashes. 
Interstitial nephritis, asthma and anaphylaxis can also 
occur but are rare. Recommendations for NSAID pre­
scribing are summarised in Box 25.33. Because of the risk 
of adverse effects, NSAIDs should be used with great 
care in the elderly (Box 25.34).
Topical agents
Topical NSAID creams and gels and capsaicin (chilli 
extract; 0.025%) cream can help in the treatment of OA 
and superficial periarticular lesions affecting hands, 
elbows and knees. They may be used as monotherapy 
or as an adjunct to oral analgesics. Topical NSAIDs can 
penetrate superficial tissues and even reach the joint 
capsule, though intrasynovial levels mainly reflect 
blood-borne drug delivery. Capsaicin selectively binds 
to the protein transient receptor potential vanilloid 
type 1 (TRPV1), which is a heat-activated calcium 
channel on the surface of peripheral type C nociceptor 
Non-selective NSAIDs can damage the gastric and 
duodenal mucosal barrier and are associated with 
an increased risk of upper gastrointestinal ulceration, 
bleeding and perforation. The adjusted increased risk 
(odds ratio) of bleeding or perforation from all NSAIDs 
is 4–5, though differences exist between NSAIDs 
(Box 25.31). Dyspepsia is a poor guide to the presence 
of NSAID-associated ulceration and bleeding, and 
the principal risk factors are shown in Box 25.32. 
Co-prescription of omeprazole (20 mg daily) or miso­
prostol (200 µg twice or 3 times daily) reduces but 
does not eliminate NSAID-induced ulceration and 
bleeding, but H2-antagonists in standard doses are inef­
fective. The COX-2 selective NSAIDs celecoxib and 
etoricoxib are much less likely to cause gastrointestinal 
toxicity but benefit is attenuated in patients on low-
dose aspirin. In the UK, National Institute for Health 
and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guidelines advise that a 
proton pump inhibitor (PPI) should be co-prescribed 
Drug
Daily adult 
dose
Doses/
day
Idiosyncratic 
side-effects, 
comments
Very low risk
Celecoxib
100–200 mg
1–2
Selective COX-2 
inhibitor
Etoricoxib
60–120 mg
1
Selective COX-2 
inhibitor
Low risk
Ibuprofen
600–1600 mg
3–4
Weak anti-
inflammatory 
effect at this 
dose
Etodolac
600 mg
1
Partially 
selective COX-2 
inhibitor
Meloxicam
7.5–15 mg
1
Partially 
selective COX-2 
inhibitor
Nabumetone
1–2 g
1–2
Partially 
selective COX-2 
inhibitor
Medium risk
Ibuprofen
1600–2400 mg
3–4
Naproxen
500–1000 mg
1–2
Diclofenac
75–150 mg
2–3
Abnormal liver 
function tests
High risk
Indometacin
50–200 mg
3–4
High incidence 
of dyspepsia and 
CNS side-effects 
(headache, 
dizziness, 
confusion)
Ketoprofen
100–200 mg
2–4
Highest risk
Piroxicam
20–30 mg
1–2
Restricted use in 
those > 60 yrs
Azapropazone
600–200 mg
2–4
Uricosuric 
action. 
Restricted use in 
those > 60 yrs
25.31  Commonly used NSAIDs and their relative 
risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation
•	 Use with caution in patients with cardiovascular disease
•	 Use the lowest dose for the shortest time possible to control 
symptoms
•	 Avoid NSAID in patients on warfarin
•	 Allow 2–3 weeks to assess efficacy. If response is 
inadequate, consider trial of another NSAID
•	 Never prescribe more than one NSAID at a time
•	 Co-prescribe proton pump inhibitor for patients with risk 
factors for gastrointestinal adverse effects (see Box 25.32)
25.33  Recommendations for the use of NSAID
*The most important risk factors.
•	 Age > 60 yrs*
•	 Past history of peptic ulcer*
•	 Past history of adverse event with NSAID
•	 Concomitant corticosteroid use
•	 High-dose or multiple NSAID
•	 High-risk NSAID (see Box 25.31)
25.32  Risk factors for NSAID-induced ulcers
•	 Gastrointestinal complications: age is a strong risk factor 
for bleeding and perforation and peptic ulceration. Elderly 
patients are more likely to die if they suffer NSAID-associated 
bleeding or perforation.
•	 Cardiovascular disease: use NSAID with caution in patients 
with cardiovascular disease. Therapy with NSAID may 
exacerbate hypertension and heart failure.
•	 Renal disease: use of NSAID may cause renal impairment.
25.34  Use of oral NSAID in old age
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1080
Procedure
Indication
Soft tissue release
Carpal tunnel
Median nerve compression
Tarsal tunnel
Posterior tibial nerve entrapment
Flexor tenosynovectomy
Relief of ‘trigger’ fingers
Ulnar nerve transposition
Ulnar nerve entrapment at elbow
Fasciotomy
Severe Dupuytren’s contracture
Tendon repairs and transfers
Hand extensor tendons
Extensor tendon rupture
Thumb and finger flexor 
tendons
Flexor tendon rupture
Synovectomy
Wrist and extensor tendon 
sheath (+ excision of radial 
head)
Pain relief and prevention of 
extensor tendon rupture in RA, 
resistant inflammatory synovitis
Knee synovectomy
Resistant inflammatory synovitis
Osteotomy
Femoral osteotomy
Early OA of hip
Tibial osteotomy
Unicompartmental knee OA
Deformed tibia in OA or Paget’s 
disease
Excision arthroplasty
First metatarsophalangeal 
joint (Keller’s procedure)
Painful hallux valgus
Radial head
Painful distal radio-ulnar joint
Lateral end of clavicle
Painful acromioclavicular joint
Metatarsal head
Painful subluxed 
metatarsophalangeal joints
Joint replacement arthroplasty
Knee, hip, shoulder, elbow
Painful damaged joints in OA  
and RA
Arthrodesis
Wrist
Damaged joint: pain relief, 
improvement of grip
Ankle/subtalar joints
Damaged joint: pain relief, 
stabilisation of hindfoot
Fracture repair
Hip arthroplasty
Fractured neck of femur
External fixation
Multiple fractures, open fractures
Intramedullary nailing
Tibial and femur fractures
Screw, plating and wiring
Wrist and other fractures
Other procedures
Nerve root decompression
Spinal stenosis, nerve 
entrapment
Kyphoplasty
Painful vertebral fracture
Vertebroplasty
Painful vertebral fracture
25.35  Surgical procedures in rheumatology and 
bone disease
patient. Assessment of motivation, social support and 
environment is no less important than careful considera­
tion of patients’ general health, their risks for major 
surgery, the extent of disease in other joints, and their 
ability to mobilise following surgery. For some severely 
compromised people, pain relief and functional inde­
pendence are better served by provision of a suitable 
wheelchair, home adjustments and social services than 
by surgery that is technically successful but following 
which the patient cannot mobilise.
Self-help and coping strategies
These help patients to cope better with, and adjust to, 
chronic pain and disability. They may be useful at any 
fibres. Initial application causes a burning sensation 
but continued use depletes presynaptic substance P, 
with subsequent pain reduction that is optimal after 
1–2 weeks.
Non-pharmacological interventions
Physical and occupational therapy
Local heat, ice packs, wax baths and other local external 
applications can induce muscle relaxation and tem­
porary relief of symptoms in a range of rheumatic 
diseases.
Hydrotherapy induces muscle relaxation and facili­
tates en­hanced movement in a warm, pain-relieving 
environment without the restraints of gravity and 
normal load-bearing. Various manipulative techniques 
may also help improve restricted movement. The com­
bination of these with education and therapist contact 
enhances their benefits.
Splints can give temporary rest and support for 
painful joints and periarticular tissues, and prevent 
harmful involuntary postures during sleep. Prolonged 
rest, however, must be avoided.
Orthoses are more permanent appliances used to 
reduce instability and excessive abnormal movement. 
They include working wrist splints, knee orthoses, and 
iron and T-straps to control ankle instability. Orthoses 
are particularly suited to severely disabled patients in 
whom a surgical option is inappropriate, and often need 
to be custom-made for the individual.
Aids and appliances can provide dignity and inde­
pendence to patients with respect to activities of daily 
living. Common examples are a raised toilet seat, raised 
chair height, extended handles on taps, a shower instead 
of a bath, thick-handled cutlery, and extended ‘hands’ 
to pull on tights and socks. Full assessment and advice 
from an occupational therapist maximise the benefits 
of these.
Surgery
A variety of surgical interventions can relieve pain and 
conserve or restore function in patients with bone, joint 
and periarticular disease (Box 25.35). Soft tissue release 
and tenosynovectomy may reduce inflammatory symp­
toms, improve function and prevent or retard tendon 
damage for variable periods, sometimes indefinitely. 
Synovectomy of joints does not prevent disease progres­
sion but may be indicated for pain relief when drugs, 
physical therapy and intra-articular injections have 
provided insufficient relief. The main approaches for 
damaged joints are osteotomy (cutting bone to alter joint 
mechanics and load transmission), excision arthroplasty 
(removing part or all of the joint), joint replacement 
(insertion of prosthesis in place of the excised joint) and 
arthrodesis (joint fusion). Surgical fixation of fractures is 
frequently required in patients with osteoporosis and 
other bone diseases.
The main aims of surgery are to provide pain relief 
and improve function and quality of life. If surgery is 
to be successful, the aims and consequences of each 
operation should be considered as part of an integrated 
programme of management and rehabilitation, by 
multidisciplinary teams of surgeons, allied health pro­
fessionals and physicians, and carefully explained to the 
Osteoarthritis
25
1081
stage but are particularly so for patients with incurable 
problems, who have tried all available treatment options. 
The aim is to increase self-management through self-
assessment and problem-solving, so that patients can 
recognise negative but potentially remediable aspects of 
their mood (stress, frustration, anger or low self-esteem) 
and their situation (physical, social, financial). These 
may then be addressed by changes in attitude and 
behaviour, as shown in Box 25.36.
Involvement of the spouse or partner in mutual goal-
setting can improve partnership adjustment. Such 
approaches are often an element of group education 
classes and pain clinics, but may require more formal 
clinical psychological input.
OSTEOARTHRITIS
Osteoarthritis (OA) is by far the most common form of 
arthritis. It is strongly associated with ageing and is a 
major cause of pain and disability in older people. Osteo­
arthritis is characterised by focal loss of articular carti­
lage, subchondral osteosclerosis, osteophyte formation 
at the joint margin, and remodelling of joint contour 
with enlargement of affected joints. Inflammation can 
occur but is not a prominent feature. Joint involvement 
in OA follows a characteristic distribution, mainly tar­
geting the hips, knees, PIP and DIP joints of the hands, 
neck and lumbar spine (see Fig. 25.9). The prevalence of 
OA rises progressively with age and it has been esti­
mated that 45% of all people develop knee OA and 25% 
hip OA at some point during life. Although some of 
these patients are asymptomatic, the lifetime risk of 
having a total hip or knee replacement for OA in someone 
aged 50 is about 11% in women and 8% in men. Symp­
toms attributable to OA are more prevalent in women, 
except at the hip, where men are equally affected.
Pathophysiology
OA is a complex disorder with both genetic and envi­
ronmental components (Fig. 25.14). Repetitive adverse 
loading of joints during occupation or competitive 
sports is also an important predisposing factor in farmers 
(hip OA), miners (knee OA) and elite or professional 
athletes (knee OA). For most people, however, participa­
tion in recreational sport does not appear to increase the 
risk of OA, unless there has been significant joint trauma. 
Congenital abnormalities of the joint, such as slipped 
femoral epiphysis, are also associated with a high risk 
of OA, presumably due to abnormal load distribution 
•	 Yoga and relaxation techniques to reduce stress
•	 Avoiding negative situations or activities that produce stress, 
and increasing pleasant activities that give satisfaction
•	 Information and discussion to alter beliefs about and 
perspectives on disease
•	 Reducing or avoiding catastrophising and maladaptive pain 
behaviour
•	 Imagery and distraction techniques for pain
•	 Expanding social contact and better use of social services
25.36  Self-help and coping strategies
within the joint, and this is also thought to be the expla­
nation for the increased risk of OA in Paget’s disease of 
bone. Obesity is another strong risk factor. Although this 
is likely to be due in part to increased mechanical loading 
of the joints, it has been speculated that cytokines 
released from adipose tissue may also play a role. The 
increased incidence of OA in women has led to specula­
tion that sex hormones may play a causal role. While 
there is no evidence to suggest that circulating sex 
hormone levels or reproductive history predispose to 
OA, some studies have shown a lower prevalence of 
OA in women who use hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT), as compared with non-users. Genetic factors play 
a key role in the pathogenesis of OA, and family-based 
studies have estimated that the heritability of OA ranges 
between about 43% at the knee to between 60% and 
65% at the hip and hand, respectively. Recent genome-
wide association studies have identified several loci 
that predispose to OA, but many others remain to be 
discovered.
Major alterations in cartilage structure are character­
istic of OA. Chondrocytes divide to produce nests of 
meta­bolically active cells (Fig. 25.15A). Initially, matrix 
components are produced at an increased rate, but at the 
same time there is increased degradation of the major 
structural components of cartilage, including aggrecan 
and type II collagen (see Fig. 25.4, p. 1063). Eventually, 
the concentration of aggrecan in matrix falls and makes 
the cartilage vulnerable to load-bearing injury. Fissuring 
of the cartilage surface (‘fibrillation’) then occurs, leading 
to the development of deep vertical clefts (Fig. 25.15B), 
localised chondrocyte death and decreased cartilage 
thickness; this is focal rather than generalised in nature 
and mainly affects the maximum load-bearing part of 
the joint, although, eventually, large parts of the carti­
lage surface can be damaged. Calcium pyrophosphate 
and basic calcium phosphate crystals often become 
deposited in the abnormal cartilage.
The subchondral bone is also abnormal, with osteo­
sclerosis and subchondral cyst formation (Fig. 25.15C). 
Fig. 25.14  Risk factors for the development of osteoarthritis. 
Heredity
Gender/hormonal status
Obesity
High bone mineral density
Trauma
Joint shape
Alignment
Usage
 – occupational
– recreational
Ageing
C
o
n
s
t
i
t
u
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
s
u
s
c
e
p
t
i
b
il
i
t
y
M
e
c
h
a
n
i
c
a
l 
f
a
c
t
o
r
s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1082
Pain
•	 Insidious onset over months or years
•	 Variable or intermittent over time (‘good days, bad days’)
•	 Mainly related to movement and weight-bearing, relieved  
by rest
•	 Only brief (< 15 mins) morning stiffness and brief (< 5 mins) 
‘gelling’ after rest
•	 Usually only one or a few joints painful
Clinical signs
•	 Restricted movement due to capsular thickening, or blocking 
by osteophyte
•	 Palpable, sometimes audible, coarse crepitus due to rough 
articular surfaces
•	 Bony swelling around joint margins
•	 Deformity, usually without instability
•	 Joint-line or periarticular tenderness
•	 Muscle weakness and wasting
•	 Synovitis mild or absent
25.37  Symptoms and signs of osteoarthritis
•	 Polyarticular finger interphalangeal joint OA
•	 Heberden’s (± Bouchard’s) nodes
•	 Marked female preponderance
•	 Peak onset in middle age
•	 Good functional outcome for hands
•	 Predisposition to OA at other joints, especially knees
•	 Strong genetic predisposition
25.38  Characteristics of generalised nodal 
osteoarthritis
Fibrocartilage is produced at the joint margin, which 
undergoes endochondral ossification to form osteo­
phytes. Bone remodelling and cartilage thinning slowly 
alter the shape of the OA joint, increasing its surface 
area. Patients with OA also have higher BMD values at 
sites distant from the joint, and this is particularly related 
to osteophyte formation. The reason for this is not com­
pletely understood but it may reflect the fact that 
common signalling pathways are involved in the regula­
tion of bone and cartilage metabolism.
The synovium undergoes variable degrees of hyper­
plasia, and inflammatory changes may sometimes be 
observed, although to a much lesser extent than in RA 
and other inflammatory arthropathies. Osteochondral 
bodies commonly occur within the synovium, reflecting 
chondroid metaplasia or secondary uptake and growth 
of damaged cartilage fragments. The outer capsule also 
thickens and contracts, usually retaining the stability of 
the remodelling joint. The muscles surrounding affected 
joints commonly show evidence of wasting and non-
specific type II fibre atrophy.
Clinical features
The main presenting symptoms are pain and functional 
restriction in a patient over the age of 45, but more 
often over 60 years. The causes of pain in OA are not 
completely understood but may relate to increased 
pressure in subchondral bone (mainly causing night 
pain), trabecular microfractures, capsular distension and 
low-grade synovitis, or may result from bursitis and 
enthesopathy secondary to altered joint mechanics. 
Typical OA pain has the characteristics listed in Box 
25.37. For many people, functional restriction of the 
hands, knees or hips is an equal, if not greater, problem 
than pain. The clinical findings vary according to sever­
ity but are principally those of joint damage.
Fig. 25.15  Pathological changes in osteoarthritis. A Abnormal 
nests of proliferating chondrocytes (arrows) interspersed with matrix devoid 
of normal chondrocytes. B Fibrillation of cartilage in OA. C Radiograph 
of knee joint affected by OA, showing osteophytes at joint margin (white 
arrows), subchondral sclerosis (black arrows) and subchondral cyst (open 
arrow). 
A
C
B
The correlation between the presence of structural 
change, pain and disability varies markedly according 
to site. It is stronger at the hip than the knee, and poor 
at most small joints. Risk factors for pain and disability 
may differ from those for structural change. At the knee, 
for example, reduced quadriceps muscle strength and 
adverse psychosocial factors (anxiety, depression) cor­
relate more strongly with pain and disability than the 
degree of radiographic change.
Radiological evidence of OA is very common in 
middle-aged and older people, and the disease may 
coexist with other conditions, so it is important to remem­
ber that pain in a patient with OA may be due to another 
cause. Generalised OA, knee OA, hip OA and spine OA 
(spondylosis) will be considered individually.
Generalised nodal OA
Characteristics of this common form of OA are shown 
in Box 25.38. Some patients are asymptomatic whereas 
others develop pain, stiffness and swelling of one or 
more PIP joints of the hands from the age of about 
40 years onward. Gradually, these develop postero­
lateral swellings on each side of the extensor tendon 
that slowly enlarge and harden to become Heberden’s 
(DIP) and Bouchard’s (PIP) nodes (Fig. 25.16). Typically, 
each joint goes through a phase of episodic symptoms 
(1–5 years) while the node evolves and OA develops. 
Once OA is fully established, symptoms may subside 
and hand function often remains good. Affected joints 
are enlarged as the result of osteophyte formation and 
Osteoarthritis
25
1083
often show characteristic lateral deviation, reflecting the 
asymmetric focal cartilage loss of OA (Fig. 25.17). 
Involvement of the first carpometacarpal joint (CMC) is 
also common, leading to pain on trying to open bottles 
and jars and functional impairment. Clinically, it may be 
detected by the presence of crepitus on joint movement, 
and squaring of the thumb base.
Generalised nodal OA has a very strong genetic com­
ponent: the daughter of an affected mother has a 1 in 3 
chance of developing nodal OA herself. People with 
nodal OA are at increased risk of OA at other sites, 
especially the knee.
Knee OA
OA principally targets the patello-femoral and medial 
tibio-femoral compartments at this site but eventually 
spreads to affect the whole of the joint (Fig. 25.18). It may 
be isolated or occur as part of generalised nodal OA. 
Most patients, particularly women, have bilateral and 
symmetrical involvement. With men, trauma is a more 
important risk factor and may result in unilateral OA.
The pain is usually localised to the anterior or medial 
aspect of the knee and upper tibia. Patello-femoral pain 
is usually worse going up and down stairs or inclines. 
Posterior knee pain suggests the presence of a complicat­
ing popliteal cyst (Baker’s cyst). Prolonged walking, 
rising from a chair, getting in or out of a car, or bending 
to put on shoes and socks may be difficult. Local exami­
nation findings may include:
•	 a jerky, asymmetric (antalgic) gait with less time 
weight-bearing on the painful side
•	 a varus (Fig. 25.19), less commonly valgus, and/or 
fixed flexion deformity
•	 joint-line and/or periarticular tenderness 
(secondary anserine bursitis and medial ligament 
enthesopathy (see Box 25.27, p. 1076), causing 
tenderness of the upper medial tibia)
•	 weakness and wasting of the quadriceps muscle
•	 restricted flexion/extension with coarse crepitus
•	 bony swelling around the joint line.
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystal 
deposition in association with OA is most common 
at the knee. This may result in a more overt inflamma­
tory component (stiffness, effusions) and super-added 
acute attacks of synovitis (‘pseudogout’, p. 1090), which 
Fig. 25.16  Nodal osteoarthritis. Heberden’s nodes and lateral (radial/
ulnar) deviation of distal interphalangeal joints, with mild Bouchard’s nodes 
at the proximal interphalangeal joints. 
Fig. 25.17  X-ray appearances in hand osteoarthritis. There is 
marked loss of joint space at all of the distal interphalangeal joints, with 
osteophyte formation most marked at the first and second DIP joints. The 
fifth proximal interphalangeal joint also shows loss of joint space with 
osteophyte formation. 
Fig. 25.18  X-ray appearances in knee osteoarthritis. There is 
almost complete loss of joint space affecting both compartments, and 
sclerosis of subchondral bone. 
Fig. 25.19  Typical varus deformity resulting from marked medial 
tibio-femoral osteoarthritis. 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1084
Monoarticular
•	 Previous trauma, localised instability
Pauciarticular or polyarticular
•	 Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (p. 1103)
•	 Metabolic or endocrine disease
Haemochromatosis (p. 972)
Ochronosis
Acromegaly (p. 792)
•	 Spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia
•	 Late avascular necrosis
•	 Neuropathic joint
•	 Kashin–Beck disease
25.39  Causes of early-onset osteoarthritis
Fig. 25.21  X-ray of spine showing typical changes of 
osteoarthritis. Cervical spondylosis showing disc space narrowing 
between C6 and C7, osteophytes at the anterior vertebral body margins 
(arrows) and osteosclerosis at the apophyseal joints. 
Spine OA
The cervical and lumbar spine are predominantly tar­
geted by OA, then referred to as cervical spondylosis 
and lumbar spondylosis, respectively (Fig. 25.21). Spine 
OA may occur in isolation or as part of generalised OA. 
The typical presentation is with pain localised to the low 
back region or the neck, although radiation of pain to 
the arms, buttocks and legs may also occur due to nerve 
root compression. The pain is typically relieved by rest 
and worse on movement. On physical examination, the 
range of movement may be limited and loss of lumbar 
lordosis is typical. The straight leg-raising test or femoral 
stretch test may be positive and neurological signs may 
be seen in the legs where there is complicating spinal 
stenosis or nerve root compression.
Early-onset OA
Unusually, typical symptoms and signs of OA may 
present before the age of 45. In most cases, a single joint 
is affected and there is a clear history of previous trauma. 
However, specific causes of OA need to be considered 
in people with early-onset disease affecting several 
joints, especially those not normally targeted by OA, 
rare causes need to be considered (Box 25.39). Kashin–
Beck disease is a rare form of OA that occurs in children, 
typically between the ages of 7 and 13, in some regions 
may predict more rapid radiographic and clinical 
progression.
Hip OA
Hip OA most commonly targets the superior aspect of 
the joint (Fig. 25.20). This is often unilateral at presenta­
tion, frequently progresses with superolateral migration 
of the femoral head, and has a poor prognosis. The less 
common central (medial) OA shows more central carti­
lage loss and is largely confined to women. It is often 
bilateral at presentation and may associate with gener­
alised nodal OA. It has a better prognosis than superior 
hip OA and progression to axial migration of the femoral 
head is uncommon.
The hip shows the best correlation between symp­
toms and radiographic change. Hip pain is usually 
maximal deep in the anterior groin, with variable radia­
tion to the buttock, anterolateral thigh, knee or shin. 
Lateral hip pain, worse on lying on that side with ten­
derness over the greater trochanter, suggests secondary 
trochanteric bursitis. Common functional difficulties are 
the same as for knee OA; in addition, restricted hip 
abduction in women may cause pain on intercourse. 
Examination may reveal:
•	 an antalgic gait
•	 weakness and wasting of quadriceps and gluteal 
muscles
•	 pain and restriction of internal rotation with the hip 
flexed – the earliest and most sensitive sign of hip 
OA; other movements may subsequently be 
restricted and painful
•	 anterior groin tenderness just lateral to the femoral 
pulse
•	 fixed flexion, external rotation deformity of the hip
•	 ipsilateral leg shortening with severe joint attrition 
and superior femoral migration.
Although obesity is not a major risk factor for devel­
opment of hip OA, it is associated with more rapid 
progression.
Fig. 25.20  X-ray of hip showing changes of osteoarthritis. Note 
the superior joint space narrowing (N), subchondral sclerosis (S), marginal 
osteophytes (white arrows) and cysts (C). 
O
C
N
S
O
Osteoarthritis
25
1085
a physiotherapist (see Box 25.30, p. 1078). Quadriceps 
strengthening exercises are particularly beneficial in 
knee OA. Weight loss can have a substantial beneficial 
effect on symptoms if the patient is obese and is probably 
one of the most effective treatments for reducing pain, 
particularly in OA of the lower limbs. Shock-absorbing 
footwear, pacing of activities, use of a walking stick for 
painful knee or hip OA, or provision of built-up shoes 
to equalise leg lengths can all improve symptoms.
Analgesics and anti-inflammatory 
drugs
If symptoms do not respond to non-pharmacological 
measures, paracetamol should be given. Addition of a 
topical NSAID, and then capsaicin, for knee and hand 
OA can also be helpful. Oral NSAID should be consid­
ered in patients who remain symptomatic. These drugs 
are significantly more effective than paracetamol and 
can be successfully combined with paracetamol or com­
pound analgesics such as co-codamol if the pain is 
severe. Opiates may occasionally be required. For tem­
porary benefit of moderate to severe pain, intra-articular 
injection of corticosteroids can be helpful (see below). 
Local physical therapies such as heat or cold can some­
times give temporary relief. Acupuncture and transcu­
taneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) have also 
been shown to be effective in knee OA. Antineuropathic 
drugs, such as amitriptyline, gabapentin and pregabalin, 
are sometimes used in patients with symptoms that 
are difficult to control, but the evidence base for their 
use is poor.
of China. The cause is unknown but suggested predis­
posing factors are selenium deficiency and contamina­
tion of cereals with mycotoxin-producing fungi.
Erosive OA
This term is used to describe rare patients with hand OA 
who have a more prolonged symptom phase, more overt 
inflammation, more disability and worse outcome than 
those with nodal OA. Distinguishing features include 
preferential targeting of PIP joints, subchondral erosions 
on X-rays, occasional ankylosis of affected joints and 
lack of association with OA elsewhere. It is unclear 
whether erosive OA is part of the spectrum of hand OA 
or a discrete subset.
Investigations
A plain X-ray of the affected joint should be performed 
and often this will show one or more of the typical fea­
tures of OA (see Figs 25.17–25.21). In addition to provid­
ing diagnostic information, X-rays are used to assess the 
severity of structural change, which is useful if joint 
replacement surgery is being considered. Non-weight-
bearing postero-anterior views of the pelvis are ade­
quate for assessing hip OA. Patients with suspected 
knee OA should have standing antero-posterior radio­
graphs taken to assess tibio-femoral cartilage loss, and a 
flexed skyline view to assess patello-femoral involve­
ment. Spine OA can often be diagnosed on plain X-ray, 
which typically shows evidence of disc space narrowing 
and osteophytes. If nerve root compression or spinal 
stenosis is suspected, MRI should be performed.
Routine biochemistry, haematology and autoanti­
body tests are usually normal. Synovial fluid aspirated 
from an affected joint is viscous with a low cell count. 
Radioisotope bone scans performed for other reasons 
often show, as an incidental finding, discrete increased 
uptake in OA joints due to increased bone remodelling.
Unexplained early-onset OA requires additional 
investigation, guided by the suspected underlying con­
dition. X-rays may show typical features of dysplasia or 
avascular necrosis, widening of joint spaces in acro­
megaly, multiple cysts and chondrocalcinosis in haemo­
chromatosis (p. 972), or disorganised architecture in 
neuropathic joints.
Management
Treatment follows the principles outlined on pages 
1077–1081 and in Box 25.40. Measures that are pertinent 
in older people are summarised in Box 25.41.
Education and other  
general measures
It is important to explain the nature of the condition 
fully, outlining the role of relevant risk factors (obesity, 
heredity, trauma) and the fact that established structural 
changes are permanent but that pain and function 
can improve. The prognosis should also be discussed 
(good for nodal hand OA, more optimistic for knee 
than hip OA), as should how appropriate action can 
improve the prognosis of large-joint OA. Exercise has 
beneficial effects in OA, including both strengthening 
and aerobic exercise, preferably with reinforcement by 
‘The following measures have been shown to be effective:
•	 weight loss (if overweight)
•	 quadriceps strengthening exercises (knee OA)
•	 paracetamol and/or topical NSAID
•	 oral NSAID
•	 joint replacement surgery for disabling symptoms.’
For further information 
www.nice.org.uk/CG59
25.40  Management of osteoarthritis
•	 Pain and disability: OA is the principal cause in old age.
•	 Calcium phosphate deposition disease: may cause acute 
attacks of synovitis (pseudogout) on a background of  
chronic OA.
•	 Falls: reduced muscle strength and pain associated with 
lower limb OA increase the risk.
•	 Muscle strengthening exercises: safely reduce the pain 
and disability of knee OA with accompanying improvements 
in balance and reduced tendency to fall.
•	 Oral paracetamol and topical NSAID: safe in older people, 
with no important drug interactions or contraindications.
•	 Intra-articular injection of corticosteroid: a very safe and 
often effective treatment, particularly useful for tiding a 
patient over a special event.
•	 Total joint replacement: an excellent cost-effective 
treatment for severe disabling knee or hip OA in older 
people. There is no age limit for joint replacement surgery.
25.41  Osteoarthritis in old age
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1086
Fig. 25.22  Factors affecting the balance of crystal formation and 
tissue concentration. 
Solute excess
[X] x [Y]
(pH)
(Temperature)
(Pressure)
Nucleating
factors
Growth-promoting
factors
Crystals
Inflammation
Trauma
Reduced solute levels
Reduced solute levels
Tissue inhibitory
factors
Shedding
Dissolution
Bone
Crystal
Associations
Common
Monosodium urate 
monohydrate
Acute gout
Chronic tophaceous gout
Calcium pyrophosphate 
dihydrate
Acute ‘pseudogout’
Chronic (pyrophosphate) arthropathy
Chondrocalcinosis
Basic calcium 
phosphates
Calcific periarthritis
Calcinosis
Uncommon
Cholesterol
Chronic effusions in RA
Calcium oxalate
Acute arthritis in dialysis patients
Extrinsic crystals/semi- 
crystalline particles
Synthetic crystals
Acute synovitis
Plant thorns/sea  
urchin spines
Chronic monoarthritis, tenosynovitis
25.42  Crystal-associated arthritis and deposition 
in connective tissue
Corticosteroid injections
Intra-articular corticosteroid injections are effective in 
the treatment of knee OA and are also used for sympto­
matic relief in the treatment of OA at the first CMC joint. 
The duration of effect is usually short but trials of serial 
corticosteroid injections every 3 months in knee OA 
have shown efficacy for up to 1 year.
Chondroitin and glucosamine
Chondroitin sulphate and glucosamine sulphate have 
been used alone and in combination for the treatment of 
knee OA. There is evidence from randomised controlled 
trials that these agents can improve knee pain to a small 
extent (3–5%), as compared with placebo. Although 
NICE did not consider these differences to be clinically 
significant, the beneficial effects of paracetamol in knee 
OA are equally small.
Hyaluronan injections
In knee OA, intra-articular injection of one of several 
forms of hyaluronan (polymers of hyaluronate), usually 
given as a course of weekly injections for 3–5 weeks, 
may give modest pain relief for several months. 
However, evidence for efficacy is heterogeneous and the 
expense of this treatment and the common requirement 
for serial injection mean that hyaluronan injections are 
not recommended for OA by NICE.
Disease-modifying therapies
There are no licensed drugs that can halt the progression 
of OA. Glucosamine sulphate was shown in one study 
to slow the rate of radiological progression in knee OA 
and to reduce the number of subjects who progressed to 
joint replacement but the study has been criticised on 
methodological grounds. A recent randomised control­
led trial suggested that strontium ranelate might also be 
effective in reducing the rate of progression of knee OA 
but it is not licensed for this indication.
Surgery
Surgery should be considered for patients with OA 
whose pain, stiffness and reduced function impact sig­
nificantly on their quality of life and are refractory to 
other treatments. Osteotomy can prolong the life of 
malaligned joints and relieve pain by reducing intra­
osseous pressure, but is performed infrequently. Total 
joint replacement surgery is by far the most common 
surgical procedure for patients with OA. It can trans­
form the quality of life for people with severe knee or 
hip OA and is indicated when there is significant 
structural damage on X-ray, and pain and functional 
impairment are limiting quality of life despite the use of 
medical therapy. Although surgery should not be under­
taken at an early stage during the development of OA, 
it is important to consider it before functional limitation 
has become advanced since this may compromise the 
surgical outcome. Patient-specific factors, such as age, 
gender, smoking and presence of obesity, should not be 
barriers to referral for joint replacement.
Only a small proportion of patients with OA progress 
to the extent that total joint replacement is required, but 
OA is by far the most frequent indication for a total joint 
replacement. Over 95% of joint replacements continue to 
function well into the second decade after surgery and 
most provide life-long, pain-free function. However, 
some 20% of patients are not satisfied with the outcome, 
and a few experience little or no improvement in pain.
CRYSTAL-INDUCED ARTHRITIS
A variety of crystals can deposit in and around joints 
and cause an acute inflammatory arthritis, as well as a 
Crystal-induced arthritis
25
1087
more chronic arthritis associated with progressive joint 
damage (Box 25.42). Crystals can be the primary patho­
genic agent, as in gout, or an accessory factor, as in 
calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease, in which 
crystals are deposited in joints that are already abnor­
mal. Several factors influence crystal formation (Fig. 
25.22). There must be sufficient concentration of the 
chemical components (ionic product), but whether a 
crystal then forms depends on the balance of tissue 
factors that promote and inhibit crystal nucleation and 
growth. Many tissues are supersaturated for the various 
products but depend on natural inhibitors to prevent 
crystallisation. The inflammatory potential of crystals 
resides in their physical irregularity and high negative 
surface charge, which can induce inflammation and 
damage cell membranes. Crystals may also cause 
mechanical damage to tissues and act as wear particles 
at the joint surface. Crystals can paradoxically reside in 
cartilage or tendon for years without causing inflamma­
tion or symptoms, and it is only when they are released 
that they trigger inflammation. This may occur sponta­
neously but can also result from local trauma, changes 
in the concentration of the components that form crys­
tals, or be part of an acute phase response due to inter­
current illness or surgery.
Gout
Gout is an inflammatory disease caused by deposition 
of monosodium urate monohydrate crystals in and 
around synovial joints.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of gout varies between populations but 
is approximately 1–2%, with a greater than 5 : 1 male 
preponderance. It is the most common inflammatory 
arthritis in men and in older women. The risk of devel­
oping gout increases with age and with serum uric acid 
(SUA) levels, which are normally distributed in the 
general population. Levels are higher in men, increase 
with age and are associated with body weight. Levels 
are higher in some ethnic groups (such as Maoris and 
Pacific islanders). Hyperuricaemia is defined as an SUA 
level greater than 2 standard deviations above the mean 
for the population. Gout has become more common over 
recent years in parallel with increased longevity and the 
higher prevalence of metabolic syndrome, of which 
hyperuricaemia is an integral component. Although 
hyperuricaemia is an independent risk factor for hyper­
tension, vascular disease, renal disease and cardiovascu­
lar events, only a minority of hyperuricaemic people 
develop gout. There is currently no evidence to support 
the use of urate-lowering therapy in patients with 
asymptomatic hyperuricaemia.
Pathophysiology
About one-third of the body uric acid pool is derived 
from dietary sources and two-thirds from endogenous 
purine metabolism (Fig. 25.23). The concentration of uric 
acid in body fluids depends on the balance between 
endogenous synthesis, and elimination by the kidneys 
(two-thirds) and gut (one-third). Purine nucleotide syn­
thesis and degradation are regulated by a network of 
enzyme pathways. Xanthine oxidase catalyses the end 
conversion of hypoxanthine to xanthine and then xan­
thine to uric acid.
The causes of hyperuricaemia are shown in Box 25.43. 
In over 90% of patients, the main abnormality is reduced 
uric acid excretion by the renal tubules, which impairs 
the body’s ability to respond to a purine load. In many 
cases, this is genetically determined and recent studies 
Fig. 25.23  The uric acid pool. Origins and disposal of uric acid. 
(≅ 600–700 mg/day)  
De novo
purine
synthesis
Tissue
nucleotides
Purine
nucleotides
(≅ 300–600
  mg/day) 
Dietary
purines
Purine
bases
Uric acid
pool
≅ 1200 mg 
Renal excretion
(≅ 600 mg/day) 
2/3rd
1/3rd
Intestinal excretion
(≅ 300 mg/day) 
Diminished renal excretion
•	 Increased renal tubular 
reabsorption*
•	 Renal failure
•	 Lead toxicity
•	 Lactic acidosis
•	 Alcohol
•	 Drugs
Thiazide and loop diuretics
Low-dose aspirin
Ciclosporin
Pyrazinamide
Increased intake
•	 Red meat
•	 Seafood
•	 Offal
Over-production of uric acid
•	 Myeloproliferative and 
lymphoproliferative disease
•	 Psoriasis
•	 High fructose intake
•	 Glycogen storage disease  
(p. 450)
•	 Inherited disorders
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome 
(HPRT mutations)
Phosphoribosyl 
pyrophosphate synthetase 
1 mutations
*Usually genetically determined (see text).
(HPRT = hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase)
25.43  Causes of hyperuricaemia and gout
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1088
Fig. 25.24  Podagra. Acute gout causing swelling, erythema and extreme 
pain and tenderness of the first metatarsophalangeal joint. 
have identified polymorphisms in several genes that are 
associated with gout, the most important of which is 
SLC2A9, which regulates urate excretion by the kidney. 
Impaired renal excretion of urate also accounts for the 
occurrence of hyperuricaemia in chronic renal failure, 
and for the association between hyperuricaemia and 
treatment with thiazide diuretics.
Other risk factors for gout include metabolic syn­
drome (p. 805), high alcohol intake (predominantly beer, 
which contains guanosine), generalised osteoarthritis, a 
diet relatively high in red meat or fructose or relatively 
low in vitamin C or coffee, and lead poisoning (satur­
nine gout). The association between OA and gout is 
thought to be due to reduction in levels of proteo­glycan 
and other inhibitors of crystal formation in osteoarthritic 
cartilage, predisposing to crystal formation.
Some patients develop gout because they over-
produce uric acid. The mechanisms are poorly under­
stood, except in the case of a few rare disorders, in which 
gout is inherited in a Mendelian manner as the result of 
mutations in genes responsible for purine synthesis (see 
Box 25.43). Lesch–Nyhan syndrome for example, is an 
X-linked recessive form of gout that is also associated 
with mental retardation, self-mutilation and choreo­
athetosis. Such conditions should be suspected if other 
clinical features are present or there is an early age at 
onset with a positive family history. Severe hyperuricae­
mia can also occur in patients with leukaemia undergo­
ing chemotherapy due to increased purine turnover.
Clinical features
The classical presentation is with an acute monoarthritis, 
which in over 50% of cases affects the first MTP joint 
(Fig. 25.24). Other common sites are the ankle, midfoot, 
knee, small joints of hands, wrist and elbow. The axial 
skeleton and large proximal joints are rarely involved. 
Typical features include:
•	 rapid onset, reaching maximum severity in  
2–6 hours, and often waking the patient in the  
early morning
•	 severe pain, often described as the ‘worst pain ever’
•	 extreme tenderness, such that the patient is unable 
to wear a sock or to let bedding rest on the joint
•	 marked swelling with overlying red, shiny skin
•	 self-limiting over 5–14 days, with complete 
resolution.
During the attack, the joint shows signs of marked 
synovitis, swelling and erythema. There may be accom­
panying fever, malaise and even confusion, especially if 
a large joint such as the knee is involved. As the attack 
subsides, pruritus and desquamation of overlying skin 
are common. The main differential diagnosis is septic 
arthritis, infective cellulitis or reactive arthritis. Acute 
attacks may also manifest as bursitis, tenosynovitis or 
cellulitis, which have the same clinical characteristics. 
Many patients describe milder episodes lasting just a 
few days. Some have attacks in more than one joint. 
Others have further attacks in other joints a few days 
later (cluster attacks), the first possibly acting as a trigger. 
Simultaneous polyarticular attacks are unusual.
Some people never have a second episode after an 
acute attack. In others, several years may elapse before 
the next attack. In many, however, a second attack 
occurs within 1 year and may progress to chronic gout, 
with chronic pain and joint damage, and occasionally 
severe deformity and functional impairment. Patients 
with uncontrolled hyperuricaemia who suffer multiple 
attacks of acute gout may also progress to chronic gout.
Crystals may be deposited in the joints and soft 
tissues to produce irregular firm nodules called tophi. 
These have a predilection for the extensor surfaces of 
fingers, hands, forearm, elbows, Achilles tendons and 
sometimes the helix of the ear. Tophi have a white 
colour, differentiating them from rheumatoid nodules 
(Fig. 25.25). Tophi can ulcerate, discharging white gritty 
material, become infected or induce a local inflamma­
tory response, with erythema and pus in the absence 
of secondary infection. They are usually a feature of 
long-standing gout but can sometimes develop within 
Fig. 25.25  Tophus with white monosodium urate monohydrate 
crystals visible beneath the skin. Diuretic-induced gout in a patient 
with pre-existing nodal OA. 
Crystal-induced arthritis
25
1089
prescribed with caution in old age. Local ice packs can 
also be used for symptomatic relief. Patients with recur­
rent episodes can keep a supply of an NSAID and take 
it as soon as the first symptoms occur, continuing until 
the attack resolves. Oral colchicine, which works by 
inhibiting microtubule assembly in neutrophils, is also 
very effective. It is usually given in doses of 0.5 mg twice 
or 3 times daily. The most common adverse effects are 
nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. Joint aspiration can 
give pain relief, and may be combined with an intra-
articular steroid injection if the diagnosis is clear and 
infection can be excluded. A short course of oral or intra­
muscular corticosteroids can also be highly effective in 
treating acute attacks.
Patients who have more than one acute attack within 
12 months and those with complications should be 
offered urate-lowering therapy (Box 25.44). The long-
term therapeutic aim is to prevent attacks occurring by 
bringing uric acid levels below the level at which mono­
sodium urate monohydrate crystals form. A therapeutic 
target of 360 µmol/L (6 mg/dL) is recommended in the 
British Society of Rheumatology guidelines, whereas the 
European League Against Rheumatism guidelines rec­
ommend a threshold of 300 µmol/L (5 mg/dL).
Allopurinol is the drug of first choice. It is a xanthine 
oxidase inhibitor, which reduces the conversion of 
hypoxanthine and xanthine to uric acid. The recom­
mended starting dose is 100 mg daily, or 50 mg in older 
patients and in renal impairment. The dose of allopuri­
nol should be increased by 100 mg every 4 weeks (50 mg 
in the elderly and those with renal impairment) until the 
target uric acid level is achieved, side-effects occur or the 
maximum recommended dose is reached (900 mg/day). 
Acute flares of gout often occur following initiation of 
urate-lowering therapy. The patient should be warned 
about this and told to continue therapy, even if an attack 
occurs. The risk of flares can be reduced by administra­
tion of oral colchicine (0.5 mg twice daily) or NSAID 
therapy for the first few months. In the longer term, 
annual moni­toring of uric acid levels is recommended. 
In most patients, urate-lowering therapy needs to be 
continued indefinitely.
Febuxostat is a xanthine oxidase inhibitor that is 
useful in patients who fail to respond adequately to 
allopurinol, and those in whom it is contraindicated or 
has been poorly tolerated. It undergoes hepatic metabo­
lism and so no dose adjustment is required for renal 
impairment. It is more effective than allopurinol at 
reducing uric acid levels and, as a result, commonly 
provokes attacks at the recommended starting dose 
(80 mg daily). In view of this, treatment with colchicine 
or NSAID should be considered for the initial 6 months.
Uricosuric drugs, such as probenecid or sulfinpyra­
zone, can be effective but require several doses each 
day and maintenance of a high urine flow to avoid uric 
12 months in patients with chronic renal failure. Occa­
sionally, tophi may develop in the absence of pre­vious 
acute attacks, especially in patients on thiazide therapy 
who have coexisting OA.
In addition to causing musculoskeletal disease, 
chronic hyperuricaemia may be complicated by renal 
stone formation (p. 507) and, if severe, renal impairment 
due to the development of interstitial nephritis as the 
result of urate deposition in the kidney. This is particu­
larly common in patients with chronic tophaceous gout 
who are on diuretic therapy.
Investigations
The diagnosis of gout can be confirmed by the identifica­
tion of urate crystals in the aspirate from a joint, bursa 
or tophus (see Fig. 25.5A, p. 1064). In acute gout, syno­
vial fluid shows increased turbidity due to the greatly 
elevated cell count (> 90% neutrophils). In chronic gout, 
the appearance is more variable but occasionally the 
fluid appears white due to the high crystal load. Between 
attacks, aspiration of an asymptomatic first MTP joint or 
knee may still reveal crystals.
A biochemical screen, including renal function, uric 
acid, glucose and lipid profile, should be performed 
because of the association with metabolic syndrome. 
Although hyperuricaemia is usually present, this does 
not confirm the diagnosis. Conversely, normal uric acid 
levels during an attack do not exclude gout, as serum 
urate falls during the acute phase response. Elevated 
ESR and CRP and a neutrophilia are typical of acute 
gout, and they return to normal as the attack subsides. 
Tophaceous gout may be accompanied by a modest but 
chronic elevation in ESR and CRP.
Radiographs are usually normal in acute gout but 
well-demarcated erosions may be seen in patients with 
chronic or tophaceous gout (Fig. 25.26). Tophi may also 
be visible on X-rays as soft tissue swellings. In late 
disease, destructive changes may occur similar to those 
in other forms of advanced inflammatory arthritis.
Management
Oral NSAIDs are effective for pain relief in the acute 
attack and are the standard treatment, but have to be 
Fig. 25.26  Erosive arthritis in chronic gout. Punched-out erosions 
are visible (arrows), in association with a destructive arthritis affecting the 
first metatarsophalangeal joint. 
•	 Recurrent attacks of  
acute gout
•	 Tophi
•	 Evidence of bone or joint 
damage
•	 Renal impairment
•	 Nephrolithiasis
•	 Very high levels of serum 
uric acid
25.44  Indications for urate-lowering drugs
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1090
*May be associated with structural damage to affected joints.
Common
•	 Age
•	 Osteoarthritis*
•	 Primary hyperparathyroidism
Rare
•	 Familial*
•	 Haemochromatosis*
•	 Hypophosphatasia
•	 Hypomagnesaemia
•	 Wilson’s disease
25.46  Risk factors for chondrocalcinosis
Fig. 25.27  Chondrocalcinosis of the knee. The X-ray shows 
calcification of the fibrocartilaginous menisci (M) and articular hyaline 
cartilage (H). There is also narrowing (N) and osteophyte (O) of the medial 
tibio-femoral compartment. 
H
M
N
O
and an incidental finding on X-ray examination, but 
others present with an acute inflammatory arthritis 
(pseudogout) or a chronic inflammatory arthropathy 
superimposed on a background of OA, especially at the 
knee (Fig. 25.27), associated with joint damage and func­
tional limitation.
Pathophysiology
The underlying mechanisms of crystal deposition are 
poorly understood. Clinical studies have shown that 
pyrophosphate levels are raised in patients with 
CPPD crystal deposition disease, possibly due to 
over-production, but why this occurs is unclear. In 
hypophosphatasia, the predisposing factor is thought to 
be impaired degradation of pyrophosphate due to muta­
tions in the genes that encode ALP. OA is thought to 
predispose to CPPD crystal deposition disease because 
of a reduction in the amounts of proteoglycan and other 
natural inhibitors of crystal formation in the abnormal 
cartilage.
Clinical features
A common presentation is with an acute inflammatory 
arthritis that resembles acute gout, sometimes termed 
‘pseudogout’. Examination reveals a warm, tender 
•	 Aetiology: a higher proportion of older patients have gout 
secondary to diuretic use and chronic kidney disease. Gout  
is often associated with OA.
•	 Presentation: may be atypical, with painful tophi and chronic 
symptoms, rather than acute attacks. Joints of the upper 
limbs are more frequently affected.
•	 Management: acute attacks are best treated by aspiration 
and intra-articular injection of corticosteroids, followed by 
early mobilisation. NSAID and colchicine should be used with 
caution because of increased risk of toxicity. Low doses of 
allopurinol (50 mg/day) should be given, and increased 
gradually to avoid toxicity.
25.45  Gout in old age
acid crystallisation in renal tubules. Salicylates antago­
nise the uricosuric action of these drugs and should 
be avoided. Uricosurics are contraindicated in over-
producers, those with renal impairment and in urolithi­
asis (they increase stone formation). The uricosuric 
benzbromarone can be very effective and safe in mild to 
moderate renal impairment, but can cause hepatotoxic­
ity. It is not licensed in the UK for the treatment of 
hyperuricaemia.
Pegloticase is a biological treatment in which the 
enzyme uricase has been conjugated to monomethoxy­
polyethylene glycol. It is indicated for the treatment of 
tophaceous gout resistant to standard therapy and is 
administered as an intravenous infusion every 2 weeks 
for up to 6 months. It is highly effective at controlling 
hyperuricaemia and causes regression of tophi. The 
main adverse effects are infusion reactions (which can 
be treated with antihistamines or steroids) and flares of 
gout during the first 3 months of therapy. A limiting 
factor for longer-term treatment is the development of 
antibodies to pegloticase, which occur in a high propor­
tion of cases and are associated with an impaired thera­
peutic response.
In addition to drug treatment, predisposing factors 
should be corrected if possible. Patients should be 
advised to lose weight where appropriate and to reduce 
excessive alcohol intake, especially beer. Thiazide diu­
retics should be stopped if possible and substituted with 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, as 
these have a uricosuric effect. Patients should be advised 
to avoid large amounts of seafood and offal, which have 
a high purine content, but a highly restrictive diet is not 
necessary.
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate 
crystal deposition disease
This condition is associated with deposition of calcium 
pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystals within articu­
lar and hyaline cartilage and is sometimes known as 
‘pseudogout’. It is rare under the age of 55, but occurs 
in 10–15% of people between the ages of 65 and 75 years 
and in 30–60% of those over 85. The knee (hyaline carti­
lage and menisci) is by far the most common site, fol­
lowed by the wrist (triangular fibrocartilage) and pelvis 
(symphysis pubis). Risk factors are shown in Box 25.46. 
In many patients, chondrocalcinosis is asymptomatic 
Crystal-induced arthritis
25
1091
erythematous joint with signs of a large effusion. Fever 
is common and the patient may appear confused and ill. 
The knee is most commonly affected, followed by the 
wrist, shoulder, ankle and elbow. Trigger factors include 
trauma, intercurrent illness and surgery. Sepsis and gout 
are the main differential diagnoses.
Chronic arthropathy may also occur in association 
with CPPD crystal deposition disease, affecting the same 
joints that are involved in acute pseudogout. The pres­
entation is with chronic pain, early morning stiffness, 
inactivity gelling and functional impairment. Acute 
attacks of pseudogout may be superimposed. Affected 
joints usually show features of OA, with varying degrees 
of synovitis. Effusion and synovial thickening are 
usually most apparent at knees and wrists; wrist involve­
ment may result in carpal tunnel syndrome. Inflamma­
tory features may be sufficiently pronounced to suggest 
RA, but tenosynovitis and extra-articular involvement 
are absent, and large and medium rather than small 
joints are targeted. Severe damage and instability of 
knees or shoulders may occasionally lead to considera­
tion of a neuropathic joint, but no neurological abnor­
malities will be found.
Investigations
Examination of synovial fluid using compensated polar­
ised microscopy will demonstrate CPPD crystals (see 
Fig. 25.5B, p. 1064) and permit distinction from gout. The 
aspirated fluid is often turbid and may be uniformly 
blood-stained, reflecting the severity of inflammation. 
Since sepsis and pseudogout can coexist, Gram stain 
and culture of the fluid should be performed to 
exclude sepsis, even if CPPD crystals are identified in 
synovial fluid.
X-rays of the affected joint may show evidence of 
calcification in hyaline cartilage and/or fibrocartilage, 
although absence of calcification does not exclude the 
diagnosis. Signs of OA are frequently present. Screening 
for secondary causes (see Box 25.46) should be under­
taken, especially in patients who present under the age 
of 25 and those with polyarticular disease.
Management
Joint aspiration can often provide symptomatic relief in 
pseudogout and sometimes no further treatment is 
required. Patients with persistent symptoms can be 
treated with intra-articular corticosteroids, colchicine 
or NSAID. Since most patients with pseudogout are 
elderly, NSAID must be used with caution. Early active 
mobilisation is also important. Chronic pyrophosphate-
induced arthropathy should be managed as for OA 
(p. 1085).
Basic calcium phosphate  
deposition disease
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP) deposition disease is 
caused by the deposition of hydroxyapatite or apatite 
crystals and other basic calcium phosphate salts (octa­
calcium phosphate, tricalcium phosphate) in soft tissues. 
The main affected sites are tendons, ligaments and 
hyaline cartilage in patients with degenerative disease, 
and skeletal muscle and subcutaneous tissues in connec­
tive tissue diseases.
Pathophysiology
Under normal circumstances, inhibitors of mineralisa­
tion, such as pyrophosphate and proteoglycans, inhibit 
calcification of soft tissues. When these protective mech­
anisms break down, abnormal calcification occurs. There 
are many causes (Box 25.47). In most situations, calcifica­
tion is of no consequence, but when the crystals are 
released, an inflammatory reaction may be initiated, 
causing local pain and inflammation.
Calcific periarthritis
Deposition of BCP in tendons may result in an acute 
inflammatory response. The most commonly affected 
site is the supraspinatus tendon (Fig. 25.28) but other 
sites may also be affected, including the tendons around 
the hip, feet and hands. The presentation is with acute 
pain, swelling and local tenderness that develops rapidly 
Disease
Site of calcification
Calcific periarthritis
Tendons and ligaments
Dermatomyositis and 
polymyositis
Subcutaneous tissue
Systemic sclerosis and 
CREST syndrome
Subcutaneous tissue
Mixed connective tissue 
disease
Subcutaneous tissue
Paget’s disease of bone
Blood vessels
Ankylosing spondylitis
Ligaments
Fibrodysplasia ossificans 
progressiva
Subcutaneous tissues and muscle
Milwaukee shoulder 
syndrome
Tendons and ligaments
Albright’s hereditary 
osteodystrophy
Muscle
(CREST = calcinosis, Raynaud’s, oesophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, 
telangiectasia)
25.47  Rheumatic diseases associated with 
basic calcium phosphate deposition
Fig. 25.28  Shoulder X-ray showing supraspinatus tendon 
calcification (arrow). 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1092
Fig. 25.29  Possible causative mechanisms in fibromyalgia. 
Disease
Illness
Regional pain
syndrome
Anxiety
Life crisis
Sleep disturbance
Non-restorative sleep
Reduced activity
Poor aerobic
fitness
Pain
Fatigue
Functional
disturbance
‘Epidemiological studies show that widespread body pain, 
fatigue, psychological distress and multiple hyperalgesic tender 
sites cluster together and associate with stressful life events.’
•	 Wolfe F, et al. Arthritis Rheum 1995; 38:19–28.
•	 Croft P, et al. BMJ 1994; 309:696–699.
25.48  Predisposing factors for fibromyalgia
over 4–6 hours. The overlying skin may be hot and red, 
raising the possibility of infection. Attacks sometimes 
occur spontaneously but can also be triggered by trauma. 
Modest systemic upset and fever are common. X-rays 
show tendon calcification. If the affected joint or bursa 
is aspirated, inflammatory fluid containing many 
calcium-staining (alizarin red S) aggregates may be 
obtained. During an acute attack, there may be a neu­
trophilia with an elevation in ESR and CRP. Routine 
biochemistry is normal. Treatment is with analgesics 
and NSAID. Attacks may also respond to a local injec­
tion of corticosteroid. The condition usually resolves 
spontaneously over 1–3 weeks and this is often accom­
panied by dispersal and disappearance of small to 
medium-sized BCP deposits on X-ray. Large deposits 
sometimes accumulate, causing limitation of joint move­
ment, and may require surgical removal.
Acute inflammatory arthritis
Deposition of BCP occurs commonly in OA, both alone 
and in combination with CPPD crystals, when it is 
referred to as mixed crystal deposition disease. It may 
present with pseudogout or be an incidental finding.
Milwaukee shoulder syndrome
This is a rare syndrome, in which extensive deposition 
of BCP crystals in large joints is associated with progres­
sive joint destruction. It is more common in women than 
in men. The onset is gradual with joint pain, sometimes 
precipitated by injury or overuse. The disease progresses 
over a few months to cause severe pain and disability, 
associated with joint destruction. X-rays show joint 
space narrowing, osteophytes and calcification. Aspira­
tion yields large volumes of relatively non-inflammatory 
fluid containing abundant BCP aggregates and often 
cartilage fragments. The differential diagnosis is end-
stage avascular necrosis, chronic sepsis or neuropathic 
joint. There is no acute phase response and synovial 
fluid cultures are negative.
Treatment is with analgesics, intra-articular injection 
of corticosteroids, local physical treatments and physio­
therapy. The clinical outcome is poor, however, and 
most patients require joint replacement. The cause is 
incompletely understood but it has been speculated that 
deposition of BCP crystals activates collagenase and 
other proteases in articular cells, which are responsible 
for the tissue damage.
Connective tissue disease
Deposition of BCP may occur in the subcutaneous 
tissues and muscle of patients with scleroderma and 
other connective tissue disease. Usually, the deposits are 
asymptomatic but can be associated with pain and local 
ulceration. There is no specific treatment.
FIBROMYALGIA
This is a common cause of generalised regional pain and 
disability, and is frequently associated with medically 
unexplained symptoms in other systems (p. 236). The 
prevalence in the UK and US is about 2–3%. Although 
fibromyalgia can occur at any age, including adoles­
cence, it increases in prevalence with age, to reach a peak 
of 7% in women aged over 70. There is a strong female 
predominance of around 10 : 1. Risk factors include life 
events that cause psychosocial distress, such as marital 
disharmony, alcoholism in the family, injury or assault, 
low income and self-reported childhood abuse (Box 
25.48). It occurs in a wide variety of races and cultures.
Pathophysiology
The cause of fibromyalgia is poorly understood but two 
abnormalities that may be interrelated (Fig. 25.29) have 
been consistently reported in affected patients.
Sleep abnormality
Delta waves are characteristic of deep stages of 
non-rapid eye movement (non-REM) sleep, usually 
occurring in the first few hours and thought to have an 
important restorative function. People with fibromyal­
gia have reduced delta sleep in a pattern distinct from 
that seen with depression. Furthermore, deprivation of 
delta but not REM sleep in normal volunteers produces 
the symptoms and signs of fibromyalgia, supporting it 
as a non-restorative sleep disorder.
Abnormal peripheral and central pain processing
A reduced threshold of pain perception and tolerance at 
characteristic sites throughout the body is characteristic 
of fibromyalgia. Affected people have peripheral sensi­
tisation and spinal cord ‘wind-up’ (pain amplification), 
with an exaggerated skin flare response to topically 
applied capsaicin, and frequent occurrence of dermato­
graphism and allodynia (normally non-noxious stimuli 
become painful). Abnormal central pain processing is 
suggested by altered cerebrospinal fluid levels of sub­
stance P (increased) and serotonin (reduced); reduced 
basal levels of regional cerebral blood flow in the 
Fibromyalgia
25
1093
they may be unable to perform tasks such as shopping 
or housework. They may have experienced major 
difficulties at work or even retire because of pain 
and fatigue.
Examination is unremarkable, apart from the pres­
ence of hyperalgesia on moderate digital pressure in 
multiple sites (Fig. 25.30). The tenderness can be quan­
titated using metered dolorimeters but moderate digital 
pressure, enough just to whiten the nail, is sufficient for 
clinical diagnosis. Patients with other musculo­skeletal 
diseases can develop fibromyalgia and it is important to 
determine to what extent symptoms are related to fibro­
myalgia or a coexisting disease.
Investigations and management
There are no abnormalities on routine blood tests or 
imaging, but it is important to screen for other condi­
tions that could contribute to some of the patient’s 
symptoms (Box 25.50).
The aims of management are to educate the patient 
about the condition, achieve pain control and improve 
sleep. Wherever possible, education should include the 
caudate and thalamus with an augmented processing 
response on functional MRI; low basal free cortisol and 
reduction in evening trough; and altered descending 
inhibition via the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal and 
growth hormone somatomedin axes.
Clinical features
The main presenting feature is widespread pain, which 
is often worst in the neck and back (Box 25.49). The pain 
is characteristically diffuse and unresponsive to analge­
sics and NSAID. Physiotherapy often makes it worse. 
Fatiguability, most prominent in the morning, is another 
major problem and disability is often marked. Although 
people can usually dress, feed and groom themselves, 
Usual symptoms
•	 Multiple regional pain
•	 Marked fatigability
•	 Marked disability
•	 Broken, non-restorative  
sleep
•	 Low affect, irritability, 
weepiness
•	 Poor concentration, 
forgetfulness
Variable locomotor symptoms
•	 Early morning stiffness
•	 Swelling of hands, fingers
•	 Numbness, tingling of all 
fingers
Additional, variable, non-locomotor symptoms
•	 Non-throbbing bifrontal headache (tension headache)
•	 Colicky abdominal pain, bloating, variable bowel habit 
(irritable bowel syndrome)
•	 Bladder fullness, nocturnal frequency (irritable bladder)
•	 Hyperacusis, dyspareunia, discomfort when touched 
(allodynia)
•	 Frequent side-effects with drugs (chemical sensitivity)
25.49  Clinical features in fibromyalgia
Test
Condition screened
Full blood count
Anaemia, lymphopenia of SLE
Erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate, C-reactive protein
Inflammatory disease
Thyroid function
Hypothyroidism
Calcium, alkaline 
phosphatase
Hyperparathyroidism, 
osteomalacia
Antinuclear antibodies
SLE
25.50  Minimum investigation screen in 
fibromyalgia
Fig. 25.30  Typical tender spots in fibromyalgia. 
Interspinous
ligaments C5–7
Mid-supraspinatus
Interspinous
ligaments L4/5
Mid-gluteal
Second/third
costochondral
junctions
1 cm distal to
lateral epicondyle
Medial fat pad
(upper medial tibia)
Skin-fold rolling
of mid-trapezius
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1094
•	 Vertebral infection: more common. Recognition may be 
delayed, as symptoms may be attributed to compression 
fractures caused by osteoporosis.
•	 Peripheral vascular disease: leads to more frequent 
involvement of the bones of the feet, and diabetic foot ulcers 
are also commonly complicated by osteomyelitis.
•	 Prosthetic joint infections: now more common because of 
the increased frequency of prosthetic joint insertion in older 
people.
•	 Gram-negative bacilli: more frequent pathogens than in 
younger people.
25.51  Joint and bone infection in old age
spouse, family or carer. It should be acknowledged that 
the cause of fibromyalgia is not fully understood but the 
widespread pain does not reflect inflammation, tissue 
damage or disease. The model of a self-perpetuating 
cycle of poor sleep and pain (see Fig. 25.29) is a useful 
framework for problem-based management. Under­
standing the diagnosis can often help the patient come 
to terms with the symptoms. Repeat or drawn-out inves­
tigation may reinforce beliefs in occult serious pathology 
and should be avoided.
Low-dose amitriptyline (10–75 mg at night), with or 
without fluoxetine, may help by encouraging delta sleep 
and reducing spinal cord wind-up. Many people with 
fibromyalgia, however, are intolerant of even small 
doses of amitriptyline. There is limited evidence for 
the use of tramadol, serotonin–noradrenaline (norepi­
nephrine) re-uptake inhibitors (SNRIs) such as duloxet­
ine, and the anticonvulsants pregabalin and gabapentin. 
A graded increase in aerobic exercise can improve well-
being and sleep quality. The use of self-help strategies 
and a cognitive behavioural approach with relaxation 
techniques should be encouraged. Sublimated anxiety 
relating to distressing life events should be specifically 
explored with appropriate counselling. There are patient 
organisations that provide additional information and 
support.
The prognosis for hospital-diagnosed fibromyalgia is 
poor. Although treatment may improve quality of life 
and ability to cope, most people do not lose their symp­
toms over 5 years. Subjects diagnosed in primary care, 
or who have sublimated anxiety that can be successfully 
addressed, may fare better.
BONE AND JOINT INFECTION
Septic arthritis
Septic arthritis is the most rapid and destructive joint 
disease, and is associated with significant morbidity and 
a mortality of 10%. This has not improved over the last 
20 years, despite advances in antimicrobial therapy. The 
incidence is 2–10 per 100 000 in the general population, 
and 30–70 per 100 000 in those with pre-existing joint 
disease or joint replacement.
Septic arthritis is usually due to haematogenous 
spread from either skin or upper respiratory tract; infec­
tion from direct puncture wounds or secondary to joint 
aspiration is uncommon. Risk factors include increasing 
age, pre-existing joint disease (principally RA), diabetes 
mellitus, immunosuppression (by drugs or disease) and 
intravenous drug misuse. In RA, the skin is a frequent 
portal of entry because of maceration of skin between 
the toes due to joint deformity and difficulties with foot 
hygiene due to hand deformity. Box 25.51 describes the 
particular considerations in old age.
Clinical features
The usual presentation is with acute or subacute mono­
arthritis and fever. The joint is usually swollen, hot 
and red, with pain at rest and on movement. Although 
any joint can be affected, lower limb joints, such as 
the knee and hip, are commonly targeted. Patients with 
pre-existing arthritis may present with multiple joint 
involvement.
In adults, the most likely organism is Staphylococcus 
aureus, particularly in patients with RA and diabetes. In 
young, sexually active adults, disseminated gonococcal 
infection occurs in up to 3% of untreated gonorrhoea, 
usually presenting with migratory arthralgia, low-grade 
fever and tenosynovitis, which may precede the devel­
opment of oligo- or monoarthritis. Painful pustular skin 
lesions may also be present. Amongst the elderly and 
intravenous drug users, Gram-negative bacilli or group 
B, C and G streptococci are important causes. Group A 
streptococci, pneumococci, meningococci and Haemo-
philus influenzae are occasionally isolated.
Investigations
The pivotal investigation is joint aspiration but blood 
cultures should also be taken. The synovial fluid is 
usually turbid or blood-stained but may appear normal. 
If the joint is not readily accessible, aspiration should be 
performed under imaging guidance or in theatre. Pros­
thetic joints should only be aspirated in theatre.
Synovial fluid should be sent for Gram stain and 
culture; cultures are positive in around 90% of cases, but 
the Gram stain is positive in only 50%. In contrast, syno­
vial fluid culture is positive in only 30% of gonococcal 
infections, making it important to obtain concurrent cul­
tures from the genital tract (positive in 70–90% of cases). 
There is a leucocytosis with raised ESR and CRP in most 
patients, but these features may be absent in elderly or 
immunocompromised patients, or early in the disease 
course. Serial measurements of CRP and ESR are useful 
in following the response to treatment.
Management
The principles of management are summarised in Box 
25.52. The patient should be admitted to hospital for 
pain relief and administration of parenteral antibiotics. 
Flucloxacillin (2 g IV 4 times daily) is the antibiotic of 
first choice pending the results of cultures, since it will 
cover most staphylococcal and streptococcal infections. 
If there is reason to suspect a Gram-negative infection, 
then a cephalosporin or gentamicin should be added. 
Microbiology advice should be sought in complicated 
situations such as intravenous drug users, patients in 
intensive care and those who might be colonised by 
resistant organisms. It is traditional to continue intra­
venous antibiotics for 2 weeks and to follow this with 
oral treatment for another 4 weeks, but there is no evi­
dence to support the optimal duration of treatment. Joint 
aspiration should be performed using a large-bore 
needle once or twice daily. If this is not possible, 
Bone and joint infection
25
1095
arthroscopic or open surgical drainage may need to be 
undertaken. Regular passive movement should be 
undertaken from the outset, and active movements 
encouraged once the condition has stabilised. Infected 
prosthetic joints require management by the orthopae­
dic team, but often prolonged antibiotic treatment on its 
own is ineffective and removal of the prosthesis is 
required for eradication of the infection.
Arthritis may be a feature of Lyme disease caused by 
members of the Borrelia species of microorganisms. It 
is generally a late manifestation, which usually affects 
large joints. Brucellosis presents with an acute febrile 
illness, followed in some cases by the development of 
localised infection, which can result in arthritis, bursitis, 
osteomyelitis, sacroiliitis and paravertebral or psoas 
abscesses. These conditions are discussed on pages 332 
and 333.
Viral arthritis
The usual presentation is with acute polyarthritis, fol­
lowing a febrile illness, which may be accompanied by 
a rash. Most cases of viral arthritis are self-limiting and 
settle down within 4–6 weeks. Human parvovirus 
(mainly B19, p. 315) arthropathy is the most common in 
Europe; adults may not have the characteristic ‘slapped 
cheek’ facial rash seen in children. The diagnosis can be 
confirmed by a rise in specific IgM. Polyarthritis may 
also occur rarely with hepatitis B and C, rubella (includ­
ing rubella vaccination) and HIV infection. A variety of 
mosquito-borne viruses may cause epidemics of acute 
polyarthritis, including Ross River (Australia, Pacific), 
Chikungunya and O’nyongnyong (Asia, Africa), and 
Mayaro viruses (South America). A wide variety of 
articular symptoms have been associated with HIV, 
mainly in the later stages of infection (Box 25.53). Man­
agement is symptomatic, with NSAID and analgesics.
Osteomyelitis
In osteomyelitis, the primary site of infection is bone and 
bone marrow. Any part of a bone may be involved but 
there is preferential targeting of the juxta-epiphyseal 
regions of long bones adjacent to joints. The usual source 
is through haematogenous spread, although directly 
introduced infection may complicate trauma or ortho­
paedic surgery. The organisms most frequently impli­
cated are staphylococci, Pseudomonas and Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis. Osteomyelitis occurs most commonly in 
childhood and adolescence. Risk factors include diabe­
tes mellitus (especially involving the foot), compromised 
immunity (including AIDS) and sickle cell disease, 
which particularly increases the risk of Salmonella infec­
tion. The infection often results in a florid inflammatory 
response, with a greatly increased intraosseous pres­
sure. If untreated, the condition may cause localised 
areas of osteonecrosis, leading to the development of a 
fragment of necrotic bone that is called a sequestrum. 
Eventual perforation of the cortex by pus stimulates 
local new bone formation (involucrum) in the peri­
osteum, often leading to the development of sinuses that 
discharge through the skin.
Clinical features and investigations
The presentation is with localised bone pain and tender­
ness, often accompanied by malaise, night sweats and 
pyrexia. The adjacent joint may be painful to move and 
may develop a sterile effusion or secondary septic arthri­
tis. X-rays may show evidence of osteopenia, localised 
osteolysis and osteonecrosis, but the imaging modality 
of choice is MRI, which is much more sensitive for 
detecting early changes. Cultures should be performed, 
where possible, by open or imaging-guided biopsy. 
Blood cultures should be taken, which may also reveal 
the causative organism.
Management
Early recognition and management is critical; once 
osteomyelitis becomes established and chronic, it 
may prove very hard to eradicate the infection with 
Admit patient to hospital
Perform urgent investigations
•	 Aspirate joint
Send synovial fluid for Gram stain and culture
Use imaging guidance if required (e.g. for hip)
•	 Send blood for culture, routine biochemistry and 
haematology, including ESR and CRP
•	 Consider sending other samples (sputum, urine, wound 
swab) for culture, depending on patient history, to determine 
primary source of infection
Commence intravenous antibiotic
•	 Flucloxacillin 2 g 4 times daily
•	 If penicillin-allergic, give clindamycin 450–600 mg 4 times 
daily
•	 If at high risk of Gram-negative sepsis (elderly, frail, 
recurrent urinary tract infection), add a cephalosporin 
(cefuroxime 1.5 g 3 times daily)
Relieve pain
•	 Oral and/or intravenous analgesics
•	 Consider local ice-packs
Aspirate joint
•	 Perform serial needle aspiration to dryness (1–3 times/day or 
as required)
•	 Consider arthroscopic drainage if needle aspiration difficult
Arrange physiotherapy
•	 Early regular passive movement, progressing to active 
movements once pain controlled and effusion not 
re-accumulating
25.52  Emergency management of suspected 
septic arthritis
25.53  Musculoskeletal manifestations of HIV
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1096
the risk genes are involved in the function of the immune 
system, and include major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) class II, PTPN22, CD40L and CTLA4. The MHC 
class II gene, HLA-DR4, is the major susceptibility haplo­
type in most ethnic groups, occurring in 50–75% of Cau­
casian patients with RA, compared to 20–25% of the 
normal population. However, DR1 is more important in 
Indians and Israelis, and DW15 in Japanese. It has long 
been thought that RA may be triggered by an infectious 
agent in a genetically susceptible host, but a specific 
pathogen has not been identified. Periodontal disease 
and oral pathogens have been implicated, as have gas­
trointestinal organisms, and viruses such as Epstein–
Barr and cytomegalovirus. Cigarette smoking is a strong 
risk factor for developing RA, especially in people with 
HLA-DR4, and is also associated with greater disease 
severity and reduced responsiveness to DMARD and 
biological treatment. Susceptibility is increased post-
partum and by breastfeeding, indicating that hormone/
immune interactions may be important.
The clinical onset of RA is characterised by infiltration 
of the synovial membrane with lymphocytes, plasma 
cells, dendritic cells and macrophages. CD4+ T lym­
phocytes, including Th1 cells (interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) 
producers) and Th17 cells (IL-17A, IL-17F and IL-22 pro­
ducers), play a central role by interacting with other cells 
in the synovium. Lymphoid follicles form within the 
synovial membrane in which T cell–B cell interactions 
lead B cells to produce cytokines and autoantibodies, 
including RF and ACPA. Synovial macrophages are acti­
vated by immune complexes and local damage-associated 
molecules acting via Toll-like receptors, to produce pro-
inflammatory cytokines, including TNF, IL-1, IL-6 and 
IL-15. These act on synovial fibroblasts, to promote 
swelling of the synovial membrane and damage to soft 
tissues and cartilage. Fibroblasts, in particular, form a 
rich source of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, 
leuko­trienes and matrix metalloproteinases that drive 
local tissue damage and remodelling. Similarly, activa­
tion of osteoclasts by RANKL and chondrocytes by 
cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF drives destruction of 
bone and cartilage respectively (Fig. 25.31). The RA joint 
is hypoxic and this promotes new blood vessel formation 
(neoangiogenesis). Thus the inflamed synovium becomes 
vascularised, with highly activated endothelial cells sup­
porting the recruitment of yet more leucocytes to per­
petuate the inflammatory process. Amongst the range of 
inflammatory mediators present in the RA joint, TNF 
plays an important role by regulating production of 
other cytokines, whose actions are shown in Figure 25.31, 
and by activating the endothelium. IL-6 similarly plays 
a critical inflammatory role within the joint and also in 
regulating the systemic effects of RA by inducing the 
acute phase response, anaemia of chronic disease, fatigue 
and reduced cognitive function.
The inflammatory granulation tissue (pannus) formed 
by the above sequence of events spreads over and under 
the articular cartilage, which is progressively eroded 
and destroyed. Maturation of osteoclasts in the synovial 
membrane and in adjacent bone combine to erode bony 
structures. Later, fibrous or bony ankylosis may occur. 
Muscles adjacent to inflamed joints atrophy and may be 
infiltrated with lymphocytes. This leads to progressive 
biomechanical dysfunction and may further amplify 
destruction.
anti­biotics alone. The principles are those followed for 
septic arthritis, with parenteral antibiotics for at least 
2 weeks, followed by oral antibiotics for at least 4 weeks. 
Resection of the infected bone and subsequent recon­
struction are often required. Complications of chronic 
osteo­myelitis include secondary amyloidosis (p. 86) and 
skin malignancy at the margin of a discharging sinus 
(Marjolin’s ulcer).
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis can affect the musculoskeletal system, 
usually targeting the spine (Pott’s disease) or large joints 
such as the hip, knee or ankle. The presentation is with 
pain, swelling and fever. The X-ray changes are non-
specific and mycobacteria are seldom identified in the 
synovial fluid, so tissue biopsy is required for a definite 
diagnosis. Medical management is described on page 
693. In some cases, surgical débridement may be required 
for extensive joint disease, and spinal involvement may 
require surgical stabilisation and decompression.
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the most common persist­
ent inflammatory arthritis, occurring throughout the 
world and in all ethnic groups. The prevalence is lowest 
in black Africans and Chinese, and highest in Pima 
Indians. In Caucasians, approximately 0.8–1.0% are 
affected, with a female to male ratio of 3 : 1. The clinical 
course is prolonged, with intermittent exacerbations and 
remissions. Patients with RA have an increased mortal­
ity when compared with age-matched controls, prima­
rily due to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. 
This is most marked in those with severe disease, with 
a reduction in expected lifespan by 8–15 years. Around 
40% of RA patients are registered as disabled within 
3 years of onset, and around 80% are moderately to 
severely disabled within 20 years. Functional capacity 
decreases most rapidly at the beginning of disease and 
the functional status of patients within their first year of 
RA is often predictive of long-term outcome. Factors that 
associate with a poorer prognosis are disability at pres­
entation, female gender, involvement of MTP joints, 
radiographic damage at presentation, smoking and a 
positive RF or ACPA. It is likely that the prognosis of 
RA will improve as more effective treatment regimens 
are introduced in patients with early disease. In former 
years, around 25% of patients required a large joint 
replacement but rates are now falling, probably reflect­
ing more aggressive and effective medical therapy.
Pathophysiology
Genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors are impli­
cated in the pathogenesis of RA. The concordance 
rate of RA is higher in monozygotic (12–15%) than in 
dizygotic twins (3%), and there is an increased frequency 
of disease in first-degree relatives of patients. Genome-
wide association studies have detected more than 30 loci 
that are associated with the risk of developing RA or 
with severity of disease once it is established. Many of 
Rheumatoid arthritis
25
1097
Rheumatoid nodules consist of a central area of fibri­
noid material surrounded by a palisade of proliferating 
mononuclear cells. Similar granulomatous lesions may 
occur in the pleura, lung, pericardium and sclera. Lymph 
nodes in RA are often hyperplastic, showing many lym­
phoid follicles with large germinal centres and numer­
ous plasma cells in the sinuses and medullary cords. 
Immunofluorescence confirms RF and ACPA synthesis 
by plasma cells in synovium and lymph nodes. The bone 
marrow in RA is similarly hyperplastic, with evidence 
of lymphocyte activation and proliferation and local 
cytokine production. The bone marrow forms a selective 
survival niche for plasma cells that, in turn, produce 
autoantibodies. Importantly, these plasma cells are 
CD20-negative and, as such, escape therapies that target 
CD20, such as rituximab (see below).
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with pain, joint swelling and 
stiffness affecting the small joints of the hands, feet and 
wrists. Large joint involvement, systemic symptoms 
and extra-articular features may also occur. Clinical cri­
teria for the diagnosis of RA are shown in Box 25.54.
Sometimes RA has a very acute onset, with florid 
morning stiffness, polyarthritis and pitting oedema. This 
occurs more commonly in old age. Other patients may 
present with proximal muscle stiffness mimicking 
Fig. 25.31  Pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis. Some of the cytokines and cellular interactions believed to be important in RA are shown, along 
with the targets for currently available biological drugs. (ADAMTS5 = aggrecanase; IL = interleukin; MMP = matrix metalloproteinases; PGE = prostaglandin 
E; TNF = tumour necrosis factor; RANKL = RANK ligand) 
T cell
Acute phase
response
T cell
TH17
Dendritic cell
Co-stimulation
Antigen
presentation
Macrophage
ADAMTS5
MMP
IL-17
IL-1
IL-6
PGE
TNF
TNF
Synovial
fibroblast
B cell
Plasma
    cell
Abatacept
Rituximab
Anti-TNF
RANKL
Chondrocyte
Osteoclast
Cartilage
Bone
Bone
erosion
Cartilage
erosion
Denosumab
IL-6
IL-6
Tocilizumab
Co-stimulation
Vasodilatation
Vasculitis
Immune
complexes
Autoantibodies
Blood
vessel
*European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology 
2010 Criteria.
Criterion
Score
Joints affected
1 large joint
0
2–10 large joints
1
1–3 small joints
2
4–10 small joints
5
Serology
Negative RF and ACPA
0
Low positive RF or ACPA
2
High positive RF or ACPA
3
Duration of symptoms
< 6 wks
0
> 6 wks
1
Acute phase reactants
Normal CRP and ESR
0
Abnormal CRP or ESR
1
Patients with a score ≥ 6 are considered 
to have definite RA.
25.54  Criteria for diagnosis of 
rheumatoid arthritis*
(ACPA = anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies; CRP = C-reactive protein; 
ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate; RF = rheumatoid factor)
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1098
Fig. 25.32  The hand in rheumatoid arthritis. A Ulnar deviation 
of the fingers with wasting of the small muscles of the hands and  
synovial swelling at the wrists, the extensor tendon sheaths, the 
metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints. B ‘Swan neck’ 
deformity of the fingers. 
A
B
with the cyst but is prevented from returning to the joint 
by a valve-like mechanism. Rupture, often induced by 
knee flexion in the presence of a large effusion, leads to 
calf pain and swelling that may mimic a deep venous 
thrombosis (DVT).
Extra-articular features
Anorexia, weight loss and fatigue are common and 
may occur throughout the disease course. Generalised 
osteoporosis and muscle-wasting result from systemic 
inflammation. Extra-articular features are most common 
in patients with long-standing seropositive erosive 
disease but may occasionally occur at presentation, 
especially in men. Most are due to serositis, granuloma 
and nodule formation or vasculitis (Box 25.55).
Cutaneous and vascular features
Rheumatoid nodules occur almost exclusively in sero­
positive patients, usually at sites of pressure or friction, 
such as the extensor surfaces of the forearm (Fig. 25.33), 
sacrum, Achilles tendon and toes. They may be compli­
cated by ulceration and secondary infection. Rheuma­
toid vasculitis may occur in older seropositive patients 
and is indicated by systemic symptoms (fatigue, fever) 
and multiple extra-articular features. Vasculitis can vary 
Systemic
•	 Fever
•	 Weight loss
•	 Fatigue
•	 Susceptibility to infection
Musculoskeletal
•	 Muscle-wasting
•	 Tenosynovitis
•	 Bursitis
•	 Osteoporosis
Haematological
•	 Anaemia
•	 Thrombocytosis
•	 Eosinophilia
Lymphatic
•	 Felty’s syndrome 
(see Box 25.56)
•	 Splenomegaly
Nodules
•	 Sinuses
•	 Fistulae
Ocular
•	 Episcleritis
•	 Scleritis
•	 Scleromalacia
•	 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Vasculitis
•	 Digital arteritis
•	 Ulcers
•	 Pyoderma gangrenosum
•	 Mononeuritis multiplex
•	 Visceral arteritis
Cardiac
•	 Pericarditis
•	 Myocarditis
•	 Endocarditis
•	 Conduction defects
•	 Coronary vasculitis
•	 Granulomatous aortitis
Pulmonary
•	 Nodules
•	 Pleural effusions
•	 Fibrosing alveolitis
•	 Bronchiolitis
•	 Caplan’s syndrome
Neurological
•	 Cervical cord compression
•	 Compression neuropathies
•	 Peripheral neuropathy
•	 Mononeuritis multiplex
Amyloidosis (p. 86)
25.55  Extra-articular manifestations of 
rheumatoid disease
polymyalgia rheumatica (p. 1117). Occasionally, the 
onset is palindromic, with relapsing and remitting epi­
sodes of pain, stiffness and swelling that last for only a 
few hours or days.
Examination reveals typical features of symmetrical 
swelling of the MCP and PIP joints. These and other joints 
are tender on pressure when actively inflamed and have 
stress pain on passive movement. Erythema is unusual 
and its presence suggests coexistent sepsis. Characteristic 
deformities may develop with long-standing uncon­
trolled disease, including ‘swan neck’ deformity, the bou­
tonnière or ‘button hole’ deformity, and a Z deformity of 
the thumb (Fig. 25.32B). Dorsal subluxation of the ulna at 
the distal radio-ulnar joint is common and may contrib­
ute to rupture of the fourth and fifth extensor tendons. 
Triggering of fingers may occur because of nodules in the 
flexor tendon sheaths. Deformities of the hand are less 
common now, as a result of more aggressive treatment.
In the foot, dorsal subluxation of the MTP joints may 
result in ‘cock-up’ toe deformities. This causes pain on 
weight-bearing on the exposed MTP heads and develop­
ment of secondary adventitious bursae and callosities. 
In the hindfoot, calcaneovalgus (eversion) is the most 
common deformity, reflecting damage to the ankle and 
subtalar joint. This is often associated with loss of the 
longitudinal arch (flat foot) due to rupture of the tibialis 
posterior tendon.
Popliteal (‘Baker’s’) cysts may occur in combination 
with knee synovitis, where synovial fluid communicates 
Rheumatoid arthritis
25
1099
Fig. 25.33  Rheumatoid nodules and olecranon bursitis. Nodules 
were palpable within as well as outside the bursa. 
Neurological complications
Peripheral entrapment neuropathies may result from 
compression by hypertrophied synovium or by joint 
subluxation. Median nerve compression in the carpal 
tunnel is most common and bilateral compression can 
occur as an early presenting feature of RA. Other syn­
dromes include ulnar nerve compression at the elbow or 
wrist, compression of the lateral popliteal nerve at the 
head of the fibula, and tarsal tunnel syndrome (entrap­
ment of the posterior tibial nerve in the flexor retinacu­
lum), which causes burning, tingling and numbness in 
the distal sole and toes. Diffuse symmetrical peripheral 
neuropathy and mononeuritis multiplex may occur in 
patients with rheumatoid vasculitis.
Cervical cord compression can result from subluxa­
tion of the cervical spine at the atlanto-axial joint or at a 
subaxial level (Fig. 25.34). Atlanto-axial subluxation is a 
common finding in long-standing RA and is due to 
erosion of the transverse ligament posterior to the 
odontoid peg. If unrecognised, it can lead to cord 
compression or sudden death following minor trauma 
or manipulation. Atlanto-axial subluxation should be 
suspected in any RA patient who describes new onset of 
occipital headache, particularly if symptoms of paraes­
thesia or electric shock are present in the arms. The onset 
is often insidious, with subtle loss of function that is 
initially attributed to active disease. Reflexes and power 
can be very difficult to assess in the presence of marked 
joint damage and therefore sensory or upper motor 
signs are most important. Patients with spinal cord com­
pression may require operative stabilisation and fixa­
tion, though the outcome is poor if the patient already 
has tetraparesis.
Other complications
Amyloidosis is a rare complication of prolonged active 
disease and usually presents with nephrotic syndrome. 
Microcytic anaemia can occur due to iron deficiency 
resulting from NSAID-induced gastrointestinal blood 
loss, and normochromic, normocytic anaemia with 
thrombocytosis is present in active disease. Felty’s 
syndrome is the association of splenomegaly and 
from relatively benign nail-fold infarcts to widespread 
cutaneous ulceration and skin necrosis. Rarely, involve­
ment of medium-sized arteries can lead to mesenteric, 
renal or coronary artery occlusion.
Ocular involvement
The most common symptom is dry eyes (keratoconjunc­
tivitis sicca) due to secondary Sjögren’s syndrome 
(p. 1114). Painless episcleritis frequently accompanies 
nodular seropositive disease; it may cause intense 
redness of superficial vessels but sight is unimpaired. 
Scleritis is more serious and potentially sight-threatening; 
the eye is red and painful, vision is impaired, and 
the sclera shows a deep red blush beneath the 
individual red superficial vessels (p. 1058). Scleromala­
cia is painless bilateral thinning of the sclera, with the 
affected area appearing blue or grey (the colour of the 
underlying choroid). Corneal melting is a rare but dev­
astating manifestation. It occurs in long-standing disease 
and is associated with systemic vasculitis. It causes pain, 
redness and blurred vision with corneal thinning. 
If it is untreated, progression to perforation is common, 
so urgent high-dose steroid and immunosuppressive 
therapy is indicated.
Cardiac and pulmonary involvement
Cardiac involvement occurs in up to 30% of patients 
with seropositive RA but is usually asymptomatic. 
Symptomatic pericardial effusions and constrictive peri­
carditis are rare. Occasionally, granulomatous lesions 
can cause heart block, cardiomyopathy, coronary artery 
occlusion or aortic regurgitation. Serositis is commonly 
asymptomatic but may present as pleurisy or breathless­
ness. Pulmonary fibrosis can occur in advanced RA and 
may cause dyspnoea (p. 712). In addition to the above 
manifestations, which are due to the direct effects of the 
inflammatory process, the risk of atheroma and cardio­
vascular disease is increased in RA. This is caused by a 
combination of conventional risk factors, such as high 
cholesterol, smoking, hypertension and reduced phy­
sical activity, and the effects of inflammatory factors, 
such as immune complexes, cytokines and chemokines, 
on the endothelium and adipose tissue. The risk of 
cardiovascular disease may be increased by NSAID 
and corticosteroids, whereas there is some evidence 
that DMARD and biological medicines are protective.
Fig. 25.34  Subluxation of cervical spine. A Flexion, showing 
widening of the space (arrow) between the odontoid peg of the axis 
(behind) and the anterior arch of the atlas (in front). B Extension, showing 
reduction in this space. 
A
B
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1100
To establish diagnosis
•	 Clinical criteria
•	 ESR and CRP
•	 Ultrasound or MRI
•	 Rheumatoid factor and 
anti-citrullinated peptide 
antibodies
To monitor disease activity and drug efficacy
•	 Pain (visual analogue scale)
•	 Early morning stiffness 
(minutes)
•	 Joint tenderness
•	 Joint swelling
•	 DAS28 score
•	 ESR and CRP
•	 Ultrasound
To monitor disease damage
•	 X-rays
•	 Functional assessment
To monitor drug safety
•	 Urinalysis
•	 Full blood count
•	 Urea, creatinine and liver 
function tests
25.57  Investigations and monitoring of 
rheumatoid arthritis
•	 Count the number of tender joints
•	 Count the number of swollen joints
•	 Measure the ESR
•	 Ask the patient to rate global activity of arthritis during the 
past week from 0 (no symptoms) to 100 (very severe)
•	 Enter data into an online calculator1 or work out using a 
formula2
1www.4s-dawn.com/DAS28.
2DAS28 = 0.56 × square root (tender joints) + 0.28 × square 
root (swollen joints) + 0.70 × loge(ESR) + 0.014 (global activity 
score)
25.58  How to calculate the DAS28 score
visual analogue scale, to generate a numerical score. The 
higher the value, the more active the disease (Box 25.58). 
Management
The mainstay of treatment in RA comprises the early 
use of small-molecule disease-modifying antirheumatic 
drugs (DMARDs), and corticosteroids for induction of 
neutropenia with RA (Box 25.56). Generalised and local 
lymphadenopathy affecting nodes draining actively 
inflamed joints may both occur. Patients with persistent 
lymphadenopathy should be biopsied since there is an 
increased risk of lymphoma in patients with long-
standing RA.
Investigations
The diagnosis of RA is based on clinical grounds but 
investigations are useful in confirming the diagnosis and 
assessing disease activity (Box 25.57). The ESR and CRP 
are usually raised but normal results do not exclude the 
diagnosis. ACPA are positive in about 70% of cases and 
are highly specific for RA, occurring in many patients 
before clinical onset of the disease. Similarly RF is posi­
tive in about 70% of cases, many of whom also test posi­
tive for ACPA. Low titres of RF are found in about 10% 
of the normal population and in other diseases (p. 1067).
Ultrasound examination and MRI are not routinely 
required in patients with obvious clinical signs. Their 
main value is in patients with symptoms suggestive of 
an inflammatory arthritis, where there is uncertainty 
about the presence of synovitis. They are also a sensitive 
means of detecting early erosions. Plain X-rays of the 
hands, wrist and feet are of limited value in early RA 
but certain changes are characteristic, including peri­
articular osteoporosis and marginal joint erosions. The 
main indication for X-ray is in the assessment of patients 
with problem joints to determine if significant structural 
damage has occurred. Patients who are suspected of 
having atlanto-axial disease should have lateral X-rays 
taken in flexion and extension, and the degree of 
cord compression should be established with MRI. In 
patients with Baker’s cyst, ultrasound may be required 
to establish the diagnosis, since DVT and Baker’s cyst 
may coexist.
The DAS28 score is widely used to assess disease 
activity, the response to treatment and the need for 
biological therapy. It involves counting the number 
of swollen and tender joints in the upper limbs 
and knees, and combining this with the ESR and the 
patient’s assessment of his/her general health on a 
Risk factors
•	 Age of onset 50–70 yrs
•	 Female > male
•	 Caucasians > blacks
•	 Long-standing RA
•	 Deforming but inactive  
disease
•	 Seropositive for RF
Common clinical features
•	 Splenomegaly
•	 Lymphadenopathy
•	 Weight loss
•	 Skin pigmentation
•	 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
•	 Vasculitis, leg ulcers
•	 Recurrent infections
•	 Nodules
Laboratory findings
•	 Normochromic,  
normocytic anaemia
•	 Neutropenia
•	 Abnormal liver function
•	 Thrombocytopenia
•	 Impaired T- and B-cell 
immunity
25.56  Felty’s syndrome
Rheumatoid arthritis
25
1101
remission. There is evidence that early use of DMARD 
therapy improves clinical outcome in RA. Partial or non-
response to DMARD therapy should prompt escalation 
of the dose or use of an additional DMARD, with pro­
gression to biological drugs if necessary (Fig. 25.35). 
Regular monitoring of DMARD therapy is essential 
because of the risk of liver and haematological toxicity. 
Some DMARDs are contraindicated in pregnancy, 
especially during the first trimester (Box 25.59). Patients 
who wish to become pregnant should be counselled to 
stop DMARD treatment while they try to conceive. Since 
RA almost always undergoes remission during preg­
nancy, it is usually possible to manage the condition 
without DMARD therapy over this period. Details of the 
dose regimens, toxicity and monitoring requirements 
are shown in Box 25.60.
Fig. 25.35  Management of early rheumatoid arthritis. See text for 
details of each drug. (DMARD = disease-modifying antirheumatic drug; 
NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; TNF = tumour necrosis 
factor) 
Methotrexate + corticosteroids
Diagnosis of RA
NSAID and analgesics
Combination DMARD
Intramuscular and intra-articular steroids
Anti-TNF #1
Abatacept
Rituximab
Tocilizumab
Anti-TNF #2
•	 Immunological changes in pregnancy: most patients with 
RA go into remission during pregnancy.
•	 Conception: methotrexate and leflunomide should be 
discontinued for at least 3 months before trying to conceive.
•	 Paracetamol: the oral analgesic of choice during pregnancy.
•	 Oral NSAIDs and selective COX-2 inhibitors: can be used 
after implantation up until the last trimester.
•	 Corticosteroids: may be used to control disease flares; the 
main maternal risks are hypertension, glucose intolerance 
and osteoporosis.
•	 DMARDs that may be used: sulfasalazine, 
hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine or ciclosporin if required to 
control inflammation.
•	 DMARDs that must be avoided: methotrexate, leflunomide, 
cyclophosphamide, gold and penicillamine.
•	 Biological therapies: safety during pregnancy is currently 
unclear.
•	 Breastfeeding: methotrexate, leflunomide, 
cyclophosphamide, ciclosporin, azathioprine, sulfasalazine 
and hydroxychloroquine are contraindicated.
25.59  Rheumatoid arthritis in pregnancy
Drug
Mechanism 
of action
Usual 
maintenance dose
Principal side-effects
Monitoring 
requirement
Monitoring 
frequency
Methotrexate
Inhibits DNA 
synthesis and 
cell division
5–25 mg/wk
GI upset, stomatitis, rash, 
alopecia, hepatotoxicity, acute 
pneumonitis
FBC, LFTs
Initially monthly, 
then every 3 mths
Sulfasalazine
Unknown
2–4 g/day
Nausea, GI upset, rash, 
hepatitis, neutropenia, 
pancytopenia (rare)
FBC, LFTs
Monthly for 3 mths, 
then 3-monthly
Hydroxychloroquine
Unknown
200–400 mg/day
Rash, nausea, diarrhoea, 
headache, corneal  
deposits, retinopathy  
(rare)
Visual 
acuity, 
fundoscopy
12-monthly
Leflunomide
Blocks T-cell 
division
10–20 mg/day
Nausea, GI upset, rash, 
alopecia, hepatitis, 
hypertension
FBC, LFTs, 
BP
2–4-weekly
D-Penicillamine
Unknown
250–750 mg/day
Rash, stomatitis, metallic 
taste, proteinuria, 
thrombocytopenia
FBC, urine 
(for protein)
Initially 1–2-weekly; 
4–6-weekly for 
maintenance
Gold
Unknown
50 mg/mth by IM 
injection
Rash, stomatitis, alopecia, 
proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, 
myelosuppression
FBC, urine 
(protein)
Each injection
Ciclosporin
Blocks T-cell 
activation
150–300 mg/day
Nausea, GI upset, renal 
impairment, hypertension
FBC, LFTs, 
U&E, BP
2–4-weekly
(BP = blood pressure; FBC = full blood count; LFT = liver function tests; U&E = urea and electrolytes)
25.60  Commonly used small-molecule disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs in rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1102
monthly. Penicillamine is given in a starting dose of 
125–250 mg daily on an empty stomach, and increased 
in 125-mg increments every 6 weeks until benefit occurs 
or adverse effects develop. Ciclosporin A inhibits lym­
phocyte division and activation. It is given in a dose of 
150–300 mg/day with monitoring of blood pressure and 
renal function.
Corticosteroids
Systemic corticosteroids have disease-modifying activ­
ity, but their primary role is in the induction of remis­
sion in patients with early RA who are starting synthetic 
DMARD treatment. Various regimens have been used 
but there is little evidence to suggest that one is supe­
rior to another. One strategy is to give a high dose of 
oral prednisolone initially (60 mg daily) and to reduce 
and stop this gradually over a period of 3 months as the 
DMARD starts to take effect. Another is to employ low-
dose prednisolone (5–10 mg daily for 6–24 months) or 
to give intramuscular injections of methylprednisolone 
or triamcinolone every 6–8 weeks. Intramuscular ster­
oids are often used to treat flares of disease activity in 
patients who are established on DMARD therapy. Intra-
articular corticosteroids are primarily indicated when 
there are one or two ‘problem joints’ with persistent 
synovitis despite good general control of the disease. 
Although corticosteroids are very useful, they also 
have significant adverse effects (p. 776). In the context 
of RA, osteoporosis is probably the most important 
since this is a known complication of RA, even in the 
absence of corticosteroid therapy. Accordingly DEXA 
scanning followed by bone protection should be consid­
ered in any patient with RA who is expected to be on 
more than 7.5 mg prednisolone daily for more than 
3 months.
Biological therapies
The use of biological agents (often abbreviated to ‘bio­
logics’) is reserved for the treatment of patients who 
have high disease activity despite having had an ade­
quate trial of traditional DMARDs. These agents are 
targeted towards specific cytokines and other cell-
surface molecules regulating the immune response. 
Although generally well tolerated, biological therapies 
increase the risk of serious infections due to suppression 
of the immune response. Although biological treatment 
is more effective than standard DMARD therapy, treat­
ment costs are significantly greater. Because of this, 
many countries have set guidelines restricting their use. 
Current UK recommendations are that biological therapy 
should be initiated only in active RA (DAS28 > 5.1; 
p. 1100) when an adequate trial of at least two other 
DMARDs (including methotrexate) has failed. Details of 
the individual agents, their mechanisms of action and 
their toxicity are shown in Box 25.61.
Anti-TNF therapy
Anti-TNF therapy is the first-line biological drug in RA. 
Several agents are available, as summarised in Box 25.61. 
With the exception of infliximab, which must be pre­
scribed with methotrexate to reduce the risk of neutralis­
ing antibodies developing, these agents can be used as 
monotherapy. In clinical practice, however, most are 
co-prescribed with methotrexate, as this is more effica­
cious. The main adverse effects are serious infections 
Disease-modifying antirheumatic 
drugs
Methotrexate
Methotrexate is the anchor DMARD in RA. It is usually 
given as a starting weekly oral dose of 7.5–10 mg and 
this is increased in 2.5 mg increments every 2–4 weeks 
until benefit occurs or toxicity is limiting. The maximum 
recommended dose is 25 mg. The benefits of methotrex­
ate usually start to appear within 1–2 months but a 
6-month course should be given before concluding that 
it has been ineffective. The most common adverse effects 
are nausea, vomiting and malaise within 24–48 hours of 
administration. Patients who experience these can some­
times be successfully treated with subcutaneous metho­
trexate. Folic acid (5 mg/week) reduces the incidence 
of adverse effects without reducing efficacy. Patients 
should be warned of drug interaction with sulphona­
mides and to avoid excess alcohol, which enhances 
methotrexate hepatotoxicity. Acute pulmonary toxicity 
(pneumonitis) is rare but can occur at any time during 
treatment. Patients should therefore be warned to seek 
early advice if they develop any new respiratory symp­
toms. Methotrexate should be stopped immediately if 
pneumonitis is suspected and high-dose steroids should 
be given.
Sulfasalazine
Sulfasalazine (SSZ) is widely used, both alone and in 
combination with methotrexate and other drugs. The 
mechanism of action is incompletely understood. 
Nausea and gastrointestinal intolerance are the main 
adverse effects. The usual starting dose is 500 mg 
daily, building up gradually to a maintenance dose of 
2–4 g/day. The patient should be warned of possible 
orange staining of urine and contact lenses. Monitoring 
should be performed for liver and haematological 
toxicity.
Hydroxychloroquine
Hydroxycholoroquine is given in a dose of 400 mg daily, 
usually in combination with other DMARDs. Ocular 
toxicity can occur with long-term use due to retinal 
damage. It is usual to check visual acuity before starting 
treatment and to repeat this periodically whilst treat­
ment is continued.
Leflunomide
Leflunomide can be used alone or in combination with 
other drugs. It works by inhibiting lymphocyte prolif­
eration and activation. It is usually well tolerated and 
has low marrow toxicity, but may cause liver dysfunc­
tion. The usual maintenance dose is 10–20 mg/day. It is 
possible to give a loading dose of 100 mg on 3 consecu­
tive days at the start of treatment, but this is seldom used 
in routine clinical practice. Monitoring should be per­
formed for liver and haematological toxicity.
Gold, penicillamine and ciclosporin A
These are only occasionally used due to the availability 
of drugs with a better risk–benefit profile. Gold (sodium 
aurothiomalate) is given by deep intramuscular injection 
of 50 mg after an initial 10 mg test dose. Treatment is 
continued weekly for up to 6 months until benefit occurs, 
when the frequency is reduced to fortnightly and then 
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
25
1103
infections. It is generally used as second-line treatment 
in patients who have failed to respond to anti-TNF 
therapy, except in those who are intolerant of methotrex­
ate, in which case it is used as a first-line treatment.
Anakinra
Anakinra is a decoy receptor for IL-1. It has some activ­
ity in RA but is seldom used since it appears to be less 
effective than other biological drugs.
Other treatments
Surgery
Synovectomy of the wrist or finger tendon sheaths of the 
hands may be required for pain relief or to prevent 
tendon rupture when medical interventions have failed. 
In later stages when joint damage has occurred, osteo­
tomy, arthrodesis or arthroplasty may be required (see 
Box 25.35, p. 1080).
General measures
The general principles outlined on page 1077 should be 
followed. Physical rest, analgesics and NSAID may be 
required to control symptoms. Passive exercises and 
joint protection measures should be encouraged with 
the aim of conserving function in affected joints. During 
treatment, periodic assessment of disease activity, pro­
gression and disability is essential. In the vast majority, 
management is outpatient- or day patient-based, but 
hospital admission can be helpful in patients with very 
active disease for a period of bed rest, multiple joint 
injections, splinting, regular hydrotherapy, physio­
therapy and education.
JUVENILE IDIOPATHIC ARTHRITIS
Inflammatory arthritis occurs rarely in children. Several 
distinct subtypes are recognised (Box 25.62). Systemic 
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA; formerly known as 
and reactivation of latent tuberculosis. There is evidence 
that TNF blockade can increase the risk of some malig­
nancies, particularly basal cell carcinoma of the skin, and 
that it can accelerate progression of cancer in patients 
with prior malignant disease. In contrast, the risk of 
vascular disease in RA patients seems to be reduced by 
anti-TNF therapy.
Rituximab
Rituximab is an antibody directed against the CD20 
receptor, which is expressed on B lymphocytes and 
immature plasma cells. It is given by two intravenous 
infusions, 2 weeks apart, usually in combination with 
intravenous corticosteroid. It causes depletion of periph­
eral and synovial B cells, which is sustained for several 
months after administration. The treatment is repeated 
usually when signs of improvement are wearing off 
(anything from 6 months to 1 year). It is mostly used in 
the treatment of patients with resistant RA who have 
failed to respond to TNF blockade.
Abatacept
Abatacept is an agent in which the Fc domain of IgG is 
fused to the extracellular domain of CTLA4. It blocks the 
interaction between CD28 and CD80/86 that is required 
for full activation of T cells following antigen presenta­
tion by dendritic cells or macrophages. Abatacept has a 
good safety profile and is as efficacious as anti-TNF 
therapy in biological-naïve patients who fail to respond 
to conventional DMARD therapy.
Tocilizumab
This agent is an antibody directed against the IL-6 recep­
tor, and is licensed for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis. It prevents IL-6 activating its receptor within 
the synovial membrane and in other tissues such as liver 
and muscle. It has similar efficacy to anti-TNF therapy 
and is licensed for use as monotherapy or in combina­
tion with methotrexate. Adverse effects include leuco­
penia, hypercholesterolaemia and an increased risk of 
25.61  Commonly used biological drugs in rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1104
•	 Uveitis: may be clinically silent and persist into adulthood, 
necessitating routine screening for eye involvement.
•	 Persistence into adulthood: persists in 50% of cases, 
especially in systemic disease, necessitating long-term 
follow-up.
•	 Reduced peak bone mass: common in polyarthritis and 
systemic JIA but little data on fracture risk, and evidence 
base for treatment is poor
•	 Biological drugs: effective in JIA but long-term safety 
remains unclear.
25.63  Juvenile idiopathic arthritis in adolescence
Still’s disease) is a systemic disorder characterised by 
fever, rash, arthritis, hepatosplenomegaly and serositis 
in association with a raised ESR and CRP. Autoantibody 
tests are negative.
Oligoarthritis is the most common form, accounting 
for about 60% of cases. Two subtypes are recognised, 
depending on the extent of involvement, but they prob­
ably form part of a single disease spectrum. Oligoarticu­
lar JIA is more common in females and tends to affect 
large joints in an asymmetrical pattern. There is an asso­
ciation with uveitis and many patients are ANA-positive. 
Rheumatoid factor-negative polyarthritis is a hetero­
geneous form. Some patients are ANA-positive and 
these probably represent a subtype of oligoarticular JIA 
with more extensive joint involvement. Other patients 
present with polyarticular disease that is similar to adult 
seronegative RA. Juvenile forms of ankylosing spondyli­
tis and psoriatic arthritis also occur.
Patients with JIA should be referred to a paediatric 
rheumatologist. The principles of management are 
similar to those in adult inflammatory disease, and cor­
ticosteroids and methotrexate are required for systemic 
JIA. Recent trials indicate that TNF blockers, IL-1 inhibi­
tors and tocilizumab may also be effective. Steroids and 
methotrexate are also indicated for oligoarticular and 
polyarticular JIA, with progression to anti-TNF therapy 
in poor responders.
The prognosis of oligoarthritis is good and in many 
patients the condition resolves at puberty. Polyarticular 
and systemic JIA have a poorer prognosis, however, and 
in about 50% of cases the disease remains active into 
adulthood, requiring extended follow-up by adult rheu­
matology services. Common issues encountered during 
transition of paediatric patients into adulthood are 
shown in Box 25.63.
Adult-onset Still’s disease
This is a rare systemic inflammatory disorder of 
unknown cause, similar to juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 
which presents with intermittent fever, rash and 
arthralgia. Splenomegaly, hepatomegaly and lymph­
adenopathy may be present. Investigations typically 
show evidence of an acute phase response, with a 
markedly elevated serum ferritin. Tests for RF and 
ANA are negative. Most patients respond to cortico­
steroids but DMARDs may also be required as steroid-
sparing agents. Anecdotal reports indicate that anakinra 
(p. 1103), anti-TNF therapy and tocilizumab may be 
helpful in patients with resistant disease, but none 
of these has been tested in a randomised trial.
SERONEGATIVE 
SPONDYLOARTHROPATHIES
These comprise a group of related inflammatory joint 
diseases, which show considerable overlap in their clini­
cal features and a shared immunogenetic association 
with the HLA-B27 antigen (Box 25.64). They include:
•	 ankylosing spondylitis
•	 axial spondyloarthritis
•	 reactive arthritis, including Reiter’s syndrome
•	 psoriatic arthritis
•	 arthropathy associated with inflammatory bowel 
disease.
The synovitis is non-specific and is often indistin­
guishable from RA. However, the distinctive feature of 
this group of diseases is the marked degree of extrasyno­
vial inflammation, especially of the enthesis but also of 
the joint capsule, periosteum, cartilage and subchondral 
bone. There is a striking association with carriage of the 
HLA-B27 allele, particularly for ankylosing spondylitis 
(> 95%) and reactive arthritis (90%), and especially asso­
ciated with sacroiliitis, uveitis or balanitis. Understand­
ing of the cause is incomplete but an aberrant response 
to infection is thought to be involved in genetically pre­
disposed individuals. In some situations, a triggering 
organism can be identified, as in reactive arthritis fol­
lowing bacterial dysentery or chlamydial urethritis, but 
in others the environmental trigger remains obscure. 
Familial clustering not only is common to the specific 
condition occurring in the proband, but also may extend 
to other diseases in the seronegative spondyloartho­
pathy group.
Subtype
Frequency
Clinical features
Immunology
Systemic JIA
5%
Fever, rash, arthralgia, hepatosplenomegaly
Autoantibody-negative
Oligoarthritis (≤ 4 joints)
60%
Large-joint arthritis, uveitis
ANA-positive
Polyarthritis (≥ 5 joints)
20%
Polyarthritis. May be extended form of oligoarthritis
ANA-positive
Enthesis-related
5%
Sacroiliitis, enthesopathy
HLA-B27-positive
Rheumatoid factor-positive
5%
Polyarthritis, similar to RA
RF-positive, ACPA-positive
Psoriatic arthritis
5%
Same as adult disease (p. 1108)
Autoantibody-negative
(ACPA = anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies; ANA = antinuclear antibody; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; RF = rheumatoid factor)
25.62  Clinical features of juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies
25
1105
Ankylosing spondylitis
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is characterised by a chronic 
inflammatory arthritis predominantly affecting the 
sacro­iliac joints and spine, which can progress to bony 
fusion of the spine. The onset is typically between the 
ages of 20 and 30, with a male preponderance of about 
3 : 1. In Europe, more than 90% of those affected are 
HLA-B27-positive. The overall prevalence is less than 
0.5% in most populations. Over 75% of patients are able 
to remain in employment and enjoy a good quality of 
life. Even if severe ankylosis develops, functional limita­
tion may not be marked as long as the spine is fused in 
an erect posture.
Pathophysiology
Ankylosing spondylitis is thought to arise from an as yet 
ill-defined interaction between environmental patho­
gens and the host immune system in genetically suscep­
tible individuals. Increased faecal carriage of Klebsiella 
aerogenes occurs in patients with established AS and may 
relate to exacerbation of both joint and eye disease. 
Wider alterations in the human gut microbial environ­
ment are increasingly implicated, which could lead to 
increased levels of circulating cytokines such as IL-23 
that can activate enthesial or synovial T cells. The 
HLA-B27 molecule itself is implicated through its 
antigen-presenting function (it is a class I MHC mol­
ecule) or because of its propensity to form homodimers 
that activate leucocytes. HLA-B27 molecules may also 
misfold, causing increased endoplasmic reticulum 
stress. This could lead to inflammatory cytokine release 
by macrophages and dendritic cells, thus triggering 
inflammatory disease.
Clinical features
The cardinal feature is low back pain and early morning 
stiffness with radiation to the buttocks or posterior 
thighs. Symptoms are exacerbated by inactivity and 
relieved by movement. The disease tends to ascend 
slowly, ultimately involving the whole spine, although 
some patients present with symptoms of the thoracic 
or cervical spine. As the disease progresses, the spine 
becomes increasingly rigid as ankylosis occurs. 
Secondary 
osteoporosis 
of 
the 
vertebral 
bodies 
frequently occurs, leading to an increased risk of verte­
bral fracture.
Early physical signs include a reduced range of 
lumbar spine movements in all directions and pain on 
sacroiliac stressing. As the disease progresses, stiffness 
increases throughout the spine and chest expansion 
becomes restricted. Spinal fusion varies in its extent and 
in most cases does not cause a gross flexion deformity, 
but a few patients develop marked kyphosis of the 
dorsal and cervical spine that may interfere with forward 
vision. This may prove incapacitating, especially when 
associated with fixed flexion contractures of hips or 
knees. Pleuritic chest pain aggravated by breathing is 
common and results from costovertebral joint involve­
ment. Plantar fasciitis, Achilles tendinitis and tenderness 
over bony prominences such as the iliac crest and greater 
trochanter may all occur, reflecting inflammation at the 
sites of tendon insertions (enthesitis).
Up to 40% of patients also have peripheral arthritis. 
This is usually asymmetrical, affecting large joints such 
as the hips, knees, ankles and shoulders. In about 10% 
of cases, involvement of a peripheral joint may antedate 
spinal symptoms, and in a further 10%, symptoms begin 
in childhood, as in the syndrome of oligoarticular juve­
nile idiopathic arthritis.
Fatigue is a major complaint and may result from 
both chronic interruption of sleep due to pain, and 
chronic systemic inflammation with direct effects of 
inflammatory cytokines on the brain. Acute anterior 
uveitis is the most common extra-articular feature, 
which occasionally precedes joint disease. Other extra-
articular features are occasionally observed but are rare 
(Box 25.65). Disease activity in AS can be assessed by the 
Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index 
(BASDAI), a questionnaire in which patients and their 
physician rate severity of various symptoms (Box 25.66). 
This is important in assessing eligibility for biological 
treatment. The criteria for the diagnosis of classical AS 
and axial spondyloarthropathy (SpA) are shown in Box 
25.67. The criteria for axial SpA were developed to take 
account of the fact that X-rays may be normal in patients 
with early AS.
Investigations
In established AS, radiographs of the sacroiliac joint 
show irregularity and loss of cortical margins, widening 
of the joint space and subsequently sclerosis, joint space 
narrowing and fusion. Lateral thoracolumbar spine 
X-rays may show anterior ‘squaring’ of vertebrae due to 
erosion and sclerosis of the anterior corners and perios­
titis of the waist. Bridging syndesmophytes may also be 
•	 Asymmetrical inflammatory oligoarthritis (lower > upper limb)
•	 Sacroiliitis and inflammatory spondylitis
•	 Inflammatory enthesitis
•	 Tendency for familial aggregation
•	 RF and ACPA negative
•	 Absence of nodules and other extra-articular features of RA
•	 Typical overlapping extra-articular features:
Mucosal inflammation: conjunctivitis, buccal ulceration, 
urethritis, prostatitis, bowel ulceration
Pustular skin lesions and nail dystrophy
Anterior uveitis
Aortic root fibrosis (aortic incompetence, conduction 
defects)
Erythema nodosum
25.64  Clinical features common to seronegative 
spondyloarthritis
•	 Anterior uveitis (25%) and conjunctivitis (20%)
•	 Prostatitis (80% men): usually asymptomatic
•	 Cardiovascular disease
Aortic incompetence
Mitral incompetence
Cardiac conduction defects
Pericarditis
•	 Amyloidosis
•	 Atypical upper lobe pulmonary fibrosis
25.65  Extra-articular features of 
ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1106
Axial spondyloarthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Imaging
Sacroiliitis on MRI only
Bilateral sacroiliitis on X-ray, 
even if changes are mild
Unilateral sacroiliitis on X-ray 
if changes are definite
History
Back pain > 3 mths which has 
four of the following 
characteristics:
1.	improved by exercise
2.	not relieved by rest
3.	insidious onset
4.	night pain
5.	age at onset < 40
Back pain > 3 mths 
improved by exercise and not 
relieved by rest
Good response of back pain to 
NSAID
Family history of 
spondyloarthritis
History of inflammatory bowel 
disease
Clinical examination
Arthritis
Enthesitis
Uveitis
Dactylitis
Psoriasis
Limitation of lumbar spine 
movement in sagittal and 
frontal planes
Chest expansion reduced
Investigations
HLA-B27-positive
Elevated CRP
Axial spondyloarthritis is diagnosed when there is sacroiliitis 
on MRI plus one other feature on history, clinical examination  
or investigation. The diagnosis can also be made in patients  
who are HLA-B27-positive with two or more clinical features  
in the absence of sacroiliitis
Ankylosing spondylitis can be diagnosed when X-ray evidence 
of sacroiliitis occurs with one other feature on history or  
clinical examination
25.67  Diagnostic criteria for ankylosing 
spondylitis and axial spondyloarthritis
Fig. 25.36  X-ray changes in spondyloarthropathies. A Fine symmetrical marginal syndesmophytes typical of ankylosing spondylitis (arrow).
 B Coarse, asymmetrical non-marginal syndesmophytes typical of psoriatic/Reiter’s spondylitis (arrow). 
A
B
Question
Score
1. How would you describe the overall level of fatigue 
or tiredness you have experienced?
1–10
2. How would you describe the overall level of neck, 
back or hip pain you have had?
1–10
3. How would you describe the overall level of pain 
and swelling you have had in joints other than the 
neck, back or hip?
1–10
4. How would you describe the overall level of 
discomfort you have had from any areas tender to 
touch or pressure?
1–10
5. How would you describe the overall level of 
discomfort you have had from the time you wake up?
1–10
6. How long does your morning stiffness last from the 
time you wake up?
0 hr to 
2+ hrs
The patient is asked to complete each question. The score is 
calculated by taking the average of all 6 questions, where 
duration of morning stiffness in minutes is coded in 12-minute 
increments from none (1) to 120 (10). Online calculators are also 
available at http://basdai.com
25.66  Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease 
Activity Index
seen. These are areas of calcification that follow the out­
ermost fibres of the annulus (Fig. 25.36). In advanced 
disease, ossification of the anterior longitudinal liga­
ment and facet joint fusion may also be visible. The 
combination of these features may result in the typical 
‘bamboo’ spine (Fig. 25.37). Erosive changes may be seen 
in the symphysis pubis, the ischial tuberosities and 
peripheral joints. Osteoporosis and atlanto-axial disloca­
tion can occur as late features. Patients with early disease 
can have normal X-rays, and if clinical suspicion is high, 
MRI should be performed. This is much more sensitive 
for detection of early sacroiliitis than X-ray (Fig. 25.38) 
and can also detect inflammatory changes in the lumbar 
spine.
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies
25
1107
The ESR and CRP are usually raised in active disease 
but may be normal. Testing for HLA-B27 can be helpful, 
especially in patients with back pain suggestive of an 
inflammatory cause, when other investigations have 
yielded equivocal results. Autoantibodies such as RF, 
ACPA and ANA are negative.
Management
The aims of management are to relieve pain and stiff­
ness, maintain a maximal range of skeletal mobility and 
avoid the development of deformities. Education and 
appropriate physical activity are the cornerstones of 
management. Early in the disease, patients should be 
taught to perform daily back extension exercises, includ­
ing a morning ‘warm-up’ routine, and to punctuate 
Fig. 25.37  ‘Bamboo’ spine of severe late ankylosing spondylitis. 
Note the symmetrical marginal syndesmophytes (arrows), sacroiliac joint 
fusion and generalised osteopenia. 
prolonged periods of inactivity with regular breaks. 
Swimming is ideal exercise. Poor posture must be 
avoided. NSAIDs and analgesics are often effective in 
relieving symptoms and may alter the underlying course 
of the disease. A long-acting NSAID at night is helpful 
for alleviation of morning stiffness. Peripheral arthritis 
can be treated with methotrexate or sulfasalazine, but 
these drugs have no effect on axial disease. Anti-TNF 
therapy should be considered in patients who are inad­
equately controlled on  standard therapy with a BASDAI 
score of ≥ 4.0 and a spinal pain score of ≥ 4.0. Anti-TNF 
therapy frequently improves symptoms but has not been 
shown to prevent ankylosis or alter natural history of 
the disease. Other biological interventions using agents 
developed for RA have been disappointing, suggesting 
fundamental differences in disease pathogenesis.
Local corticosteroid injections can be useful for per­
sistent plantar fasciitis, other enthesopathies and periph­
eral arthritis. Oral corticosteroids may be required for 
acute uveitis but do not help spinal disease. Severe hip, 
knee or shoulder restriction may require surgery. Total 
hip arthroplasty has largely removed the need for dif­
ficult spinal surgery in those with advanced deformity.
Reactive arthritis
Reactive arthritis (previously known as Reiter’s disease) 
is predominantly a disease of young men, with a male 
preponderance of 15 : 1. It is the most common cause 
of inflammatory arthritis in men aged 16–35 but may 
occur at any age. Between 1 and 2% of patients with 
non-specific urethritis seen at genitourinary medicine 
clinics have reactive arthritis (p. 415). Following an epi­
demic of Shigella dysentery, 20% of HLA-B27-positive 
men developed reactive arthritis. Reactive arthritis may 
present with the triad described in Box 25.68 but many 
patients present with arthritis only.
Clinical features
The onset is typically acute, with an inflammatory 
oligo­arthritis that is asymmetrical and targets lower 
limb joints, such as the knees, ankles, midtarsal and 
MTP joints. It occasionally presents with single joint 
Fig. 25.38  MRI appearances in sacroiliitis. Coronal MRI short T1 
inversion recovery (STIR) sequence showing bilateral sacroiliitis in early 
ankylosing spondylitis. Bone marrow oedema (circles) is present around 
both sacroiliac joints, which show irregularities due to erosions (arrows). 
Classic triad*
•	 Non-specific urethritis
•	 Conjunctivitis (~50%)
•	 Reactive arthritis
Additional extra-articular features
•	 Circinate balanitis  
(20–50%)
•	 Keratoderma  
blennorrhagica (15%)
•	 Nail dystrophy
•	 Buccal erosions (10%)
Precipitated by
•	 Bacterial dysentery, mainly Salmonella, Shigella, 
Campylobacter or Yersinia
•	 Sexually acquired infection with Chlamydia
*Incomplete forms with just one or two of the classic triad are more 
frequent than the full syndrome.
25.68  Reiter’s disease
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1108
involvement and no clear history of an infectious trigger. 
There may be considerable systemic disturbance, with 
fever and weight loss. Achilles tendinitis or plantar fas­
ciitis may also be present. The first attack of arthritis is 
usually self-limiting, but recurrent or chronic arthritis 
develops in more than 60% of patients, and about 10% 
still have active disease 20 years after the initial presen­
tation. Low back pain and stiffness are common and 
15–20% of patients develop sacroiliitis. Spondylitis, 
chronic erosive arthritis, recurrent acute arthritis and 
uveitis are the major causes of long-term morbidity.
Several extra-articular features may occur (see 
Box 25.68). Circinate balanitis starts as vesicles on the 
coronal margin of the prepuce and glans penis, later 
rupturing to form superficial erosions with minimal sur­
rounding erythema, some coalescing to give a circular 
pattern. Lesions are often painless and may escape 
notice. Keratoderma blennorrhagica begins as discrete 
waxy, yellow-brown vesico-papules with desquamating 
margins, occasionally coalescing to form large crusty 
plaques. The palms and soles are particularly affected 
but spread may occur to the scrotum, scalp and trunk. 
These lesions are indistinguishable from pustular pso­
riasis. Nail dystrophy with subungual hyperkeratosis is 
common and indistinguishable from psoriatic nail dys­
trophy. Mouth ulcers manifest as shallow red painless 
patches on tongue, palate, buccal mucosa and lips, 
lasting only a few days. Conjunctivitis may accompany 
the first acute episode. Uveitis is rare with the first attack 
but occurs in 30% of patients with recurring or chronic 
arthritis.
Other 
complications 
are 
rare 
but 
include 
aortic 
incompetence, 
conduction 
defects, 
pleuro-
pericarditis, peripheral neuropathy, seizures and 
meningoencephalitis.
Investigations
The diagnosis is usually made clinically but joint aspira­
tion may be required to exclude crystal arthritis and 
articular infection. Synovial fluid is leucocyte-rich and 
may contain multinucleated macrophages (Reiter’s 
cells). ESR and CRP are raised during an acute attack. 
Urethritis may be confirmed in the ‘two-glass test’ by 
demonstration of mucoid threads in the first-void speci­
men that clear in the second. High vaginal swabs may 
reveal Chlamydia on culture. Except for post-Salmonella 
arthritis, stool cultures are usually negative by the time 
the arthritis presents, but serum agglutinin tests may 
help confirm previous dysentery. RF, ACPA and ANA 
are negative.
In chronic or recurrent disease, X-rays show 
periarticular osteoporosis, joint space narrowing and 
proliferative erosions. Another characteristic feature is 
periostitis, especially of metatarsals, phalanges and 
pelvis, and large, ‘fluffy’ calcaneal spurs. In contrast to 
AS, radiographic sacroiliitis is often asymmetrical and 
sometimes unilateral, and syndesmophytes are predom­
inantly coarse and asymmetrical, often extending 
beyond the contours of the annulus (‘non-marginal’) 
(see Fig. 25.36B). X-ray changes in the peripheral joints 
and spine are identical to those in psoriasis.
Management
The acute attack should be treated with rest, oral NSAIDs 
and analgesics. Intra-articular steroids may be required 
in patients with severe synovitis. Non-specific chlamy­
dial urethritis is usually treated with a short course of 
doxycycline or a single dose of azithromycin, and this 
may reduce the frequency of arthritis in sexually 
acquired cases. Treatment with DMARDs should be con­
sidered for patients with persistent marked symptoms, 
recurrent arthritis or severe keratoderma blennorrha­
gica. Anterior uveitis is a medical emergency requiring 
topical, subconjunctival or systemic corticosteroids.
Psoriatic arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) occurs in 7–20% of patients with 
psoriasis and in up to 0.6% of the general population. 
The onset is usually between 25 and 40 years of age. 
Most patients (70%) have pre-existing psoriasis but 
in 20% the arthritis predates the occurrence of skin 
disease. Occasionally, the arthritis and psoriasis develop 
synchronously.
Clinical features
The presentation is with pain and swelling affecting the 
joints and entheses. Several patterns of joint involve­
ment are recognised but the course is generally one of 
intermittent exacerbation followed by varying periods 
of complete or near-complete remission. Destructive 
arthritis and disability are uncommon, except in the case 
of arthritis mutilans.
•	 Asymmetrical inflammatory oligoarthritis affects about 
40% of patients and often presents abruptly with a 
combination of synovitis and adjacent periarticular 
inflammation. This occurs most characteristically in 
the hands and feet, when synovitis of a finger or toe 
is coupled with tenosynovitis, enthesitis and 
inflammation of intervening tissue to give a 
‘sausage digit’ or dactylitis (Fig. 25.39A). Large 
joints, such as the knee and ankle, may also be 
involved, sometimes with very large effusions.
•	 Symmetrical polyarthritis occurs in about 25% of 
cases. It predominates in women and may strongly 
resemble RA, with symmetrical involvement of 
small and large joints in both upper and lower 
limbs. Nodules and other extra-articular features  
of RA are absent and arthritis is generally less 
extensive and more benign. Much of the hand 
deformity often results from tenosynovitis and soft 
tissue contractures.
•	 Distal IPJ arthritis is an uncommon but characteristic 
pattern affecting men more often than women. It 
targets finger DIP joints and surrounding 
periarticular tissues, almost invariably with 
accompanying nail dystrophy (Fig. 25.39B).
•	 Psoriatic spondylitis presents a similar clinical picture 
to AS but with less severe involvement. It may 
occur alone or with any of the other clinical patterns 
described above and is typically unilateral or 
asymmetric in severity.
•	 Arthritis mutilans is a deforming erosive arthritis 
targeting the fingers and toes that occurs in 5%  
of cases of PsA. Prominent cartilage and bone 
destruction results in marked instability. The 
encasing skin appears invaginated and ‘telescoped’ 
(‘main en lorgnette’) and the finger can be pulled 
back to its original length.
Connective tissue diseases
25
1109
Nail changes include pitting, onycholysis, subungual 
hyperkeratosis and horizontal ridging. They are found 
in 85% of those with PsA and only 30% of those with 
uncomplicated psoriasis, and can occur in the absence 
of skin disease. The characteristic rash of psoriasis 
(p. 1286) may be widespread, or confined to the scalp, 
natal cleft and umbilicus, where it is easily overlooked. 
Conjunctivitis can occur, whereas uveitis is mainly con­
fined to HLA-B27-positive individuals with sacroiliitis 
and spondylitis.
Investigations
The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds. Autoantibod­
ies are generally negative and acute phase reactants, 
such as ESR and CRP, are raised in only a proportion of 
patients with active disease. X-rays may be normal or 
show erosive change with joint space narrowing. Fea­
tures that favour PsA over RA include the characteristic 
distribution (see Fig 25.9, p. 1070) of proliferative ero­
sions with marked new bone formation, absence of peri­
articular osteoporosis and osteosclerosis. Imaging of the 
axial skeleton often reveals features similar to those 
in chronic reactive arthritis, with coarse, asymmetrical, 
non-marginal syndesmophytes and asymmetrical sacro­
iliitis. MRI and ultrasound with power Doppler are 
increasingly employed to detect synovial inflammation 
and inflammation at the entheses.
Management
Therapy with NSAID and analgesics may be sufficient 
to control symptoms in mild disease. Intra-articular 
steroid injections can control synovitis in problem joints. 
Splints and prolonged rest should be avoided because 
of the tendency to fibrous and bony ankylosis. Patients 
with spondylitis should be prescribed the same exercise 
and posture regime as in AS.
Therapy with DMARDs should be considered for 
persistent synovitis unresponsive to conservative treat­
ment. Methotrexate is the drug of first choice since it 
may also help skin psoriasis, but other DMARDs may 
also be effective, including sulfasalazine, ciclosporin and 
leflunomide. DMARD monitoring should take place 
with particular attention to liver function since abnor­
malities are common in PsA. Hydroxychloroquine is 
generally avoided, as it can cause exfoliative skin reac­
tions. Anti-TNF treatment should be considered for 
patients with active synovitis who respond inadequately 
to standard DMARDs. This is effective for both PsA and 
psoriasis. Other biological treatments, such as ustekinu­
mab, are emerging, which target the IL-12/23 receptor. 
Ustekinumab is highly effective in the treatment of pso­
riatic skin disease and is often effectve in PsA.
The retinoid acitretin (p. 1267) is effective for skin 
lesions and, anecdotally, may also help arthritis, but it 
is teratogenic so must be avoided in young women. It 
also causes mucocutaneous side-effects, hyperlipidae­
mia, myalgias and extraspinal calcification. Photo­
chemotherapy with methoxypsoralen and long-wave 
ultraviolet light (psoralen + UVA, PUVA) is primarily 
used for skin disease, but can also help those with syn­
chronous exacerbations of inflammatory arthritis.
Enteropathic arthritis
An acute inflammatory oligoarthritis occurs in around 
10% of patients with ulcerative colitis and 20% of those 
with Crohn’s disease. It predominantly affects the large 
lower limb joints (knees, ankles, hips) but wrists and 
small joints of the hands and feet can also be involved. 
The arthritis usually coincides with exacerbations of the 
underlying bowel disease, and sometimes is accompa­
nied by aphthous mouth ulcers, iritis and erythema 
nodosum. It improves with effective treatment of the 
bowel disease, and can be cured by total colectomy in 
patients with ulcerative colitis. Patients with inflamma­
tory bowel disease may also develop sacroiliitis (16%) 
and AS (6%), which are clinically and radiologically 
identical to classic AS. These can predate or follow the 
onset of bowel disease and there is no correlation 
between activity of the spondylitis and bowel disease. 
The arthritis often remits with treatment of the bowel 
disease but DMARD and biological treatment is occa­
sionally required.
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
These share overlapping clinical features, characterised 
by dysregulation of immune responses, autoantibody 
production often directed at components of the cell 
nucleus, and widespread tissue damage.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a rare disease 
with a prevalence that ranges from about 0.03% in 
Fig. 25.39  Psoriatic arthropathy. A ‘Sausage’ middle finger of a 
patient with psoriatic arthritis. B Typical distal interphalangeal joint 
pattern with accompanying nail dystrophy (pitting and onycholysis). 
A
B
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1110
Fig. 25.40  Severe secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon leading to 
digital ulceration. 
Fig. 25.41  Butterfly (malar) rash of systemic lupus 
erythematosus, sparing the nasolabial folds. 
Caucasians to 0.2% in Afro-Caribbeans. Some 90% of 
affected patients are female and the peak age at onset is 
between 20 and 30 years. Lupus is associated with con­
siderable morbidity and a five-fold increase in mortality 
compared to age- and gender-matched controls, mainly 
because of an increased risk of premature cardiovascular 
disease.
Pathophysiology
The cause of SLE is incompletely understood but genetic 
factors play an important role. There is a higher concord­
ance in monozygotic twins and the disease is strongly 
associated with polymorphic variants at the HLA locus. 
In a few instances, SLE is associated with inherited 
mutations in complement components C1q, C2 and C4, 
in the immunoglobulin receptor FcγRIIIb or in the DNA 
exonuclease TREX1. Genome-wide association studies 
have identified common polymorphisms near several 
other genes that predispose to SLE, most of which are 
involved in regulating immune cell function. From an 
immunological standpoint, the characteristic feature of 
SLE is autoantibody production. These autoantibodies 
have specificity for a wide range of targets but many are 
directed against antigens present within the cell or 
within the nucleus. This has led to the hypothesis that 
SLE may occur because of defects in apoptosis or in the 
clearance of apoptotic cells, which causes inappropriate 
exposure of intracellular antigens on the cell surface, 
leading to polyclonal B- and T-cell activation and 
autoantibody production. This is supported by the fact 
that environmental factors that cause flares of lupus, 
such as UV light and infections, increase oxidative stress 
and cause cell damage. Whatever the underlying cause 
of the autoantibody production, immune complex for­
mation is thought to be an important mechanism of 
tissue damage in active SLE, leading to vasculitis and 
organ damage.
Clinical features
Symptoms such as fever, weight loss and mild lymph­
adenopathy may occur during flares of disease activity, 
whereas others such as fatigue, malaise and fibromyalgia-
like symptoms can be constant and not particularly asso­
ciated with active inflammatory disease.
Arthritis
Arthralgia is a common symptom, occurring in 90% of 
patients, and is often associated with early morning 
stiffness. Tenosynovitis may also occur but clinically 
apparent synovitis with joint swelling is rare. Joint 
deformities may occur (Jaccoud’s arthropathy) as the 
result of tendon damage, but joint erosions do not occur. 
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Raynaud’s syndrome (p. 602) is common and may ante­
date other symptoms by months or years. A common 
presentation is Raynaud’s in combination with arthral­
gia or arthritis (Fig. 25.40). Raynaud’s associated with 
SLE and other connective tissue disease needs to be dif­
ferentiated from primary Raynaud’s, which is common 
in healthy young women. Features in favour of second­
ary Raynaud’s include age at onset of over 25 years, 
absence of a family history of Raynaud’s, and occurrence 
in a male. Examination of capillary nail-fold loops using 
an ophthalmoscope (and oil placed on the skin) may 
help distinguish primary from secondary Raynaud’s. 
Loss of the normal loop pattern, with capillary ‘fallout’ 
and dilatation and branching of loops, supports connec­
tive tissue disease.
Skin
Rash is common in SLE and is classically precipitated by 
exposure to UV light. Three distinct types occur:
•	 The classic butterfly facial rash (up to 20% of 
patients). This is erythematous, raised and painful 
or itchy, and occurs over the cheeks with sparing of 
the nasolabial folds (Fig. 25.41).
•	 The subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus 
(SCLE) rash, which is migratory, non-scarring and 
either annular or psoriaform.
•	 The discoid lupus rash characterised by 
hyperkeratosis and follicular plugging, with 
scarring alopecia if it occurs on the scalp.
Diffuse, usually non-scarring alopecia may also occur 
with active disease. Other skin manifestations include 
periungual erythema (reflecting dilated capillary loops), 
vasculitis and livedo reticularis (Fig. 25.42), which is also 
a common feature of the antiphospholipid syndrome 
(p. 1055).
Connective tissue diseases
25
1111
Kidney
Renal involvement is one of the main determinants of 
prognosis, and regular monitoring of urinalysis and 
blood pressure is essential. The typical renal lesion is a 
proliferative glomerulonephritis (p. 498), characterised 
by heavy haematuria, proteinuria and casts on urine 
microscopy.
Cardiovascular
The most common manifestation is pericarditis. Myocar­
ditis and Libman–Sacks endocarditis can also occur. The 
endocarditis is due to accumulation on the heart valves 
of sterile fibrin containing vegetations, which is thought 
to be a manifestation of hypercoagulability associated 
with antiphospholipid antibodies. The risk of atheroscle­
rosis is greatly increased, as is the risk of stroke and 
myocardial infarction. This is thought to be multifacto­
rial due to the adverse effects of inflammation on the 
endothelium, chronic steroid therapy and the procoagu­
lant effects of antiphospholipid antibodies.
Lung
Lung involvement is common and most frequently 
mani­fests as pleurisy or pleural effusion. Other features 
include pneumonitis, atelectasis, reduced lung volume 
and pulmonary fibrosis that leads to breathlessness. The 
risk of thromboembolism is increased, especially in 
patients with antiphospholipid antibodies.
Neurological
Fatigue, headache and poor concentration are common, 
and often occur in the absence of laboratory evidence of 
active disease. More specific features of cerebral lupus 
include visual hallucinations, chorea, organic psychosis, 
transverse myelitis and lymphocytic meningitis.
Haematological
Neutropenia, 
lymphopenia, 
thrombocytopenia 
or 
haemolytic anaemia may occur, due to antibody-
mediated destruction of peripheral blood cells. The 
degree of lymphopenia is a good guide to disease 
activity.
Gastrointestinal
Mouth ulcers may occur and may or may not be painful. 
Mesenteric vasculitis is a serious complication, which 
can present with abdominal pain, bowel infarction or 
perforation.
Investigations
The diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical fea­
tures and laboratory abnormalities. To fulfil the classifi­
cation criteria for SLE, at least 4 of the 11 factors shown 
in Box 25.69 must be present or have occurred in the 
past. Patients should be screened for ANA and antibod­
ies to extractable nuclear antigens, and have comple­
ment levels checked along with routine haematology 
and biochemistry. Patients with active SLE almost 
always test positive for ANA, but ANA-negative SLE 
can very rarely occur in the presence of antibodies to 
the Ro antigen. Anti-dsDNA antibodies are characteris­
tic of severe active SLE but only occur in around 30% of 
cases. Similarly, patients with active disease tend to have 
low levels of C3 and C4, but this may be the result of 
inherited complement deficiency that predisposes to 
SLE. Studies of other family members can help to dif­
ferentiate inherited deficiency from complement con­
sumption. A raised ESR, leucopenia and lymphopenia 
are typical of active SLE, along with anaemia, haemo­
lytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia. CRP is often 
normal in active SLE, except in the presence of serositis, 
and an elevated CRP suggests coexisting infection.
Management
The therapeutic goals are to educate the patient about 
the nature of the illness, to control symptoms and to 
Fig. 25.42  Livedo reticularis in systemic lupus erythematosus. 
Features
Characteristics
Malar rash
Fixed erythema, flat or raised, sparing the 
nasolabial folds
Discoid rash
Erythematous raised patches with adherent 
keratotic scarring and follicular plugging
Photosensitivity
Rash due to unusual reaction to sunlight
Oral ulcers
Oral or nasopharyngeal ulceration, which 
may be painless
Arthritis
Non-erosive, involving two or more 
peripheral joints
Serositis
Pleuritis (history of pleuritic pain or rub, or 
pleural effusion) or pericarditis (rub, ECG 
evidence or effusion)
Renal disorder
Persistent proteinuria > 0.5 g/day or 
cellular casts (red cell, granular or tubular)
Neurological 
disorder
Seizures or psychosis, in the absence of 
provoking drugs or metabolic derangement
Haematological 
disorder
Haemolytic anaemia or leucopenia* (< 4 × 
109/L) or lymphopenia* (< 1 × 109/L) or 
thrombocytopenia* (< 100 × 109/L) in the 
absence of offending drugs
Immunological 
disorder
Anti-DNA antibodies in abnormal titre or 
presence of antibody to Sm antigen or 
positive antiphospholipid antibodies
ANA disorder
Abnormal titre of ANA by 
immunofluorescence
A person has SLE if any 4 out of these 11 features are present 
serially or simultaneously.
*On two separate occasions.
25.69  Revised American Rheumatism Association 
criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1112
prevent organ damage. Patients should be advised to 
avoid sun and UV light exposure and to employ sun 
blocks (factor 25–50).
Mild to moderate disease
Patients with mild disease restricted to skin and joints 
can sometimes be managed with analgesics, NSAID 
and hydroxychloroquine (200–400 mg daily). Fre­
quently, however, corticosteroids are also necessary 
(prednisolone 5–20 mg/day), often in combination with 
immunosuppressants such as methotrexate, azathio­
prine or mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). Increased doses 
of steroids may be required for flares in activity or com­
plications such as pleurisy or pericarditis. The mono­
clonal antibody belimumab, which targets the β-cell 
growth factor BLyS, has recently been shown to be effec­
tive in patients with active SLE who have responded 
inadequately to standard therapy.
Life-threatening disease
High-dose corticosteroids and immunosuppressants are 
required for the treatment of renal, CNS and cardiac 
involvement. A commonly used regimen is pulse 
methyl­prednisolone (10 mg/kg IV), coupled with cyclo­
phosphamide (15 mg/kg IV), repeated at 2–3-weekly 
intervals for six cycles. Cyclophosphamide may cause 
haemorrhagic cystitis, but the risk can be minimised 
by good hydration and co-prescription of mesna, 
which binds its urotoxic metabolites. Because of the 
risk of azoospermia and anovulation (which may be per­
manent), pre-treatment sperm or ova collection and 
storage need to be considered prior to treatment with 
cyclophosphamide.
Mycophenolate mofetil has been used successfully in 
combination with high-dose steroids for renal involve­
ment in SLE, with results equivalent to those of pulse 
cyclophosphamide but fewer adverse effects. The role of 
belimumab in life-threatening SLE remains to be estab­
lished since clinical trials of this agent excluded patients 
with renal and cerebral lupus.
Maintenance therapy
Following control of the acute episode, the patient 
should be switched to oral immunosuppressive medica­
tion. A typical regimen is to start oral prednisolone in a 
dose of 40–60 mg daily on cessation of pulse therapy, 
gradually reducing to reach a target of 10–15 mg/day or 
less by 3 months. Azathioprine (2–2.5 mg/kg/day), 
methotrexate (10–25 mg/week) or MMF (2–3 g/day) 
should also be prescribed. The long-term aim is to con­
tinue the lowest dose of corticosteroids and immuno­
suppressant that will maintain remission. Cardiovascular 
risk factors, such as hypertension and hyperlipidaemia, 
should be controlled and patients advised to stop 
smoking.
Lupus patients with the antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome (p. 1055) who have had previous thrombosis 
require life-long warfarin therapy.
Systemic sclerosis
Systemic sclerosis, or scleroderma, is a generalised dis­
order of connective tissue affecting the skin, internal 
organs and vasculature. It is characterised by sclero­
dactyly in combination with Raynaud’s and digital 
ischaemia (Fig. 25.43). The peak age of onset is in the 
fourth and fifth decades, and overall prevalence is 10–20 
per 100 000, with a 4 : 1 female preponderance. It is sub­
divided into diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis (DCSS: 
30% of cases) and limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis 
(LCSS: 70% of cases). Many patients with LCSS have 
features that are phenotypically grouped into the 
‘CREST’ syndrome (Calcinosis, Raynaud’s, oEsophageal 
involvement, Sclerodactyly and Telangiectasia). The 
prognosis in DCSS is poor, with a 5-year survival of 
approximately 70%. Features that associate with a poor 
prognosis include older age, diffuse skin disease, pro­
teinuria, high ESR, a low TLCO (gas transfer factor for 
carbon monoxide) and pulmonary hypertension.
Pathophysiology
The cause of systemic sclerosis is poorly understood. 
There is evidence for a genetic component, and associa­
tions with alleles at the HLA locus have been found. The 
disease occurs in all ethnic groups, and race may influ­
ence severity, since DCSS is significantly more common 
in black women than white. Isolated cases have been 
reported in which a systemic sclerosis-like disease has 
been triggered by exposure to silica dust, vinyl chloride, 
hypoxyresins and trichloroethylene. There is clear evi­
dence of immunological dysfunction: T lymphocytes, 
especially those of the Th17 subtype, infiltrate the skin 
and there is abnormal fibroblast activation, leading to 
increased production of extracellular matrix in the 
dermis, primarily type I collagen. This results in sym­
metrical thickening, tightening and induration of the 
skin (sclerodactyly). Arterial and arteriolar narrowing 
occurs due to intimal proliferation and vessel wall 
inflammation. Endothelial injury causes release of vaso­
constrictors and platelet activation, resulting in further 
ischaemia, which is thought to exacerbate the fibrotic 
process.
Clinical features
Skin
Initially, there is non-pitting oedema of fingers and 
flexor tendon sheaths. Subsequently, the skin becomes 
shiny and taut, and distal skin creases disappear. This is 
accompanied by erythema and tortuous dilatation of 
capillary loops in the nail-fold bed, readily visible with 
Fig. 25.43  Systemic sclerosis. Hands showing tight, shiny skin, 
sclerodactyly, flexion contractures of the fingers and thickening of the left 
middle finger extensor tendon sheath. 
Connective tissue diseases
25
1113
Fig. 25.44  Typical facial appearance in the CREST syndrome. 
ischaemia. Fibrosing alveolitis mainly affects patients 
with DCSS who have topoisomerase 1 antibodies.
Renal involvement
One of the main causes of death is hypertensive renal 
crisis, characterised by rapidly developing malignant 
hypertension and renal failure. Hypertensive renal crisis 
is much more likely to occur in DCSS than in LCSS, and 
in patients with topoisomerase 1 antibodies.
Investigations
Scleroderma is primarily a clinical diagnosis but various 
laboratory abnormalities are characteristic. The ESR is 
usually elevated and raised levels of IgG are common, 
but CRP values tend to be normal unless there is severe 
organ involvement or coexisting infection. ANA is posi­
tive in about 70%, and approximately 30% of patients 
with DCSS have antibodies to topoisomerase 1 (Scl-70). 
About 60% of patients with CREST syndrome have anti­
centromere antibodies (p. 1068).
Management
No treatments are available that halt or reverse the 
fibrotic changes that underlie the disease. The focus of 
management, therefore, is to ameliorate the effects of the 
disease on target organs.
•	 Raynaud’s syndrome and digital ulcers. Raynaud’s 
should be treated by avoidance of cold exposure 
and use of mittens (heated mittens are available), 
supplemented if necessary with calcium 
antagonists. Intermittent infusions of prostacyclin 
may benefit severe digital ischaemia. The endothelin 
1 antagonist bosentan can be of value in promoting 
healing of digital ulcers. If these become infected, 
antibiotics may be required, but as these penetrate 
tissues poorly in scleroderma, they need to be given 
at higher doses for a longer duration than usual.
•	 Oesophageal reflux should be treated with proton 
pump inhibitors and anti-reflux agents. Antibiotics 
may be required for bacterial overgrowth 
syndromes, and metoclopramide or domperidone 
may help patients with symptoms of 
pseudo-obstruction.
•	 Hypertension should be treated aggressively 
with ACE inhibitors, even if renal impairment is 
present. 
•	 Joint involvement may be treated with analgesics 
and/or NSAID. If synovitis is present, 
immunosuppressants such as methotrexate can also 
be of value.
•	 Pulmonary hypertension may be treated with 
bosentan. In selected patients, heart–lung 
transplantation may be considered. Corticosteroids 
and cytotoxic drugs are indicated in patients who 
have coexisting myositis or fibrosing alveolitis.
Mixed connective tissue disease
Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is a condition 
in which the clinical features of SLE, systemic sclerosis 
and myositis may all occur in the same patient. It most 
commonly presents with synovitis and oedema of the 
hands, in combination with Raynaud’s phenomenon 
and muscle pain or weakness. Most patients have 
an ophthalmoscope or dissecting microscope (and oil 
placed on the skin). The face and neck are usually 
involved next, with thinning of the lips and radial fur­
rowing. In some patients, skin thickening stops at this 
stage. Skin involvement restricted to sites distal to 
the elbow or knee (apart from the face) is classified as 
‘limited disease’ or CREST syndrome (Fig. 25.44). 
Involvement proximal to the knee and elbow and on the 
trunk is classified as ‘diffuse disease’.
Raynaud’s phenomenon
This is a universal feature and can precede other features 
by many years. Involvement of small blood vessels in 
the extremities may cause critical tissue ischaemia, 
leading to skin ulceration over pressure areas, localised 
areas of infarction and pulp atrophy at the fingertips.
Musculoskeletal features
Arthralgia, morning stiffness and flexor tenosynovitis 
are common. Restricted hand function is due to skin 
rather than joint disease and erosive arthropathy is 
uncommon. Muscle weakness and wasting can occur 
due to myositis.
Gastrointestinal involvement
Smooth muscle atrophy and fibrosis in the lower two-
thirds of the oesophagus lead to reflux with erosive 
oesophagitis. Dysphagia and odynophagia may also 
occur. Involvement of the stomach causes early satiety 
and occasionally outlet obstruction. Recurrent occult 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding may indicate a ‘water­
melon’ stomach (antral vascular ectasia), which occurs 
in up to 20% of patients. Small intestine involvement 
may lead to malabsorption due to bacterial overgrowth 
and intermittent bloating, pain or constipation. Dilata­
tion of large or small bowel due to autonomic neu­
ropathy may cause pseudo-obstruction with nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal discomfort and distension, often 
worse after food.
Pulmonary involvement
This is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Pulmo­
nary hypertension complicates long-standing disease 
and is six times more prevalent in LCSS than in DCSS. 
It presents with rapidly progressive dyspnoea (more 
rapid than interstitial lung disease), right heart failure 
and angina, often in association with severe digital 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1114
normal result is more than 6 mm of wetting. Staining 
with rose Bengal may show punctate epithelial abnor­
malities over the area not covered by the open eyelid. If 
the diagnosis remains in doubt, it can be confirmed by 
lip biopsy, which shows focal lymphocytic infiltrate of 
the minor salivary glands. Most patients have an ele­
vated ESR and hypergammaglobulinaemia, and one or 
more autoantibodies, including ANA and RF. Anti-Ro 
and anti-La antibodies are commonly present (see Box 
25.11, p. 1068).
Management
No treatments that have disease-modifying effects have 
yet been identified and management is symptomatic. 
Lachrymal substitutes, such as hypromellose, should be 
used during the day in combination with more viscous 
lubricating ointment at night. Soft contact lenses can be 
useful for corneal protection in patients with filamentary 
keratitis, and occlusion of the lachrymal ducts is occa­
sionally needed. Artificial saliva and oral gels can be 
tried for xerostomia but are often not effective. Stimula­
tion of saliva flow by sugar-free chewing gum or loz­
enges may be helpful. Adequate post-prandial oral 
hygiene and prompt treatment of oral candidiasis are 
essential. Vaginal dryness is treated with lubricants such 
as K-Y jelly. Extraglandular and musculoskeletal mani­
festations may respond to steroids, and if so, immuno­
suppressive drugs can be added for their steroid-sparing 
effect. Fatigue is difficult to treat; this is usually due to 
non-restorative sleep (often because of xerostomia) and 
is unresponsive to steroids. Immunosuppression does 
not improve sicca symptoms. If lymphadenopathy or 
salivary gland enlargement develops, biopsy should be 
performed to exclude malignancy.
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are related disorders 
that are characterised by an inflammatory process affect­
ing skeletal muscle. In dermatomyositis, characteristic 
skin changes also occur. Both diseases are rare, with an 
incidence of 2–10 cases per million/year. They can occur 
in isolation or in association with other autoimmune 
diseases, such as SLE, systemic sclerosis and Sjögren’s 
syndrome. The cause is unknown, although there is evi­
dence for a genetic contribution.
Clinical features
The typical presentation of polymyositis is with 
symmetrical proximal muscle weakness, usually affect­
ing the lower limbs more than the upper. The onset 
is usually between 40 and 60 years of age and is typi­
cally gradual, over a few weeks. Myositis is usually 
widespread but focal disease can also occur. Affected 
patients report difficulty rising from a chair, climbing 
stairs and lifting, sometimes in combination with 
muscle pain. Systemic features of fever, weight loss 
and fatigue are common. Respiratory or pharyngeal 
muscle involvement can lead to ventilatory failure or 
aspiration that requires urgent treatment. Interstitial 
lung disease occurs in up to 30% of patients and is 
strongly associated with the presence of antisynthetase 
(Jo-1) antibodies.
anti-ribonucleoprotein (RNP) antibodies, but these can 
occur in SLE without overlap features. Management 
focuses on treating the individual components of the 
syndrome.
Sjögren’s syndrome
This is an autoimmune disorder of unknown cause, 
characterised by lymphocytic infiltration of salivary and 
lachrymal glands, leading to glandular fibrosis and exo­
crine failure. The typical age of onset is between 40 and 
50, with a 9 : 1 female preponderance. The disease may 
occur in isolation (primary Sjögren’s syndrome) or in 
patients with other autoimmune diseases (secondary 
Sjögren’s syndrome).
Clinical features
The eye symptoms, termed keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 
are due to a lack of lubricating tears, which, in turn, 
reflects inflammatory infiltration of the lacrimal glands. 
Conjunctivitis and blepharitis are frequent, and may 
lead to filamentary keratitis due to tenacious mucous 
filaments binding to the cornea and conjunctiva. Oral 
involvement manifests as a dry mouth and typically the 
patient needs to sip water to swallow food. There is a 
high incidence of dental caries. Other sites of extraglan­
dular involvement are listed in Box 25.70. The disease 
is associated with a 40-fold increased lifetime risk of 
lymphoma.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be established by the Schirmer tear 
test, which measures tear flow over 5 minutes using 
absorbent paper strips placed on the lower eyelid; a 
Risk factors
•	 Age of onset 40–60
•	 Female > male
•	 HLA-B8/DR3
Common clinical features
•	 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
•	 Xerostomia
•	 Salivary gland enlargement
•	 Non-erosive arthritis
•	 Raynaud’s phenomenon
•	 Fatigue
Less common features
•	 Low-grade fever
•	 Interstitial lung disease
•	 Anaemia, leucopenia
•	 Thrombocytopenia
•	 Cryoglobulinaemia
•	 Vasculitis
•	 Peripheral neuropathy
•	 Lymphadenopathy
•	 Lymphoreticular lymphoma
•	 Glomerulonephritis
•	 Renal tubular acidosis
Autoantibodies frequently detected
•	 RF
•	 ANA
•	 SS-A (anti-Ro)
•	 SS-B (anti-La)
•	 Gastric parietal cell
•	 Thyroid
Associated autoimmune disorders
•	 SLE
•	 Progressive systemic  
sclerosis
•	 Primary biliary cirrhosis
•	 Chronic active hepatitis
•	 Myasthenia gravis
25.70  Features of Sjögren’s syndrome
Vasculitis
25
1115
Fig. 25.45  Typical eyelid appearance in dermatomyositis. Note the 
oedema and telangiectasia. 
Fig. 25.46  Muscle biopsy from a patient with inflammatory 
myositis. The sample shows an intense inflammatory cell infiltrate in 
an area of degenerating and regenerating muscle fibres. 
Dermatomyositis presents similarly but in combina­
tion with characteristic skin lesions. These include 
Gottron’s papules, which are scaly, erythematous or vio­
laceous, psoriaform plaques occurring over the extensor 
surfaces of PIP and DIP joints, and a heliotrope rash that 
is a violaceous discoloration of the eyelid in combination 
with periorbital oedema (Fig. 25.45). Similar rashes 
occur on the upper back, chest and shoulders (‘shawl’ 
distribution). Periungual nail-fold capillaries are often 
enlarged and tortuous. There is about a threefold 
increased risk of malignancy in patients with dermato­
myositis and polymyositis. This may be apparent at the 
time of presentation, but the risk remains increased for 
at least 5 years following diagnosis.
Investigations
Muscle biopsy is the pivotal investigation and shows 
the typical features of fibre necrosis, regeneration and 
inflammatory cell infiltrate (Fig. 25.46). Occasionally, 
however, a biopsy may be normal, particularly if myosi­
tis is patchy. In such cases, MRI is used to identify areas 
of abnormal muscle for biopsy. Serum levels of CK are 
usually raised and are a useful measure of disease activ­
ity, although a normal CK does not exclude the diagno­
sis, particularly in juvenile myositis.  EMG can confirm 
the presence of myopathy and exclude neuropathy. 
Screening for underlying malignancy should be under­
taken routinely, and should include CT of chest/
abdomen/pelvis, upper and lower gastrointestinal 
endoscopy, and mammography in women.
Management
Oral corticosteroids (prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily) are 
the mainstay of initial treatment, but high-dose intra­
venous methylprednisolone (1 g/day for 3 days) may be 
required in patients with respiratory or pharyngeal 
weakness. If there is a good response, steroids should be 
reduced by approximately 25% per month to a mainte­
nance dose of 5–7.5 mg. Although most patients respond 
well to corticosteroids, many need additional immuno­
suppressive therapy. Azathioprine and methotrexate are 
the agents of first choice, but ciclosporin, cyclophospha­
mide, tacrolimus or MMF can be used as alternatives. 
Intravenous immunoglobulin may be effective in refrac­
tory cases. Relapses may occur in association with a 
rising CK, and indicate the need for additional therapy. 
If the patient relapses or fails to respond to treatment, 
this may be due to steroid-induced myopathy. A further 
biopsy should be performed and may show type 2 fibre 
atrophy in steroid-induced myopathy, as opposed to 
necrosis and regeneration in active myositis.
Inclusion body myositis
This is an inflammatory disease of muscle of unknown 
cause with a genetic component, which is associated 
with the accumulation of abnormal protein aggregates 
in affected tissue. It presents with muscle weakness in 
those over the age of 40 and is more common in men. 
Although proximal weakness does occur, distal involve­
ment is more usual and may be asymmetrical. Investiga­
tion is the same as for polymyositis (p. 1115) and 
typically reveals a slightly elevated CK and both myo­
pathic and neurogenic changes on EMG. Muscle biopsy 
shows abnormal fibres containing rimmed vacuoles 
and filamentous inclusions in the nucleus and cyto­
plasm. Treatment can be tried with high-dose cortico­
steroids, immunosuppressants and immunoglobulin, as 
described for polymyositis, but the therapeutic response 
is often poor.
VASCULITIS
These are a heterogeneous group of diseases character­
ised by inflammation and necrosis of blood-vessel walls, 
with associated damage to skin, kidney, lung, heart, 
brain and gastrointestinal tract. There is a wide spec­
trum of involvement and disease severity, ranging from 
mild and transient disease affecting only the skin, to 
life-threatening fulminant disease with multiple organ 
failure. Principal sites of involvement for the main types 
of vasculitis are summarised in Figure 25.47. The clinical 
features result from a combination of local tissue ischae­
mia (due to vessel inflammation and narrowing) and the 
systemic effects of widespread inflammation. Systemic 
vasculitis should be considered in any patient with 
fever, weight loss, fatigue, evidence of multisystem 
involvement, rashes, raised inflammatory markers and 
abnormal urinalysis (Box 25.71).
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1116
Systemic
•	 Malaise
•	 Fever
•	 Night sweats
•	 Weight loss with arthralgia 
and myalgia
Rashes
•	 Palpable purpura
•	 Pulp infarcts
•	 Ulceration
•	 Livedo reticularis
Ear, nose and throat
•	 Epistaxis
•	 Recurrent sinusitis
•	 Deafness
Respiratory
•	 Haemoptysis
•	 Cough
•	 Poorly controlled asthma
Gastrointestinal
•	 Abdominal pain (due to 
mucosal inflammation or 
enteric ischaemia)
•	 Mouth ulcers
•	 Diarrhoea
Neurological
•	 Sensory or motor neuropathy
25.71  Clinical features of systemic vasculitis
Giant cell arteritis
Kawasaki disease
Takayasu’s arteritis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Behçet’s syndrome
Behçet’s syndrome
Henoch-Schönlein
purpura
Polyangiitis with
granulomatosis
 
Churg–Strauss
syndrome
Cryoglobulinaemic
vasculitis
Microscopic
polyangiitis
Fig. 25.47  Types of vasculitis. The anatomical 
targets of different forms of vasculitis are shown. 
Takayasu’s disease
Takayasu’s disease predominantly affects the aorta, its 
major branches and occasionally the pulmonary arteries. 
The typical age at onset is between 25 and 30 years, with 
an 8 : 1 female preponderance. It has a worldwide 
distribution but is most common in Asia. Takayasu’s is 
characterised by granulomatous inflammation of the 
vessel wall, leading to vessel occlusion or weakening 
of the vessel wall. It presents with claudication, fever, 
arthralgia and weight loss. The vessels most commonly 
affected are the aorta and carotid, ulnar, brachial, 
radial and axillary arteries. Clinical examination may 
reveal loss of pulses, bruits, hypertension and aortic 
incompetence. Investigation will identify an acute phase 
response and normocytic, normochromic anaemia, but 
the diagnosis is based on angiography, which reveals 
coarctation, occlusion and aneurysmal dilatation. The 
distribution of involvement is classified into four types:
•	 type 1: localised to the aorta and its branches
•	 type 2: localised to the descending thoracic and 
abdominal aorta
•	 type 3: combines features of 1 and 2
•	 type 4: involves the pulmonary artery.
Treatment is with high-dose steroids and immuno­
suppressants, as described for SLE. With appropriate 
treatment, the 5-year survival is 83%.
Kawasaki disease
Kawasaki disease is a vasculitis that mostly affects the 
coronary vessels. It presents as an acute systemic disor­
der, usually affecting children under 5 years. It occurs 
mainly in Japan and other Asian countries, such as 
China and Korea, but other ethnic groups may also be 
affected. Presentation is with fever, generalised rash, 
including palms and soles, inflamed oral mucosa and 
conjunctival injection resembling a viral exanthem. The 
cause is unknown but is thought to be the result of 
an abnormal immune response to an infectious trigger. 
Cardiovascular complications include coronary arteritis, 
leading to myocardial infarction, transient coronary 
dilatation, myocarditis, pericarditis, peripheral vascular 
insufficiency and gangrene. Treatment is with aspirin 
(5 mg/kg daily for 14 days) and intravenous gamma­
globulin (400 mg/kg daily for 4 days).
Vasculitis
25
1117
underlying disorder. Both diseases are rare under the 
age of 60 years. The average age at onset is 70, with a 
female preponderance of about 3 : 1. The overall preva­
lence is about 20 per 100 000 in those over the age of 
50 years.
Clinical features
The cardinal symptom of GCA is headache, which is 
often localised to the temporal or occipital region and 
may be accompanied by scalp tenderness. Jaw pain 
develops in some patients, brought on by chewing or 
talking, due to ischaemia of the masseter muscles. Visual 
disturbance can occur and a catastrophic presentation is 
with blindness in one eye due to occlusion of the poste­
rior ciliary artery. On fundoscopy, the optic disc may 
appear pale and swollen with haemorrhages, but these 
changes may take 24–36 hours to develop and the fundi 
may initially appear normal. Other visual symptoms 
include loss of visual acuity, reduced colour perception 
and papillary defects. Rarely, neurological involvement 
may occur, with transient ischaemic attacks, brainstem 
infarcts and hemiparesis.
The cardinal features of PMR are symmetrical muscle 
pain and stiffness affecting the shoulder and pelvic 
girdles. Constitutional symptoms, such as weight loss, 
fatigue, malaise and night sweats, are common. The 
onset of symptoms is usually fairly sudden over a few 
days, but may be more insidious. On examination, there 
may be stiffness and painful restriction of active shoul­
der movement but passive movements are preserved. 
Muscles may be tender to palpation but weakness and 
muscle-wasting are absent. Other conditions that mimic 
PMR are shown in Box 25.72.
Investigations
The typical laboratory abnormality is an elevated ESR, 
often with a normochromic, normocytic anaemia. CRP 
may also be elevated and in some cases this precedes 
elevation of the ESR. Rarely, PMR and GCA can present 
with a normal ESR. The diagnosis is usually based on a 
combination of the typical clinical features, raised ESR 
and prompt response to steroid. However, if there is 
doubt concerning the diagnosis of GCA, a temporal 
artery biopsy may be undertaken. Characteristic biopsy 
findings are fragmentation of the internal elastic lamina 
with necrosis of the media in combination with a mixed 
inflammatory cell infiltrate. Whilst a positive biopsy is 
helpful, a negative biopsy does not exclude the diagno­
sis because the lesions are focal. Ultrasound or arteriog­
raphy may be used to help guide the biopsy.
Management
Corticosteroids are the treatment of choice and should 
be commenced urgently in suspected GCA because of 
the risk of visual loss (Box 25.73). Response to treatment 
Fig. 25.48  Rash of systemic vasculitis (palpable purpura). 
Polyarteritis nodosa
Polyarteritis nodosa has a peak incidence between the 
ages of 40 and 50, with a male preponderance of 2 : 1. The 
annual incidence is around 2/1 000 000. Hepatitis B is an 
important risk factor, and the incidence is 10 times 
higher in the Inuit of Alaska, in whom hepatitis B infec­
tion is endemic. Presentation is with fever, myalgia, 
arthralgia and weight loss, in combination with mani­
festations of multisystem disease. The most common 
skin lesions are palpable purpura (Fig. 25.48), ulceration, 
infarction and livedo reticularis (see Fig. 25.42, p. 1111). 
Pathological changes comprise necrotising inflamma­
tion and vessel occlusion, and in 70% of patients, arteri­
tis of the vasa nervorum leads to neuropathy, which is 
typically symmetrical and affects both sensory and 
motor function. Severe hypertension and/or renal 
impairment may occur due to multiple renal infarctions, 
but glomerulonephritis is rare (in contrast to micro­
scopic polyangiitis). The diagnosis is confirmed by angi­
ography, which shows multiple aneurysms and smooth 
narrowing of mesenteric, hepatic or renal systems, or by 
muscle or sural nerve biopsy, which reveals the histo­
logical changes above. Treatment is with high-dose ster­
oids and immunosuppressants, as described for SLE.
Giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia 
rheumatica
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is a granulomatous arteritis 
that predominantly affects medium-sized arteries in the 
head and neck. It is commonly associated with poly­
myalgia rheumatica (PMR), which presents with sym­
metrical muscle pain and stiffness affecting the shoulder 
and pelvic girdles. Since many patients with GCA have 
symptoms of PMR, and many patients with PMR go on 
to develop GCA if untreated, many rheumatologists 
consider them to be different manifestations of the same 
•	 Fibromyalgia
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Cervical spondylosis
•	 RA
•	 Systemic vasculitis
•	 Inflammatory myopathy 
(particularly inclusion body 
myositis, p. 1115)
•	 Malignancy
25.72  Conditions that can mimic 
polymyalgia rheumatica
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1118
occur in 50% of patients. Patients with WG are usually 
proteinase-3 (PR3) antibody-positive.
Patients with active disease usually have a leuco­
cytosis with an elevated CRP and ESR, in association 
with raised ANCA levels. Complement levels are usually 
normal or slightly elevated. Imaging of the upper 
airways or chest with MRI can be useful in localising 
abnormalities but, where possible, the diagnosis should 
be confirmed by biopsy of the kidney or lesions in the 
sinuses and upper airways.
Management 
is 
with 
high-dose 
steroids 
and 
cyclophosphamide, as described for SLE, followed 
by maintenance therapy with lower-dose steroids and 
azathioprine, methotrexate or mycophenolate mofetil 
(MMF). Rituximab in combination with high-dose ster­
oids is equally effective as oral cyclophosphamide at 
inducing remission in ANCA-associated vasculitis. Both 
MPA and WG have a tendency to relapse, and patients 
must be followed on a regular and long-term basis to 
check for clinical signs of recurrence. Measurements of 
ESR, CRP and levels of ANCA antibodies are useful in 
monitoring disease activity.
Churg–Strauss syndrome
Churg–Strauss syndrome (CSS) is a small-vessel vascu­
litis with an incidence of about 1–3 per 1 000 000; it is 
associated with eosinophilia. Some patients have a pro­
dromal period for many years, characterised by allergic 
rhinitis, nasal polyposis and late-onset asthma that is 
often difficult to control. The typical acute presentation 
is with a triad of skin lesions (purpura or nodules), 
asymmetric mononeuritis multiplex and eosinophilia. 
Pulmonary infiltrates and pleural or pericardial effu­
sions due to serositis may be present. Up to 50% of 
patients have abdominal symptoms provoked by 
mesenteric vasculitis. Patients with active disease have 
raised levels of ESR and CRP and an eosinophilia. 
Although antibodies to MPO or PR3 can be detected in 
up to 60% of cases, CSS is considered to be a distinct 
disorder from the other ANCA-associated vasculitides. 
Biopsy of an affected site reveals a small-vessel vascu­
litis with eosinophilic infiltration of the vessel wall. 
Management is with high-dose steroids and cyclophos­
phamide, followed by maintenance therapy with low-
dose steroids and azathioprine, methotrexate or MMF.
is dramatic, such that symptoms will have completely 
resolved within 48–72 hours of starting corticosteroid 
therapy in virtually all patients. It is customary to use 
higher doses in GCA (60–80 mg prednisolone) than in 
PMR (15–30 mg), although the evidence base for this is 
weak. In both conditions the steroid dose should be 
progressively reduced, guided by symptoms and ESR, 
with the aim of reaching a dose of 10–15 mg by about 
8 weeks. Thereafter, the rate of reduction should be 
slower – by 1 mg per month – until an acceptable dose 
is achieved (5–7.5 mg daily). If symptoms recur, the dose 
should be increased to that which previously controlled 
the symptoms, and reduction attempted again in another 
few weeks. Most patients need steroids for an average 
of 12–24 months. Some patients also require steroid-
sparing agents, such as methotrexate or azathioprine, if 
they require a maintenance dose of prednisolone of 
more than 7.5 mg daily. Prophylaxis against osteoporo­
sis should be given in patients with low BMD.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic  
antibody-associated vasculitis
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associ­
ated vasculitis is a life-threatening disorder character­
ised by inflammatory infiltration of small blood vessels, 
fibrinoid necrosis and the presence of circulating anti­
bodies to ANCA. The combined incidence is about 10–
15/1 000 000. Two subtypes are recognised. Microscopic 
polyangiitis (MPA) is a necrotising small-vessel vasculi­
tis found with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, 
often in association with alveolar haemorrhage. Cutane­
ous and gastrointestinal involvement is common and 
other features include neuropathy (15%) and pleural 
effusions (15%). Patients are usually myeloperoxidase 
(MPO) antibody-positive. In granulomatosis with poly­
angiitis (also known as Wegener’s granulomatosis 
(WG)), the vasculitis is characterised by granuloma for­
mation, mainly affecting the nasal passages, airways and 
kidney. A minority of patients present with glomerulo­
nephritis. The most common presentation of WG is with 
epistaxis, nasal crusting and sinusitis, but haemoptysis 
and mucosal ulceration may also occur. Deafness may be 
a feature due to inner ear involvement, and proptosis 
may occur because of inflammation of the retro-orbital 
tissue (Fig. 25.49). This causes diplopia due to entrap­
ment of the extra-ocular muscles, or loss of vision due to 
optic nerve compression. Disturbance of colour vision is 
an early feature of optic nerve compression. Untreated 
nasal disease ultimately leads to destruction of bone and 
cartilage. Migratory pul­monary infiltrates and nodules 
•	 Take blood for ESR and CRP
•	 Commence prednisolone 40–60 mg daily
•	 Review patient in 3–4 days
•	 Continue steroids in patients whose symptoms have resolved, 
with gradual reduction in dose
•	 Organise temporal artery biopsy in patients with poor or 
equivocal response
25.73  Emergency management of 
giant cell arteritis
Fig. 25.49  Eye involvement in granulomatosis with polyangiitis. 
Vasculitis
25
1119
Oral ulceration can be managed with topical steroid 
preparations (soluble prednisolone mouthwashes, ster­
oid pastes). Colchicine can be effective for erythema 
nodosum and arthralgia. Thalidomide (100–300 mg per 
day for 28 days initially) is very effective for resistant 
oral and genital ulceration but is teratogenic and neuro­
toxic. Steroids and immunosuppressants are indicated 
for uveitis and neurological disease.
Relapsing polychondritis
Relapsing polychondritis is a rare inflammatory disease 
of cartilage that classically presents with acute pain and 
swelling of one or both ear pinnae, sparing the lower, 
non-cartilaginous portion. Around 30% of patients have 
coexisting autoimmune or connective tissue disease. 
Involvement of tracheobronchial cartilage leads to 
hoarse voice, cough, stridor or expiratory wheeze. Other 
manifestations include collapse of the bridge of the nose, 
scleritis, hearing loss and cardiac valve dysfunction. 
Cartilage biopsy shows an inflammatory infiltrate in the 
perichondrium. Both ESR and CRP are raised in active 
disease. Pulmonary function tests, including flow 
volume loops, should be performed to assess the degree 
of laryngotracheal disease, since this is an important 
cause of mortality. Mild disease usually responds to 
low-dose steroids or NSAID, whereas major tracheo­
bronchial involvement requires high-dose steroids and 
immunosuppressants, as described for SLE.
Henoch–Schönlein purpura
Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a small-vessel vas­
culitis caused by immune complex deposition following 
an infectious trigger. It is predominantly a disease of 
children and young adults. The usual presentation is 
with purpura over the buttocks and lower legs, accom­
panied by abdominal pain, gastrointestinal bleeding and 
arthralgia. Nephritis can also occur and may present up 
to 4 weeks after the onset of other symptoms. Biopsy of 
affected tissue shows a vasculitis with IgA deposits in 
the vessel wall. HSP is usually a self-limiting disorder 
that settles spontaneously without specific treatment. 
Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive therapy may 
be required in patients with more severe disease, par­
ticularly in the presence of nephritis.
Cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis
This is a small-vessel vasculitis that can develop in 
some patients with circulating cryoglobulins, which are 
immunoglobulins that precipitate out in the cold. Cryo­
globulins are classified into three types (see Box 4.14, 
p. 88), and types II and III are associated with vasculitis. 
The typical presentation is with a vasculitic rash over 
the lower limbs, arthralgia, Raynaud’s phenomenon 
and neuropathy. Some cases are secondary to hepatitis 
infection and others are secondary to other autoimmune 
diseases. Affected patients should be screened for evi­
dence of hepatitis B and C infection, and if the results 
are positive, these should be treated appropriately 
(pp. 952 and 955). There is no consensus as to how best 
to treat cryoglobu­linaemic vasculitis in the absence of an 
obvious trigger. Corticosteroids and immunosuppres­
sive therapy are often used empirically but their efficacy 
is uncertain.
Behçet’s syndrome
This is a vasculitis of unknown aetiology that character­
istically targets small arteries and venules. It is rare in 
Western Europe but more common in ‘Silk Route’ coun­
tries around the Mediterranean and Japan, where there 
is a strong association with HLA-B51.
Oral ulcers are universal (Fig. 25.50). Unlike aphthous 
ulcers, they are usually deep and multiple, and last for 
10–30 days. Genital ulcers are also a common problem, 
occurring in 60–80% of cases. The usual skin lesions are 
erythema nodosum or acneiform lesions, but migratory 
thrombophlebitis and vasculitis also occur. Ocular 
involvement is common and may include anterior or 
posterior uveitis or retinal vasculitis. Neurological 
involvement occurs in 5% and mainly involves the 
brainstem, although the meninges, hemispheres and 
cord can also be affected, causing pyramidal signs, 
cranial nerve lesions, brainstem symptoms or hemi­
paresis. Recurrent thromboses also occur. Renal involve­
ment is extremely rare.
The diagnosis is primarily made on clinical grounds 
(Box 25.74) but one characteristic feature that can be of 
diagnostic value is the pathergy test, which involves 
pricking the skin with a needle and looking for evidence 
of pustule development within 48 hours.
Fig. 25.50  Oral ulceration in Behçet’s syndrome. 
•	 Recurrent oral ulceration: minor aphthous, major aphthous or 
herpetiform ulceration at least three times in 12 mths
Plus two of the following:
•	 Recurrent genital ulceration
•	 Eye lesions: anterior uveitis, posterior uveitis, cells in vitreous 
on slit-lamp examination, retinal vasculitis
•	 Skin lesions: erythema nodosum, pseudofolliculitis, 
papulopustular lesions, acneiform nodules
•	 Positive pathergy test
25.74  Criteria for the diagnosis of 
Behçet’s syndrome
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1120
Fig. 25.51  Osteoporotic fractures: X-rays. A Wrist (Colles fracture). B Spine. C Hip. 
A
B
C
differentiate into osteoblasts and an increase in their 
ability to differentiate into adipocytes.
Peak bone mass and bone loss are regulated by 
both genetic and environmental factors. Genetic factors 
account for up to 80% of the population variance in peak 
bone mass and other determinants of fracture risk, such 
as bone turnover and bone size. Polymorphisms have 
been identified in several genes that contribute to the 
pathogenesis of osteoporosis and many of these are in 
the RANK and Wnt signalling pathways, which play a 
critical role in regulating bone turnover (see Fig. 25.2, 
p. 1061). However, these account for only a small propor­
tion of the genetic contribution to osteoporosis and many 
additional genetic variants remain to be discovered.
Environmental factors, such as exercise and calcium 
intake during growth and adolescence, are important in 
maximising peak bone mass and in regulating rates of 
post-menopausal bone loss. Smoking has a detrimental 
effect on bone mineral density (BMD) and is associated 
with an increased fracture risk, partly because female 
smokers have an earlier menopause than non-smokers. 
Heavy alcohol intake is a recognised cause of osteoporo­
sis and fractures, but moderate intake does not substan­
tially alter risk.
Post-menopausal osteoporosis
This is the most common cause of osteoporosis because 
of the effects of oestrogen deficiency, as described above. 
Early menopause (below the age of 45 years) is a particu­
larly important risk factor.
Male osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is less common in men and a secondary 
cause can be identified in about 50% of cases. The 
most common are hypogonadism, corticosteroid use 
(see below) and alcoholism. In hypogonadism, the 
pathogenesis is as described for post-menopausal osteo­
porosis, as testosterone deficiency results in an increase 
in bone turnover and uncoupling of bone resorption 
from bone formation. Genetic factors are probably 
important in the 50% of cases with no identifiable cause.
Corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis
This is an important cause of osteoporosis that relates to 
dose and duration of corticosteroid therapy. Although 
there is no ‘safe’ dose of corticosteroid, the risk increases 
when the dose of prednisolone exceeds 7.5 mg daily and 
is continued for more than 3 months. Corticosteroids 
have adverse effects on calcium metabolism and bone 
cell function. A key abnormality is reduced bone 
DISEASES OF BONE
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is the most common bone disease and 
affects millions of people worldwide. Fractures related 
to osteoporosis are estimated to affect around 30% of 
women and 12% of men in developed countries, and are 
a major public health problem. In the UK alone, fractures 
are sustained by over 250 000 individuals annually, with 
treatment costs of about £1.75 billion. Osteoporotic frac­
tures can affect any bone, but the most common sites are 
the forearm (Colles fracture), spine (vertebral fracture) 
and hip (Fig. 25.51). Of these, hip fractures are the most 
serious. Their immediate mortality is about 12% and 
there is a continued increase in mortality of about 20% 
when compared with age-matched controls. Treatment 
of hip fracture accounts for the majority of the health-
care costs associated with osteoporosis.
The defining feature of osteoporosis is reduced bone 
density, which causes a micro-architectural deteriora­
tion of bone tissue and leads to an increased risk of 
fracture. The prevalence of osteoporosis increases 
with age, reflecting the fact that bone density declines 
with age, especially in women (Fig. 25.52). The age-
related decline in bone mass is accompanied by an 
increased risk of fractures (Fig. 25.53). This is due in 
part to the fall in bone density, but more importantly, 
to the increased risk of falling, which increases with age 
(p. 172).
Pathophysiology
Osteoporosis occurs because of a defect in attaining peak 
bone mass and/or because of accelerated bone loss. In 
normal individuals, bone mass increases during skeletal 
growth to reach a peak between the ages of 20 and 
40 years but falls thereafter (see Fig. 25.52). In women 
there is an accelerated phase of bone loss after the meno­
pause due to oestrogen deficiency, which causes uncou­
pling of bone resorption and bone formation, such that 
the amount of bone removed by osteoclasts exceeds the 
rate of new bone formation by osteoblasts. Age-related 
bone loss is a distinct process that accounts for the 
gradual bone loss that occurs with advancing age in both 
genders. Bone resorption is not particularly increased 
but bone formation is reduced and fails to keep pace 
with bone resorption. Accumulation of fat in the bone 
marrow space also occurs because of an age-related 
decline in the ability of bone marrow stem cells to 
Diseases of bone
25
1121
hyperparathyroidism causes bone loss because sus­
tained elevation in PTH increases bone turnover, and 
bone formation cannot keep pace with resorption. A 
similar mechanism operates in thyrotoxicosis, driven 
by raised levels of thyroid hormones. Cushing’s disease 
is a rare cause, identical in mechanism to corticosteroid-
induced osteoporosis. Anorexia nervosa causes osteo­
porosis through calcium deficiency, low body weight 
and hypogonadism, whereas malabsorption predis­
poses to it through malnutrition, calcium and vitamin 
D deficiency and consequent secondary hyperpara­
thyroidism. Chronic HIV infection predisposes to osteo­
porosis because of low body weight, chronic immune 
activation and antiretroviral therapy. Inflammatory dis­
eases increase bone resorption and suppress bone for­
mation through release of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
such as IL-1 and TNF, and increased expression of 
RANK by lymphocytes. Similar mechanisms operate in 
certain cancers, which release a variety of bone-resorbing 
factors, including TNF, lymphotoxin and parathyroid 
hormone-related protein (PTHrP). Gaucher’s disease 
(p. 451) and systemic mastocytosis also cause release 
of bone resorbing factors. Thiazolidinediones such 
as rosiglitazone inhibit osteoblast differentiation and 
promote adipocyte differentiation in the bone marrow, 
leading to reduced bone formation and bone loss. 
Aromatase inhibitors cause osteoporosis by reducing 
peripheral conversion of adrenal androgens to oestro­
gen, whereas gonadotrophin-releasing hormone ago­
nists do so by causing hypogonadism.
formation due to a direct inhibitory effect on osteoblast 
function and steroid-induced osteoblast and osteocyte 
apoptosis. Corticosteroids also inhibit intestinal calcium 
absorption and cause a renal leak of calcium, and this 
tends to reduce serum calcium, leading to secondary 
hyperparathyroidism with increased osteoclastic bone 
resorption. Hypogonadism may also occur with high-
dose steroids.
Pregnancy-associated osteoporosis
This is a rare condition that typically presents with back 
pain and multiple vertebral fractures during the second 
or third trimester. The cause is unknown but may relate 
to an exaggeration of the bone loss that normally occurs 
during pregnancy, in patients with pre-existing low 
bone mass.
Other causes
Osteoporosis can occur as a complication of many 
diseases and drug treatments (Box 25.75). Primary 
Fig. 25.52  Changes in bone mass and microstructure with age.
 A Changes in bone mass with age in men (blue line) and women (red 
line). B Scanning electron micrographs of normal bone (left) and 
osteoporotic bone (right). 
Normal
+1.0
0
–1.0
–2.0
–3.0
0
20
40
60
80
Osteopenia
Osteoporosis
Normal
Osteoporosis
Bone density T-score
A
B
Fig. 25.53  Relationship between age and the incidence of 
osteoporotic fractures. Changes in the incidence of wrist fractures, 
vertebral fractures and hip fractures with age. 
3000
Fractures/100000 person-years
2000
1000
40
50
60
Age (years)
Women
Hip
Spine
Wrist
70
80
90 40
50
60
Age (years)
Men
70
80
90
Endocrine disease
•	 Hypogonadism
•	 Hyperthyroidism
•	 Hyperparathyroidism
•	 Cushing’s syndrome
Inflammatory disease
•	 Inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Ankylosing spondylitis
•	 RA
Drugs
•	 Corticosteroids
•	 Gonadotrophin-releasing  
hormone (GnRH) agonists
•	 Aromatase inhibitors
•	 Thyroxine over-replacement
•	 Thiazolidinediones
•	 Sedatives
•	 Anticonvulsants
•	 Alcohol intake > 3 U/day
•	 Heparin
Gastrointestinal disease
•	 Malabsorption
•	 Chronic liver disease
Lung disease
•	 Chronic obstructive  
pulmonary disease
•	 Cystic fibrosis
Miscellaneous
•	 Myeloma
•	 Homocystinuria
•	 Anorexia nervosa*
•	 Highly trained athletes*
•	 HIV infection
•	 Gaucher’s disease
•	 Systemic mastocytosis
•	 Immobilisation
•	 Body mass index < 18
•	 Heavy smokers
•	 Autoantibodies to 
osteoprotegerin (OPG)
*Hypogonadism also plays a role in osteoporosis associated with these 
conditions.
25.75  Secondary causes of osteoporosis and 
osteoporotic fractures
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1122
with an elevated 10-year fracture risk as defined by a 
fracture risk assessment tool (websites listed on p. 1135). 
Figure 25.54 provides an algorithm for the investigation 
of patients with suspected osteoporosis based on clinical 
risk factors, fracture risk assessment and DEXA.
A history should be taken to identify any predispos­
ing causes, such as early menopause, excessive alcohol 
intake, smoking and corticosteroid therapy. Signs of 
endocrine disease, neoplasia and inflammatory disease 
should be sought on clinical examination. A falls history 
should be taken and a ‘get up and go’ test performed, 
especially in older patients (p. 167). Renal function, liver 
function, thyroid function, immunoglobulins and ESR, 
with screening for coeliac disease (anti-tissue trans­
glutaminase (tTG) antibodies), should be performed. 
Serum 25(OH) vitamin D and PTH measurements are 
useful to exclude vitamin D deficiency and secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. Primary hyperparathyroidism 
should be suspected if hypercalcaemia is present 
(p. 769). Levels of sex hormones and gonadotrophins 
should be measured in men with osteoporosis and 
women under the age of 50. Transiliac bone biopsy is 
sometimes required in early-onset osteoporosis of 
unknown cause or when coexisting osteomalacia is 
suspected.
Management
The aim of treatment is to reduce the risk of fracture 
and this can be achieved by a combination of non-
pharmacological and pharmacological approaches.
Non-pharmacological interventions
Advice on smoking cessation, moderation of alcohol 
intake, adequate dietary calcium intake and exercise 
should be given. Those with recurrent falls or unsteadi­
ness on a ‘get up and go’ test should be referred to a 
multidisciplinary falls prevention team (p. 172). Hip 
protectors can reduce the risk of hip fracture in selected 
patients but adherence is often poor.
*Defined as a fracture that occurs as the result of a fall from standing 
height or less.
•	 Low trauma fracture age > 50 years*
•	 Clinical features of osteoporosis (height loss, kyphosis)
•	 Osteopenia on plain X-ray
•	 Corticosteroid therapy (> 7.5 mg prednisolone daily for 
> 3 mths)
•	 Family history of hip fracture
•	 Low body weight (BMI < 18)
•	 Early menopause (< 45 yrs)
•	 Diseases associated with osteoporosis
•	 Increased fracture risk on risk factor analysis (FRAX or 
QFracture)
•	 Assessing response of osteoporosis to treatment
25.76  Indications for bone densitometry
Clinical features
Patients with osteoporosis are asymptomatic until a frac­
ture occurs. Osteoporotic spinal fracture may present 
with acute back pain or gradual onset of height loss and 
kyphosis with chronic pain. The pain of acute vertebral 
fracture can occasionally radiate to the anterior chest or 
abdominal wall and be mistaken for a myocardial infarc­
tion or intra-abdominal pathology, but worsening of 
pain by movement and local tenderness both suggest 
vertebral fracture. Peripheral osteoporotic fractures 
present with local pain, tenderness and deformity, often 
after an episode of minimal trauma. In patients with hip 
fracture, the affected leg is shortened and externally 
rotated. Many patients present with incidental osteo­
penia on an X-ray performed for other reasons.
Investigations
The pivotal investigation is dual energy X-ray absorptio­
metry (DEXA) at the lumbar spine and hip (see Fig. 25.8, 
p. 1066). This should be considered in patients with clini­
cal risk factors for osteoporosis (Box 25.76), and those 
Fig. 25.54  Algorithm for the investigation of patients with suspected osteoporosis. *Using FRAX® or QFracture (see Further information, 
p. 1135). (BMD = bone mineral density) 
Measure BMD
at spine and hip
Normal
(T-score > −1.0)
Clinical risk factors
+ fracture risk assessment*
Reassure
Reassure
Osteopenia
(T-score −1.5 to −2.5)
Lifestyle advice
and reassess
after 2–5 years
Osteoporosis
(T-score < –2.5)
Lifestyle advice
and drug
treatment
Fragility fracture
age > 50
Low risk
Moderate or high risk
Diseases of bone
25
1123
male osteoporosis but neither has been shown to prevent 
non-vertebral fractures in men. Ibandronate is some­
times used but the evidence for prevention of non-
vertebral fractures is less robust. Zoledronic acid is 
effective in the treatment of post-menopausal osteoporo­
sis, corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis and osteoporo­
sis in men. It reduces the risk of vertebral fracture by 
about 75% with similar effects to alendronic acid on non-
vertebral fractures. It is especially useful for secondary 
prevention of fractures in elderly patients with hip frac­
ture and reduces mortality in this group, being the only 
treatment that has been shown to modify this. Etidro­
nate reduces the risk of vertebral fracture but the effects 
on non-vertebral fracture are less robust than those of 
other bisphosphonates. It is now seldom used.
Oral bisphosphonates are poorly absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract and should be taken on an empty 
stomach with plain water; no food should be eaten 
for 30–45 minutes after administration. Upper gastro­
intestinal upset occurs in about 5% so oral bisphospho­
nates should be used with caution in patients with 
existing gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. They should 
be avoided in patients with oesophageal stricture or 
achalasia, since tablets may stick in the oesophagus, 
causing ulceration and perforation. The most common 
adverse effect with intravenous bisphosphonates is a 
transient influenza-like illness characterised by fever, 
malaise, anorexia and generalised aches, which occurs 
24–48 hours after administration. This is self-limiting but 
can be treated with paracetamol or NSAID if necessary. 
It predominantly occurs after the first exposure and tol­
erance develops thereafter. Other adverse effects are 
shown in Box 25.78. Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) is 
characterised by the presence of necrotic bone in the 
mandible or maxilla, typically occurring after tooth 
extraction when the socket fails to heal. Most ONJ cases 
have occurred in cancer patients with coexisting mor­
bidity, such as infection and diabetes, who have received 
high doses of intravenous bisphosphonates; this compli­
cation is very rare in patients who are treated with the 
Drug treatment
Several drugs have been shown to reduce the risk of 
osteoporotic fractures in randomised controlled trials. 
Their effects on vertebral and non-vertebral fracture are 
also summarised in Box 25.77.
Drug treatment should be considered in patients 
with BMD T-score values below −2.5 or below −1.5 in 
corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis, because there is 
evidence that fractures occur at a higher BMD value in 
steroid users and that drugs prevent fracture in patients 
with T-scores at this level. Treatment should also be 
considered in patients with vertebral fractures, irre­
spective of BMD, unless they resulted from significant 
trauma.
Bisphosphonates
Bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption by binding to 
hydroxyapatite crystals on the bone surface. When 
osteo­clasts attempt to resorb bone that contains bisphos­
phonate, the drug is released within the cell, where it 
inhibits key signalling pathways that are essential for 
osteoclast function. Although bisphosphonates prima­
rily target the osteoclast, bone formation is also sup­
pressed because of coupling between bone formation 
and bone resorption and an inhibitory effect on osteo­
blasts. However, the balance of effect on bone turnover 
is favourable, resulting in a gain in bone density due 
partly to increased mineralisation of bone. Bisphospho­
nate treatment typically leads to an increase in spine 
BMD of about 5–8% and in hip BMD of 2–4% during the 
first 3 years of treatment and plateaus thereafter.
Alendronic acid is the bisphosphonate used most fre­
quently. It reduces risk of vertebral fractures by 40% and 
non-vertebral fractures by about 25% in postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis. Risedronate is an alternative 
with similar efficacy, but may be better tolerated in 
patients with a history of gastrointestinal upset. Both 
drugs are effective in the treatment of corticosteroid-
induced osteoporosis. They can also be used to treat 
Drug
Regimen
Vertebral fracture
Non-vertebral fracture
Hip fracture
Alendronic acid
70 mg/wk orally
+
+
+
Risedronate
35 mg/wk orally
+
+
+
Ibandronate
150 mg/mth orally
3 mg 3-monthly IV
+
+/–
–
Zoledronic acid
5 mg annually IV
+
+
+
Denosumab
60 mg 6-monthly SC
+
+
+
Strontium ranelate
2 g daily orally
+
+
+/–
Hormone replacement therapy
Various preparations
+
+
+
PTH 1-34
20 µg/day SC
+
+
–
PTH 1-84
100 µg/day SC
+
–
–
Raloxifene
60 mg/day orally
+
–
–
Tibolone
1.25 mg/day orally
+
+
–
Calcium/vitamin D
500 mg calcium and 
800 U vitamin D orally
–
+/–
–
(+ effective, – not effective; +/– equivocal results, or efficacy based on post-hoc subgroup analysis of clinical trials.)
25.77  Effects of drugs on the risk of osteoporotic fractures
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1124
risk of myocardial infarction. There is also an increased 
risk of venous thrombosis. Rarely, a severe rash occurs, 
and this is an indication to stop treatment.
Parathyroid hormone
PTH is an anabolic agent that works by stimulating new 
bone formation. The most widely used preparation is the 
1-34 fragment of PTH (teriparatide) given by single daily 
subcutaneous injection of 20 µg. Teriparatide increases 
BMD by 10% or more in osteoporotic subjects and 
reduces risk of vertebral fractures by about 65% and 
non-vertebral fractures by 50%. It is also effective in 
corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis and appears supe­
rior to alendronate in terms of BMD gain and vertebral 
fracture reduction. It is also effective in male osteoporo­
sis. PTH is expensive and is usually reserved for patients 
with severe osteoporosis (BMD T-score of −3.5 to −4.0 or 
below) and those who have failed to respond adequately 
to other treatments. The recommended duration of treat­
ment is 24 months, after which patients should receive 
an antiresorptive drug, such as a bisphosphonate, to 
maintain the increase in BMD. Teriparatide should not 
be administered at the same time as bisphosphonates, as 
this blunts the anabolic effect. In patients who are being 
treated with teriparatide because of failure to respond, 
existing treatments should be stopped. The 1-84 frag­
ment of PTH acts in a similar way to teriparatide but the 
evidence for prevention of non-vertebral fracture is less 
robust.
Hormone replacement therapy,  
raloxifene and tibolone
Cyclical HRT with oestrogen and progestogen prevents 
post-menopausal bone loss and reduces the risk of ver­
tebral and non-vertebral fractures in post-menopausal 
women. It is primarily indicated for the prevention of 
osteoporosis in women with an early menopause 
(p. 760) and for treatment of women with osteoporosis 
in their early fifties who have troublesome menopausal 
symptoms. HRT should be avoided in older women 
with established osteoporosis because it significantly 
increases the risk of breast cancer and cardiovascular 
disease. Raloxifene acts as a partial agonist at oestrogen 
receptors in bone and liver but as an antagonist in breast 
and endometrium, and is classified as a selective 
oestrogen receptor modulator (SERM). It results in a 
dose regimes used in osteoporosis. None the less, all 
patients receiving bisphosphonates for any reason 
should be advised to pay attention to good oral hygiene. 
There is no evidence that temporarily stopping medica­
tion in patients undergoing tooth extraction is necessary 
or alters the occurrence of ONJ. Atypical subtrochanteric 
fractures have been described in patients who have 
received long-term bisphosphonates, and may be the 
result of over-suppression of normal bone remodelling. 
In the vast majority, the benefits of bisphosphonate 
therapy far outweigh the risks, but it is important that 
treatment is targeted to patients with low BMD who are 
most likely to benefit.
Denosumab
Denosumab is a monoclonal antibody that neutralises 
the effects of RANKL (see Figure 25.2, p. 1061); it is 
administered by subcutaneous injection every 6 months 
in the treatment of osteoporosis. It is a powerful inhibi­
tor of bone resorption and reduces the risk of hip frac­
tures by 40%, vertebral fractures by 70% and other 
non-vertebral fractures by 20%. It has few adverse effects 
but there are isolated reports of ONJ with long-term use. 
Unlike bisphosphonates, its duration of action is short 
and it must be administered on a long-term basis to 
maintain its effect on bone mass and bone turnover.
Calcium and vitamin D
Calcium and vitamin D have limited efficacy in the 
prevention of osteoporotic fractures when given in 
isolation but are widely used as an adjunct to other 
treatments, most often as combination preparations con­
taining 500 mg calcium and 800 U vitamin D. They are 
of greatest value in preventing fragility fractures in 
elderly or institutionalised patients who are at high risk 
of calcium and vitamin D deficiency (Box 25.79).
Strontium ranelate
Strontium ranelate reduces vertebral fracture risk by 
about 50% after 3 years and non-vertebral fracture risk 
by 12%. The mechanism of action is poorly understood. 
It has a weak inhibitory effect on bone resorption, stimu­
lates biochemical markers of bone formation and is 
incorporated within hydroxyapatite crystals in place of 
calcium. Large changes in BMD (12%) occur, although 
this is partly an artefact due to substitution of strontium 
for calcium in bone mineral. The most common adverse 
effect is diarrhoea. Strontium is contraindicated in 
patients with cardiovascular disease due to an increased 
Common
•	 Upper gastrointestinal intolerance (oral)
•	 Acute phase response (intravenous)
Less common
•	 Atrial fibrillation (intravenous zoledronic acid)
•	 Renal impairment (intravenous zoledronic acid)
•	 Atypical subtrochanteric fractures
Rare
•	 Uveitis
•	 Osteonecrosis of the jaw
25.78  Adverse effects of bisphosphonates
•	 Bone loss: due to increased bone turnover, with an 
age-related defect switch in differentiation of bone marrow 
stromal cells to form adipocytes as opposed to osteoblasts.
•	 Fractures due to osteoporosis: common cause of morbidity 
and mortality, although fracture healing is not delayed by age.
•	 Recurrent fractures: those who suffer a fragility fracture are 
at increased risk of further fracture, so should be 
investigated for osteoporosis and treated if this is confirmed.
•	 Falls: risk factors for falls (such as visual and neuromuscular 
impairments) are independent risk factors for hip fracture in 
elderly women, so intervention to prevent falls is as 
important as treatment of osteoporosis (p. 172).
•	 Intravenous zoledronic acid: reduces mortality and 
subsequent fracture in elderly patients with hip fractures.
•	 Calcium and vitamin D: reduce the risk of fractures in those 
who are housebound or living in care homes.
25.79  Osteoporosis in old age
Diseases of bone
25
1125
vertebral osteoporosis) and documenting the occurrence 
of clinical fractures.
Surgery
Orthopaedic surgery is frequently required to reduce 
and stabilise osteoporotic fractures. Patients with intra­
capsular fracture of the femoral neck generally require 
hemi-arthroplasty or total hip replacement in view of the 
high risk of avascular necrosis.
Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty
Vertebroplasty (VP) is sometimes used in the treatment 
of painful vertebral compression fractures. It involves 
injecting methyl methacrylate (MMA) into the affected 
vertebral body. Although VP has been found to give 
better pain relief than medical therapy in the short term, 
recent randomised controlled trials that compared VP 
with a sham procedure showed no benefit (Box 25.80), 
indicating that the reduction in pain may be a placebo 
response. Kyphoplasty (KP) is used under similar cir­
cumstances but in this case a needle is introduced into 
the affected vertebral body and a balloon is inflated, 
which is then filled with MMA. This procedure is more 
effective than medical treatment at relieving pain in the 
short term, with results similar to VP. The effects of KP 
have not so far been compared with a sham procedure. 
Both procedures are generally safe but serious adverse 
effects include spinal cord compression, and fat embolus 
may occur.
modest increase in BMD (2%) and a 40% reduction in 
vertebral fractures, but does not influence the risk of 
non-vertebral fracture and can provoke muscle cramps 
and worsen hot flushes. It increases the risk of VTE to a 
similar extent as HRT but reduces the risk of breast 
cancer; it does not influence the risk of cardiovascular 
disease. Bazedoxifene is a related SERM that has similar 
effects to raloxifene. Tibolone is a steroid that has partial 
agonist activity at oestrogen, progestogen and androgen 
receptors. It has similar effects on BMD to raloxifene and 
has been found to prevent vertebral and non-vertebral 
fractures in post-menopausal osteoporosis. Treatment is 
associated with a slightly increased risk of stroke but a 
reduced risk of breast cancer.
Other drugs
Calcitonin is an osteoclast inhibitor that has weak anti-
fracture efficacy but is no longer used in the treatment 
of osteoporosis because of concerns about an increased 
risk of cancer with long-term use. It is occasionally used 
(unlicensed) in the short-term treatment of patients with 
acute vertebral fracture, when it is given by subcutane­
ous or intramuscular injection (100–200 U daily). Calci­
triol (1,25(OH)2D3), the active metabolite of vitamin D, 
is licensed for treatment of osteoporosis, but it is seldom 
used since the data on fracture prevention are less robust 
than for other agents.
Duration of therapy and  
monitoring response
Oral bisphosphonates are usually given on a long-term 
basis for osteoporosis with periodic review of the 
continued need for therapy at 5-yearly intervals. The 
evidence base on duration of treatment is limited. Alen­
dronate and risedronate appear to be safe and effective 
for up to 10 years in most patients, although one ran­
domised trial with alendronate showed that overall frac­
ture rates were similar in those given 5 years’ therapy as 
opposed to 10. Studies with intravenous zoledronic acid 
have shown that 3 years’ treatment give equal protection 
from fractures as 6 years’ treatment. Other drug treat­
ments, such as HRT, raloxifene and denosumab, need to 
be given continuously for a beneficial effect. The optimal 
duration of treatment for strontium has not been estab­
lished. For anabolic drugs such as PTH, a 2-year course 
of treatment is given and followed by long-term anti­
resorptive therapy.
The response to drug treatment can be assessed by 
repeating BMD measurements after 2–3 years. However, 
changes in BMD do not predict anti-fracture efficacy 
well and there is little evidence that monitoring by BMD 
or markers improves adherence. It may, however, reas­
sure the patient that the treatment is working. Since the 
precision of spine BMD (approximately 1%) is better 
than hip (approximately 2.5%), spine BMD is best for 
monitoring. To be sure that a change has occurred, about 
twice the precision (about 2% for spine, 5% for hip) is 
required. This means that, under normal circumstances, 
at least 2 years should have elapsed before a repeat scan 
is performed. Biochemical markers of bone turnover, 
such as N-telopeptide (NTX), respond more quickly 
than BMD and can be used to assess adherence, but the 
correlation with anti-fracture efficacy is modest. Treat­
ment response can also be established by measuring 
change in patient height (to assess progression of 
‘Meta-analysis of individual patient data from two placebo 
controlled trials of vertebroplasty showed no advantage of active 
treatment over a sham procedure.’
•	 Staples MP, et al BMJ 2011; 343:d3952.
25.80  Vertebroplasty in painful vertebral 
fractures
Management of recurrent fracture
Since the treatments for osteoporosis are incompletely 
effective at preventing fracture, it is not uncommon to 
encounter patients who suffer recurrent fractures whilst 
on treatment. In these circumstances it is useful 
to perform DEXA to determine whether BMD has 
increased, provided that sufficient time has elapsed to 
assess this (see above). If BMD has increased, then treat­
ment should be continued. If there has been no BMD 
response or significant bone loss has occurred, the 
patient should be questioned about adherence and 
asked if the treatment is being taken correctly. This 
is particularly important with oral bisphosphonates, 
where absorption is poor and is inhibited by food. If the 
patient appears to be taking the medication correctly 
and significant bone loss has occurred, then a different 
treatment should be considered.
Osteomalacia and rickets
These conditions are characterised by defective miner­
alisation of bone due to vitamin D deficiency, resistance 
to the effects of vitamin D or hypophosphataemia. 
Osteomalacia describes a syndrome in adults of defec­
tive bone mineralisation, bone pain, increased bone 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1126
fragility and fractures. Rickets is the equivalent syn­
drome in children and is characterised by enlargement 
of the growth plate and bone deformity. The disease 
remains prevalent in frail older people who have a poor 
diet and limited sunlight exposure, and in some Muslim 
women who live in northern latitudes. There are four 
main causes of osteomalacia and rickets (Box 25.81).
Vitamin D deficiency
The most common cause of osteomalacia and rickets is 
vitamin D deficiency, which can result from either lack 
of sunlight exposure, from which the majority of vitamin 
D is derived; dietary deficiency (Fig. 25.55); or malab­
sorption of vitamin D in patients with gastrointestinal 
disease.
Pathophysiology
The source of vitamin D and pathways involved in 
regulating its metabolism are shown in Figure 25.55. In 
normal individuals, vitamin D (also known as cholecal­
ciferol) comes from two sources: about 70% is made in 
the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol under the influence 
of ultraviolet light, whereas the remaining 30% is 
derived from the diet. On entering the circulation, 
vitamin D is hydroxylated in the liver to form 25(OH) 
vitamin D and this is further hydroxylated in the kidney 
to form 1,25(OH)2D, the biologically active metabolite. 
The 1,25(OH)2D primarily acts on the gut to increase 
intestinal calcium absorption but also acts on the 
skeleton to stimulate bone remodelling. Synthesis of 
1,25(OH)2D is regulated by a negative feedback loop 
orchestrated by the parathyroid glands. When vitamin 
D levels fall – for example, as the result of reduced sun­
light exposure or dietary lack – 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D 
levels also fall, resulting in a reduction in calcium 
absorption from the gut. This causes serum calcium 
levels to fall, and this is detected by calcium-sensing 
receptors on the parathyroid chief cells, which respond 
by secreting parathyroid hormone (PTH). The raised 
levels of PTH restore calcium levels to normal by stimu­
lating production of 1,25(OH)2D, reducing renal calcium 
excretion and increasing bone resorption. Renal phos­
phate excretion also increases, lowering serum phos­
phate levels. Initially, these changes are effective in 
maintaining normal levels of serum calcium but, with 
prolonged vitamin D deficiency, reserves of 25(OH)D 
become progressively depleted (through increased 
conversion of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D), leading to 
hypocalcaemia and hypocalcaemia with progressive 
demineralisation of the skeleton and the clinical syn­
dromes of osteomalacia and rickets.
Clinical features
Vitamin D deficiency in children causes delayed devel­
opment, muscle hypotonia, craniotabes (small unossi­
fied areas in membranous bones of the skull that yield 
to finger pressure with a cracking feeling), bossing of the 
frontal and parietal bones and delayed anterior fonta­
nelle closure, enlargement of epiphyses at the lower end 
of the radius, and swelling of the rib costochondral junc­
tions (‘rickety rosary’). Osteomalacia in adults presents 
insidiously. Mild osteomalacia can be asymptomatic or 
Cause
Predisposing factor
Mechanism
Vitamin D deficiency
Classical
Lack of sunlight exposure and poor diet
Reduced cholecalciferol synthesis in the skin/low 
levels of vitamin D in diet
Gastrointestinal disease
Malabsorption
Malabsorption of dietary vitamin D and calcium
Failure of 1,25 vitamin D synthesis
Chronic renal failure
Hyperphosphataemia and kidney 
damage
Impaired conversion of 25(OH)D3 to 1,25(OH)2D3
Vitamin D-resistant rickets type I 
(autosomal recessive)
Loss-of-function mutations in renal 
25(OH)D 1α-hydroxylase enzyme
Impaired conversion of 25(OH)D3 to 1,25(OH)2D3
Vitamin D receptor defects
Vitamin D-resistant rickets type II 
(autosomal recessive)
Loss-of-function mutations in vitamin D 
receptor
Impaired response to 1,25(OH)2D3
Defects in phosphate and pyrophosphate metabolism
Hypophosphataemic rickets (X-linked 
dominant)
Mutations in PHEX
Increased FGF23 production (mechanism unclear)
Autosomal dominant 
hypophosphataemic rickets
Mutation in FGF23
Mutant FGF23 is resistant to degradation
Autosomal recessive 
hypophosphataemic rickets
DMP1 mutation
Increased production of FGF23
Local deficiency of DMP1 inhibits mineralisation
Tumour-induced hypophosphataemic 
osteomalacia
Ectopic production of FGF23 by tumour
Over-production of FGF23
Hypophosphatasia
Mutations in bone-specific alkaline 
phosphatase
Inhibition of bone mineralisation due to 
accumulation of pyrophosphate in bone
Iatrogenic and other
Bisphosphonate therapy
High-dose etidronate/pamidronate
Drug-induced impairment of mineralisation
Aluminium
Use of aluminium-containing phosphate 
binders or aluminium in dialysis fluid
Aluminium-induced impairment of mineralisation
Fluoride
High fluoride in water
Fluoride inhibits mineralisation
25.81  Causes of osteomalacia and rickets
Diseases of bone
25
1127
Fig. 25.55  Vitamin D metabolism. There is close interaction between vitamin D, serum calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH). See text for details. 
Liver
Kidney
Parathyroids
Gut
Sunlight
Skin
Vitamin D
~30%
~70%
25(OH)
vitamin D
(inactive)
1,25(OH) 2
vitamin D
(active)
PTH
Vitamin D
25-hydroxylase
25(OH)
vitamin D
1α-hydroxylase
Serum
calcium↑
Serum
phosphate↓
Oral
intake
–ve feedback
PTH
Calcium-sensing
receptor
PTH
secretory
granules
Parathyroid
chief cell
–ve
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Bone
present with fractures and mimic osteoporosis. More 
severe osteomalacia presents with muscle and bone 
pain, general malaise and fragility fractures. Proximal 
muscle weakness is prominent and the patient may walk 
with a waddling gait and struggle to climb stairs or get 
out of a chair. There may be bone and muscle tenderness 
on pressure and focal bone pain can occur due to fissure 
fractures of the ribs and pelvis.
Investigations
The diagnosis can usually be made on a biochemical 
screen with measurement of serum 25(OH)D and PTH. 
Typically, serum ALP levels are raised, 25(OH)D levels 
are low or undetectable, and PTH is elevated. Serum 
calcium and phosphate levels may also be low but 
normal values do not exclude the diagnosis. X-rays are 
normal until advanced disease, when focal radiolucent 
areas (pseudofractures or Looser’s zones) may be seen 
in ribs, pelvis and long bones (Fig. 25.56A). Radiographic 
osteopenia is common and the presence of vertebral 
crush fractures may cause confusion with osteoporosis. 
In children, there is thickening and widening of the 
epiphyseal plate. Radionuclide bone scan can show 
multiple hot spots in the ribs and pelvis at the site of 
fractures and the appearance may be mistaken for 
metastases. Where there is doubt, the diagnosis can be 
confirmed by bone biopsy, which shows the pathogno­
monic features of increased thickness and extent of 
osteoid seams (Fig. 25.56B).
Management
Osteomalacia and rickets respond promptly to treatment 
with vitamin D (250–1000 µg daily), with rapid clinical 
improvement, an elevation in serum 25(OH)D and a 
reduction in PTH. Serum ALP levels sometimes rise ini­
tially as mineralisation of bone increases, but eventually 
fall to within the reference range as the bone disease 
heals. After 3–4 months, treatment can generally be 
stopped or the dose of vitamin D reduced to a mainte­
nance level of 10–20 µg of cholecalciferol daily, except in 
patients with underlying disease such as malabsorption, 
in whom higher doses may be required.
Fig. 25.56  Osteomalacia. A X-ray of the pelvis showing Looser’s 
zones (arrow). B Photomicrograph of bone biopsy from osteomalacic 
patient showing thick osteoid seams (stained light blue) that cover almost 
all of the bone surface. Calcified bone is stained dark blue. 
A
B
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1128
Vitamin D-resistant rickets
The term vitamin D-resistant rickets (VDRR) describes 
osteomalacia and rickets caused by:
•	 inactivating mutations in the 25-hydroxyvitamin D 
1α-hydroxylase (CYP27B1) enzyme, which converts 
25(OH)D to the active metabolite 1,25(OH)2D3 (type 
I VDRR)
•	 inactivating mutations in the vitamin D receptor, 
which impair its ability to activate transcription 
(type II VDRR).
Clinical features are similar to those of infantile rick­
ets and the diagnosis is usually first suspected when the 
patient fails to respond to vitamin D supplementation. 
Since both are recessive disorders, consanguinity is com­
mon but there may or may not be a positive family his­
tory. Biochemical features of type I disease are similar to 
vitamin D deficiency, except that levels of 25(OH)D are 
normal. In type II disease, 25(OH)D is normal but PTH 
and 1,25(OH)2D3 values are raised. Type I can be treated 
with the active vitamin D metabolites, 1α-hydroxyvitamin 
D (1–2 µg daily, orally) or 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D 
(0.25–1.5 µg daily, orally), with or without calcium sup­
plements, depending upon the patient’s diet. Type II 
VDRR is extremely difficult to treat but sometimes 
responds partially to very high doses of active vitamin D 
metabolites and calcium and phosphate supplements.
Renal rickets and osteomalacia
Osteomalacia and rickets occur in patients with chronic 
renal failure due to defects in synthesis of renal 
1,25(OH)2D3 or due to over-aggressive treatment with 
oral phosphate binders. Pathogenesis and management 
are discussed on page 486.
Hypophosphataemic rickets  
and osteomalacia
Rickets and osteomalacia can occur as the result of 
inheri­ted or acquired defects in renal tubular phosphate 
reabsorption, and rarely in patients with tumours that 
secrete phosphaturic substances (see Box 25.81).
Pathophysiology
Circulating levels of FGF23 play a critical role in regulat­
ing serum phosphate by modulating expression of 
sodium-dependent phosphate transporters in the 
kidney, which are responsible for renal tubular phos­
phate reabsorption. Osteocytes are the main source of 
FGF23 and levels of expression are regulated by the 
proteins DMP1 and PHEX, which are also produced by 
osteocytes (see Fig. 25.2, p. 1061). Inherited mutations 
affecting these proteins are summarised in Box 25.81  
and account for most cases of hypophosphataemic 
rickets. Acquired hypophosphataemic rickets is mostly 
caused by over-production of FGF23 by tumours.
Clinical features and diagnosis
The hereditary disorders usually present in childhood 
with rickets. The diagnosis is made on the basis of the 
early age at onset and the presence of hypophosphat­
aemia with renal phosphate wasting, in the absence of 
vitamin D deficiency. Molecular diagnosis can define the 
causal mutation. Tumour-induced hypophosphataemic 
osteomalacia presents with severe, rapidly progressive 
symptoms in patients with no obvious predisposing 
factor for osteomalacia. Strenuous efforts should be 
made to identify the underlying, usually occult tumour 
with whole-body MRI or CT.
Management
Treatment is with phosphate supplements (1–4 g daily) 
and active metabolites of vitamin D (1α-hydroxyvitamin 
D, 1–2 µg daily, or 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D, 0.25–1.5 µg 
daily) to promote intestinal calcium and phosphate 
absorption. The aim is to ameliorate symptoms, restore 
normal growth, maintain serum phosphate levels within 
the reference range and normalise ALP levels. Levels 
of calcium, phosphate, ALP and renal function should 
be monitored. Tumour-induced osteomalacia can be 
managed in the same way but ideally should be treated 
with surgical excision of the tumour since this is 
curative.
Hypophosphatasia
Hypophosphatasia is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by inactivating mutations in the TNALP gene 
that impair ALP function, resulting in accumulation of 
pyrophosphate and inhibition of bone mineralisation. 
Chondrocalcinosis may also occur. The diagnosis 
should be suspected in osteomalacic patients with low 
or undetectable levels of serum ALP but normal levels 
of calcium, phosphate, PTH and vitamin D metabolites. 
Medical treatment with injections of recombinant ALP 
has recently been introduced with promising results.
Other causes of osteomalacia
These are summarised in Box 25.81. Aluminium intoxi­
cation is now rare due to reduced use of aluminium-
containing phosphate binders and removal of aluminium 
from the water supplies used in dialysis. If aluminium 
intoxication is suspected, the diagnosis can be confirmed 
by demonstration of aluminium at the calcification front 
in a bone biopsy. Osteomalacia due to bisphosphonates 
has mostly been described in patients with Paget’s 
disease receiving etidronate and high-dose pamidro­
nate. It is usually asymptomatic and healing occurs 
when treatment is stopped. Excessive fluoride intake 
causes osteomalacia due to direct inhibition of minerali­
sation and is common in parts of the world where there 
is a high fluoride content in drinking water. The condi­
tion reverses when fluoride intake is reduced.
Paget’s disease of bone
Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a common condition 
characterised by focal areas of increased and disorgan­
ised bone remodelling. It mostly affects the axial skele­
ton, and bones that are commonly involved include the 
pelvis, femur, tibia, lumbar spine, skull and scapula. It 
is seldom diagnosed before the age of 40, but gradually 
increases in incidence thereafter to affect up to 8% of the 
UK population by the age of 85. The disease is common 
in Caucasians from north-west and southern Europe but 
is rare in Scandinavians, Asians, Chinese and Japanese. 
These ethnic differences persist after migration, support­
ing the importance of genetic factors in the aetiology, but 
the incidence of PDB has fallen in some countries over 
the past 25 years, suggesting that environmental triggers 
also play a role.
Diseases of bone
25
1129
precipitate high-output cardiac failure in elderly patients 
with limited cardiac reserve. Osteosarcoma is a rare but 
serious complication that presents with subacute onset 
of increasing pain and swelling of an affected site.
Investigations
The characteristic features are an elevated serum ALP 
and bone expansion on X-ray, with alternating areas of 
radiolucency and osteosclerosis (Fig. 25.57B). ALP is 
normal in about 5% of cases, usually because of mono­
stotic involvement. Radionuclide bone scanning is useful 
to define the presence and extent of disease (Fig. 25.57A). 
If the bone scan is positive, X-rays should be taken of an 
affected bone to confirm the diagnosis. Bone biopsy is 
not usually required but may help to exclude osteo­
sclerotic metastases in cases of diagnostic uncertainty.
Management
The main indication for treatment with inhibitors of bone 
resorption is bone pain thought to be due to increased 
metabolic activity (Box 25.82). It is often difficult to dif­
ferentiate this from pain due to complications such as 
bone deformity, nerve compression symptoms and OA. 
If there is doubt, it can be worthwhile giving a therapeu­
tic trial of antiresorptive therapy to determine whether 
the symptoms improve. A positive response indicates 
that the pain was due to increased metabolic activity. 
The aminobisphosphonates pamidronate, zoledronate 
and risedronate are more effective than simple bisphos­
phonates such as etidronate and tiludronate at suppress­
ing bone turnover in PDB, but their effects on pain are 
similar. Although bisphosphonates suppress bone turn­
over in PDB, there is no evidence to show that they alter 
the natural history or prevent complications. Calcitonin 
can be used as an alternative but is less convenient to 
administer and more expensive. Repeated courses of 
bisphosphonates or calcitonin can be given if symptoms 
recur. If symptoms do not respond to antiresorptive 
therapy, it is likely that the pain is due to a complication 
of the disease and this should be managed according to 
the principles described on page 1085.
Pathophysiology
The primary abnormality is increased osteoclastic bone 
resorption, accompanied by marrow fibrosis, increased 
vascularity of bone and increased osteoblast activity. 
Bone in PDB is architecturally abnormal and has reduced 
mechanical strength. Osteoclasts in PDB are increased in 
number, are unusually large and contain characteristic 
nuclear inclusion bodies. Genetic factors are important 
and mutations in the SQSTM1 gene are a common cause 
of classical PDB. The presence of nuclear inclusion 
bodies in osteoclasts has fuelled speculation that PDB 
might be caused by a slow virus infection with measles 
or distemper but the evidence is conflicting. Biomechani­
cal factors may help determine the pattern of involve­
ment, since PDB often starts at sites of muscle insertions 
into bone and, in some cases, localises to bones or limbs 
that have been subjected to repetitive trauma or overuse. 
Involvement of subchondral bone can compromise the 
joint and predispose to OA (‘Pagetic arthropathy’).
Clinical features
The classic presentation is with bone pain, deformity, 
deafness and pathological fractures, but many patients 
are asymptomatic and diagnosed from an abnormal 
X-ray or blood test performed for another reason. Cli­
nical signs include bone deformity and expansion, 
increased warmth over affected bones, and pathological 
fracture. Bone deformity is most evident in weight-
bearing bones such as the femur and tibia, but when 
the skull is affected the patient may complain that hats 
no longer fit due to cranial enlargement. Neurological 
problems, such as deafness, cranial nerve defects, nerve 
root pain, spinal cord compression and spinal stenosis, 
are recognised complications due to enlargement of 
affected bones and encroachment upon the spinal cord 
and nerve foraminae. Surprisingly, deafness seldom 
results from compression of the auditory nerve, but is 
conductive due to osteosclerosis of the temporal bone. 
The increased vascularity of Pagetic bone makes opera­
tive procedures difficult and, in extreme cases, can 
Fig. 25.57  Paget’s disease. A Isotope bone scan from a patient with Paget’s disease, illustrating the intense tracer uptake and deformity of the 
affected femur. B The typical radiographic features with expansion of the femur, alternating areas of osteosclerosis and radiolucency of the trochanter, 
and pseudofractures breaching the bone cortex (arrows). 
A
B
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1130
sites are the femoral head, humeral head and femoral 
condyles. In some cases, the condition occurs as the 
result of direct trauma that interrupts the blood supply 
to the affected bone. This is the reason for osteonecrosis 
of the femoral head in patients with subtrochanteric 
fractures of the femoral neck, and patients with throm­
bophilia and haemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell 
disease. Other important predisposing factors include 
high-dose corticosteroid treatment, alcohol excess, SLE 
and radiotherapy, but in many of these conditions, the 
pathophysiology is poorly understood. The presentation 
is with pain localised to the affected site, which is exac­
erbated by weight-bearing. The diagnosis can be con­
firmed by MRI, which shows evidence of subchondral 
necrotic bone and bone marrow oedema. X-rays are 
normal in the early stages but later may show evidence 
of osteosclerosis and deformity of the affected bone. 
There is no specific treatment. Management should 
focus on controlling pain and encouraging mobilisation 
(p. 1085). Symptoms often improve spontaneously with 
time but joint replacement may be required in patients 
who have persisting pain in association with significant 
structural damage to the affected joint.
Scheuermann’s osteochondritis
This disorder predominantly affects adolescent boys, 
who develop a dorsal kyphosis in association with 
irregular radiographic ossification of the vertebral end 
plates. It has a strong genetic component and may be 
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most 
patients are asymptomatic but back pain, aggravated 
by exercise and relieved by rest, may occur. Excessive 
exercise and heavy manual labour before epiphyseal 
fusion has occurred may aggravate symptoms. Man­
agement consists of advice to avoid excessive activity, 
and protective postural exercises. Rarely, corrective 
surgery may be required if there is severe deformity. 
During adulthood, Scheuermann’s osteochondritis can 
sometimes be complicated by the development of 
Other bone diseases
Reflex sympathetic  
dystrophy syndrome
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome (RSDS), or 
algodystrophy, presents with gradual onset of severe 
pain, swelling and local tenderness, usually affecting a 
limb extremity. It is characterised by localised osteo­
porosis of the affected limb and evidence of regional 
autonomic dysfunction, such as abnormal sweating, 
colour and temperature change. It is commonly trig­
gered by fracture, occurring in up to 25% of patients 
with Colles fracture. It can also associate with soft tissue 
injury, pregnancy and intercurrent illness, or can 
develop spontaneously. The cause is unknown but over­
activity of the sympathetic nervous system is thought to 
be responsible for many of its features.
The diagnosis is clinical but supported by patchy 
osteoporosis of the affected bone on X-ray, by a local 
increase in isotope uptake on bone scanning (Fig. 25.58), 
or by marrow oedema on MRI. The differential diagno­
sis includes infection and malignancy. Usually, the diag­
nosis of RSD is clear on clinical grounds and by the 
absence of an acute phase response or other systemic 
features of malignancy, but a biopsy of the affected site 
can be undertaken if necessary and typically shows local 
osteopenia only.
The aims of treatment are to control pain and encour­
age mobilisation. Analgesics, NSAID, antineuropathic 
agents, calcitonin, corticosteroids, β-adrenoceptor ant­
agonists (β-blockers), sympathectomy and bisphospho­
nates have all been tried, but none is particularly 
effective. Although some cases resolve with time, many 
have persistent symptoms and fail to regain normal 
function.
Osteonecrosis
Osteonecrosis describes death of bone due to impair­
ment of its blood supply. The most commonly affected 
Fig. 25.58  Reflex sympathetic dystrophy. Isotope bone scan showing 
increased uptake in femoral condyle. 
Drug
Route of 
administration
Dose
Inhibitory 
effect on 
bone 
turnover
Etidronate
Oral
400 mg daily 
for 3–6 mths
+
Tiludronate
Oral
400 mg daily 
for 3–6 mths
+
Risedronate
Oral
30 mg daily 
for 2 mths
++
Pamidronate
IV
1–3 × 60 mg
++
Zoledronic 
acid
IV
1 × 5 mg
+++
Calcitonin
SC
100–200 U  
3 times 
weekly for 
2–3 mths
+
+ moderately effective; ++ effective; +++ highly effective.
25.82  Medical management of Paget’s disease
Bone and joint tumours
25
1131
secondary OA, which may cause back pain. Occasion­
ally, the vertebral deformity and kyphosis can be mis­
taken for osteoporotic vertebral fractures during adult 
life, but this can be excluded by DEXA examination, 
which typically shows normal or raised BMD values in 
Scheuermann’s disease.
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
This is an acquired disorder caused by mutations in the 
GNAS1 gene, characterised by focal or multifocal bone 
pain, bone deformity and expansion, and pathological 
fractures. Associated features include endocrine dys­
function, especially precocious puberty, and café-au-lait 
skin pigmentation (McCune–Albright syndrome). The 
diagnosis is made by imaging, which shows focal, pre­
dominantly osteolytic lesions and bone expansion 
on X-ray, and focal increased uptake on bone scan. 
The condition can resemble Paget’s disease of bone but 
the earlier age of onset and pattern of involvement 
are usually distinctive. Management is symptomatic. 
Surgery is sometimes required for treatment of fracture 
and deformity. Very rarely, malignant change can occur 
and should be suspected if there is a sudden increase in 
pain and swelling. There is limited evidence that intra­
venous pamidronate may help bone pain and promote 
healing of lytic lesions.
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is the name given to a 
group of disorders characterised by severe osteoporosis 
and multiple fractures in infancy and childhood. Most 
cases are caused by mutations in the COL1A1 and 
COL1A2 genes, which encode the proteins that make up 
type I collagen. This results either in reduced collagen 
production (in mild OI) or in formation of abnormal 
collagen chains that are rapidly degraded (in severe OI). 
Most patients have dominant inheritance but recessive 
forms have been described, caused by mutations in the 
CRTAP and LEPRE genes, which are involved in post-
translational modification of collagen. Many patients 
have no family history and are presumed to have new 
mutations. Severity varies from neonatal lethal (type II), 
through very severe with multiple fractures in infancy 
and childhood (types III and IV), to mild (type I), in 
which affected patients typically have blue sclerae. The 
diagnosis of OI is usually obvious clinically. In child­
hood, the disease can be mistaken for non-accidental 
injury and in adulthood for osteoporosis. In such cases, 
genetic testing can be of diagnostic value. Treatment is 
multidisciplinary, involving surgical reduction and fixa­
tion of fractures and correction of limb deformities, and 
physiotherapy and occupational therapy for rehabilita­
tion of patients with bone deformity. Bisphosphonates 
are widely used in the treatment of OI, especially intra­
venous pamidronate in children, but there is limited 
evidence that this prevents fractures or deformity.
Osteopetrosis
Osteopetrosis is a rare group of inherited diseases 
caused by failure of osteoclast function. Presentation is 
highly variable, ranging from a lethal disorder that 
presents with bone marrow failure in infancy to a milder 
and sometimes asymptomatic form that presents in 
adulthood. Severe osteopetrosis is inherited in an auto­
somal recessive manner and presents with failure to 
thrive, delayed dentition, cranial nerve palsies (due to 
absent cranial foramina), blindness, anaemia and recur­
rent infections due to bone marrow failure. The adult-
onset type (Albers–Schönberg disease) shows autosomal 
dominant inheritance and presents with bone pain, 
cranial nerve palsies, osteomyelitis, OA or fracture, or 
is sometimes detected as an incidental radiographic 
finding. The responsible mutations either affect the 
genes that regulate osteoclast differentiation (RANK, 
RANKL), causing ‘osteoclast-poor’ osteopetrosis, or 
affect the genes involved in bone resorption, causing 
‘osteoclast-rich’ osteopetrosis. These include mutations 
in the TCIRG1 gene, which encodes a component of the 
osteoclast proton pump, and mutations in the CLCN7 
gene, which encodes the osteoclast chloride pump. 
Management is difficult. IFN-γ treatment can improve 
blood counts and reduce frequency of infections, but in 
severe cases haematopoietic stem cell transplantation is 
required to provide a source of osteoclasts that resorb 
bone normally.
Sclerosing bone dysplasias
These are rare diseases characterised by osteosclerosis 
and increased bone formation. Van Buchem’s disease 
and sclerosteosis are recessive disorders caused by loss-
of-function mutations in the SOST gene (see Fig. 25.2, 
p. 1061). The resulting lack of sclerostin causes increased 
bone formation and bone overgrowth, leading to 
enlargement of the cranium and jaw, tall stature and 
cranial nerve palsies. There is no effective treatment. 
High bone mass syndrome is a benign disorder charac­
terised by unusually high bone density. Most patients 
are asymptomatic but bone overgrowth in the palate can 
occur. Treatment is not usually required. Camurati–
Engelmann disease is an autosomal dominant condition 
caused by gain of function in the TGFB1 gene. It presents 
with bone pain, muscle weakness and osteosclerosis 
mainly affecting the diaphysis of long bones. Cortico­
steroids can help the bone pain, although analgesics are 
also usually required.
BONE AND JOINT TUMOURS
Primary tumours of bones and joints are rare, have a 
peak incidence in childhood and adolescence, and can 
be benign or malignant (Box 25.83). Paget’s disease of 
Cell type
Benign
Malignant
Osteoblast
Osteoid osteoma
Osteosarcoma
Chondrocyte
Chondroma
Osteochondroma
Chondrosarcoma
Fibroblast
Fibroma
Fibrosarcoma
Bone marrow cell
Eosinophilic 
granuloma
Ewing’s sarcoma
Endothelial cell
Haemangioma
Angiosarcoma
Osteoclast precursor
Giant cell tumour
Malignant giant 
cell tumour
25.83  Primary tumours of the 
musculoskeletal system
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1132
page 710, haemophilia on page 1051 and sickle cell 
anaemia on page 1032.
Malignant disease
Malignant disease can cause a variety of non-metastatic 
musculoskeletal problems (Box 25.85). One of the most 
striking is hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy, 
characterised by clubbing and painful swelling of the 
limbs, periosteal new bone formation and arthralgia/
arthritis. The most common causes are bronchial carci­
noma and mesothelioma (pp. 699 and 719), but the con­
dition can be inherited when it is caused by inactivating 
mutations in the HPGD gene, which is responsible for 
degradation of PGE2, suggesting that over-production of 
prostaglandins may generally play a causal role in club­
bing. Bone scans show increased periosteal uptake 
before new bone is apparent on X-ray. The course 
follows that of the underlying malignancy and resolves 
if this is cured.
bone (p. 1128) accounts for most cases of osteosarcoma 
occurring above the age of 40.
Osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma presents with local pain, swelling and 
tenderness. X-rays may show expansion of the bone 
with a surrounding soft tissue mass, often containing 
islands of calcification, but further evaluation by MRI or 
CT is necessary to determine the extent of tumour. The 
diagnosis can be confirmed by biopsy but this should 
be done after referral to a specialist team. Treatment 
depends on histological type but generally involves sur­
gical removal of the tumour, followed by chemotherapy 
and radiotherapy. The prognosis is excellent with benign 
tumours and also generally good in cases that present in 
childhood and adolescence. The prognosis is poor in 
elderly patients with osteosarcoma related to Paget’s 
disease of bone.
Metastatic bone disease
Metastatic bone disease may present in a variety of 
ways: with localised or generalised progressive bone 
pain, generalised regional pain, symptoms of spinal cord 
compression, or acute pain due to pathological fracture. 
Systemic features, such as weight loss and anorexia, and 
symptoms referable to the primary tumour are often 
present. The tumours that most commonly metastasise 
to bone are myeloma and those of bronchus, breast, 
prostate, kidney and thyroid. Management is discussed 
in Chapter 11.
RHEUMATOLOGICAL INVOLVEMENT IN 
OTHER DISEASES
Many systemic diseases can affect the locomotor system, 
and many drugs may cause adverse locomotor effects 
(Box 25.84). The most common examples are described 
here. Bone disease in sarcoidosis is described on 
Musculoskeletal problem
Principal drug
Secondary gout
Thiazides, furosemide, alcohol
Osteoporosis
Corticosteroids, heparin, glitazones, aromatase inhibitors, GnRH agonists
Osteomalacia
Anticonvulsants, etidronate and pamidronate (high-dose)
Osteonecrosis
Corticosteroids, alcohol
Drug-induced lupus syndrome
Procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid, chlorpromazine
Arthralgias or arthritis
Corticosteroid withdrawal, glibenclamide, methyldopa, ciclosporin, isoniazid, barbiturates
Myalgia
Corticosteroid withdrawal, L-tryptophan, fibrates, statins
Myopathy
Corticosteroids, chloroquine
Myositis, myasthenia
Penicillamine, statins
Cramps
Corticosteroids, ACTH, diuretics, carbenoxolone
Vasculitis
Amphetamines, thiazides
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone)
25.84  Drug-induced effects on the musculoskeletal system
•	 Polyarthritis
•	 Dermatomyositis and polymyositis
•	 Hypophosphataemic osteomalacia
•	 Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
•	 Vasculitis, connective tissue disease
•	 Raynaud’s syndrome
•	 Polymyalgia rheumatica-like syndrome
25.85  Rheumatological manifestations 
of malignancy
Endocrine disease
Hypothyroidism (p. 743) may present with carpal tunnel 
syndrome, or rarely with very painful, symmetrical 
proximal myopathy with muscle hyper­trophy. Both 
resolve 
with 
thyroxine 
replacement. 
Hyperpara­
thyroidism (p. 769) predisposes to calcium pyrophos­
phate dihydrate deposition disease and to calcific 
periarthritis, especially in patients with renal disease.
Miscellaneous conditions
25
1133
Diabetes mellitus (Ch. 21) commonly causes diabetic 
cheiroarthropathy characterised by tightening of skin 
and periarticular structures, causing flexion deformities 
of the fingers that may be painful. Diabetic osteopathy 
presents as forefoot pain with radiographic progression 
from osteopenia to complete osteolysis of the phalanges 
and metatarsals. Diabetes also predisposes to adhesive 
capsulitis, Dupuytren’s contracture, septic arthritis and 
Charcot’s joints.
Acromegaly (p. 792) can be associated with mechani­
cal back pain, with normal or excessive (not restricted) 
movement; carpal tunnel syndrome; Raynaud’s syn­
drome; and an arthropathy (50%). The arthropathy 
mainly affects the large joints and has clinical similarities 
to OA but with normal or an increased range of move­
ment. X-rays may show widening of joint spaces, squar­
ing of bone ends, generalised osteopenia and tufting of 
terminal phalanges. It does not improve with treatment 
of the acromegaly.
Haematological disease
Haemochromatosis (p. 972) is complicated by an 
arthropathy in about 50% of cases. It typically presents 
between the ages of 40 and 50, and may predate other 
features of the disease. The small joints of the hands and 
wrists are typically affected but the hips, shoulders and 
knees may also be involved. The X-ray changes resemble 
OA but cysts are often multiple and prominent, with 
little osteophyte formation. Involvement of the radiocar­
pal and MCP joints may occur, which is unusual in 
primary OA, and about 30% have calcium pyrophos­
phate dihydrate deposition disease and/or pseudogout. 
Treatment of the haemochromatosis does not influence 
the arthropathy, and management of the arthropathy is 
as described for OA. Haemophilia (p. 1051) can be com­
plicated by haemarthrosis, which, if recurrent, can result 
in the development of secondary osteoarthritis. Sickle-
cell disease (p. 1032) may be complicated by bone pain, 
osteonecrosis and osteomyelitis. Thalassaemia (p. 1033) 
may be complicated by bone deformity, especially 
affecting the craniofacial bones, and by osteoporosis.
Neurological disease
Neurological disease may result in rapidly destructive 
arthritis of joints, first described by Charcot in associa­
tion with syphilis. The cause is incompletely understood 
but may involve repetitive trauma as the result of 
sensory loss and altered blood flow secondary to 
impaired sympathetic nervous system control. The main 
predisposing diseases and sites of involvement are:
•	 diabetic neuropathy (hindfoot)
•	 syringomyelia (shoulder, elbow, wrist)
•	 leprosy (hands, feet)
•	 tabes dorsalis (knees, spine).
The presentation is with subacute or chronic mono­
arthritis. Pain can occur, especially at the onset, but 
once the joint is severely deranged, pain is often mini­
mal and signs become disproportionately greater than 
symptoms. The joint is often grossly swollen, with 
effusion, crepitus, marked instability and deformity, 
Fig. 25.59  Wrist X-ray showing a neuropathic (Charcot) joint in a 
patient with syringomyelia. Note the disorganised architecture with 
complete loss of the proximal carpal row, bony fragments and soft tissue 
swelling. 
but usually no increased warmth. X-rays show disor­
ganisation of normal joint architecture and often multi­
ple loose bodies (Fig. 25.59), and either no (atrophic) 
or gross (hypertrophic) new bone formation. Manage­
ment principally involves orthoses and occasionally 
arthrodesis.
MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS
Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis
Spondylolysis describes a break in the integrity of the 
neural arch. The principal cause is an acquired defect in 
pars interarticularis due to a fracture, mainly seen in 
gymnasts, dancers and runners, in whom it is an impor­
tant cause of back pain. Spondylolisthesis describes the 
condition where a defect causes slippage of a vertebra 
on the one below. This may be congenital, post-traumatic 
or degenerative. Rarely, it can result from metastatic 
destruction of the posterior elements. Uncomplicated 
spondylolysis does not cause symptoms but spondy­
lolisthesis can cause low back pain aggravated by stand­
ing and walking. Occasionally, symptoms of nerve root 
or spinal compression may occur. The diagnosis can be 
made on lateral X-rays of the lumbar spine but MRI may 
be required if there is neurological involvement. Advice 
on posture and muscle-strengthening exercises is 
required in mild cases. Surgical fusion is indicated for 
severe and recurrent low back pain. Surgical decompres­
sion is mandatory prior to fusion in patients with sig­
nificant lumbar stenosis or symptoms of cauda equina 
compression.
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a 
common disorder, affecting 10% of men and 8% of 
women over the age of 65, and associated with obesity, 
Rheumatology and bone disease
25
1134
in four or more joints (Box 25.86). There is no specific 
treatment, apart from the general principles listed on 
page 1077.
Dupuytren’s contracture
Dupuytren’s contracture results from fibrosis and con­
tracture of the superficial palmar fascia of the hands. The 
patient is unable to extend the fingers fully and there is 
puckering of the skin with palpable nodules. The ring 
and little fingers are usually the first and worst affected. 
It is usually painless, but causes problems due to limita­
tion of hand function and snagging of the curled fingers 
in pockets. It is age-related, usually bilateral and more 
common in men. There is a strong genetic component 
and sometimes may be familial, with dominant inherit­
ance. It can be associated with plantar fibromatosis, Pey­
ronie’s disease, alcohol misuse and chronic vibration 
injury. It is very slowly progressive. Often no treatment 
is required, but it can be treated medically by local injec­
tions of collagenase or surgically by fasciotomy if symp­
toms are troublesome.
Carpal tunnel syndrome
This is a common nerve entrapment syndrome caused 
by compression of the median nerve at the wrist. It 
presents with numbness, tingling and pain in a median 
nerve distribution (p. 1224). The most common causes 
are hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, RA, obesity and 
pregnancy, especially in the third trimester. In some 
patients no underlying cause may be identified. Carpal 
tunnel syndrome often responds to treatment of the 
underlying condition, but other options include local 
steroid injections and surgical decompression.
Trigger finger
This occurs as the result of stenosing tenosynovitis in the 
flexor tendon sheath, with intermittent locking of the 
finger in flexion. It can arise spontaneously or in associa­
tion with inflammatory diseases like RA. Symptoms 
usually respond to local steroid injections but surgical 
decompression is occasionally required.
hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is charac­
terised by florid new bone formation along the antero­
lateral aspect of at least four contiguous vertebral bodies 
(Fig. 25.60). DISH is distinguished from lumbar spondy­
losis by the absence of disc space narrowing and mar­
ginal vertebral body sclerosis, and from ankylosing 
spondylitis by the absence of sacroiliitis or apophyseal 
joint fusion. It is usually an asymptomatic radiographic 
finding but can cause back pain or pain at peripheral 
sites, such as the heel in association with calcaneal spur 
formation.
Pigmented villonodular synovitis
Pigmented villonodular synovitis is an uncommon 
proliferative disorder of synovium, which typically 
affects young adults. It is caused by a somatic chromo­
somal translocation in synovial cells that places the 
CSF1 gene downstream of the COL6A3 gene promoter. 
The result is local over-production of macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), which causes accu­
mulation of macrophages in the joint. The presentation 
is with joint swelling, limitation of movement and local 
discomfort. The diagnosis can be confirmed by MRI or 
synovial biopsy. Treatment is by surgical or radiation 
synovectomy.
Joint hypermobility
Hypermobility is a relatively uncommon disorder asso­
ciated with joint laxity. It may be primary or secondary 
to inherited diseases, such as Marfan’s syndrome 
(p. 603), Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (p. 1050) and osteo­
genesis imperfecta (p. 1131). Benign joint hypermobility 
syndrome is diagnosed clinically when the modified 
Beighton score is 4 or above in the presence of arthralgia 
Clinical test
Score
Extend little finger > 90°
(1 point each side)
Bring thumb back parallel to/touching 
forearm
(1 point each side)
Extend elbow > 10°
(1 point each side)
Extend knee > 10°
(1 point each side)
Touch floor with flat of hands, legs 
straight
(1 point)
Hypermobile = a score of 6 or more points out of a possible 9 
for epidemiological studies, or 4 or more points (with arthralgia 
in four or more joints) for a clinical diagnosis of the benign joint 
hypermobility syndrome.
25.86  Modified Beighton score for 
joint hypermobility
Fig. 25.60  Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH). 
Antero-posterior X-ray of thoracic spine showing right-sided, flowing new 
bone joining more than four contiguous vertebrae. The disc spaces are 
preserved. 
Further information
25
1135
Periodic fever syndromes
These are a group of rare inherited disorders that present 
with intermittent attacks of fever, rash, arthralgia and 
myalgia. They usually occur in childhood but may 
present for the first time in adulthood. They are dis­
cussed in more detail on page 85.
Anterior tibial compartment syndrome
This is characterised by severe pain in the front of 
the lower leg, aggravated by exercise and relieved by 
rest. Symptoms result from fascial compression of the 
muscles in the anterior tibial compartment and may 
be associated with foot drop. Treatment is by surgical 
decompression.
Synovitis–acne–pustulosis–
hyperostosis–osteitis syndrome
The 
synovitis–acne–pustulosis–hyperostosis–osteitis 
(SAPHO) syndrome is an uncommon disorder charac­
terised by bone pain and swelling due to a sterile osteo­
myelitis and hyperostosis predominantly targeting 
the clavicles and bones of the anterior chest wall. Other 
features include a pustulotic rash affecting the palms 
and soles of the feet, sacroiliitis and synovitis of periph­
eral joints. It most commonly presents in children 
and young or middle-aged adults. Various treatments 
have been used, including corticosteroids, DMARDs, 
bisphosphonates and TNF blockers, with varying 
degrees of success. The cause is unknown but has been 
suggested to be an autoimmune process triggered by a 
bacterial or viral pathogen.
Further information
Journal articles
Ralston SH. Paget’s disease of bone. N Engl J Med 2013; 
368:644–650.
Rudwaleit M. New approaches to diagnosis  
and classification of axial and peripheral 
spondyloarthropathies. Curr Opin Rheum 2010; 
22:275–280.
Sambrook P, Cooper C. Osteoporosis. Lancet 2006; 
367:2010–2018.
Scott DL, Woolf F, Huizinga TW. Rheumatoid arthritis. 
Lancet 2010; 376:1094–1108.
Zhang W, Doherty M, et al. EULAR recommendations for 
gout. Part 2: Management. Ann Rheum Dis 2006; 
65:1312–1324.
Websites
www.4s-dawn.com/DAS28
www.basdai.com/BASDAI.php BASDAI calculator.
www.nice.org.uk/CG59 Osteoarthritis.
www.nice.org.uk/TA161 and www.nice.org.uk/TA160 
Osteoporosis.
www.omim.org Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
(OMIM): genetic diseases.
www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/ and www.qfracture.org/ Fracture 
risk assessment tools.
This page intentionally left blank
1137
26 
Clinical examination of the nervous  
system 1138
Functional anatomy and physiology 1140
Functional anatomy of the nervous  
system 1141
Localising lesions in the brainstem 1148
Investigation of neurological disease 1149
Neuroimaging 1149
Neurophysiological testing 1151
Presenting problems in neurological  
disease 1155
Headache and facial pain 1156
Dizziness, blackouts and ‘funny turns’ 1157
Status epilepticus 1159
Coma 1159
Delirium 1161
Amnesia 1161
Weakness 1162
Sensory disturbance 1164
Abnormal movements 1165
Abnormal perception 1167
Altered balance and vertigo 1167
Abnormal gait 1168
Abnormal speech and language 1168
Disturbance of smell 1169
Visual disturbance and ocular  
abnormalities 1169
Hearing disturbance 1173
Bulbar symptoms – dysphagia and  
dysarthria 1173
Bladder, bowel and sexual disturbance 1174
Personality change 1175
Sleep disturbance 1175
Psychiatric disorders 1175
Neurological disease
Intracranial mass lesions and raised 
intracranial pressure 1211
Raised intracranial pressure 1212
Brain tumours 1213
Paraneoplastic neurological disease 1216
Hydrocephalus 1216
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension 1217
Head injury 1218
Disorders of cerebellar function 1218
Disorders of the spine and spinal cord 1218
Cervical spondylosis 1218
Lumbar spondylosis 1219
Spinal cord compression 1220
Intrinsic diseases of the spinal cord 1222
Diseases of peripheral nerves 1223
Entrapment neuropathy 1224
Multifocal neuropathy 1224
Polyneuropathy 1224
Guillain–Barré syndrome 1224
Chronic polyneuropathy 1225
Brachial plexopathy 1225
Lumbosacral plexopathy 1226
Spinal root lesions 1226
Diseases of the neuromuscular  
junction 1226
Myasthenia gravis 1226
Other myasthenic syndromes 1227
Diseases of muscle 1228
J.P. Leach
R.J. Davenport
Functional symptoms 1175
Headache syndromes 1176
Epilepsy 1178
Vestibular disorders 1186
Disorders of sleep 1187
Excessive daytime sleepiness 
(hypersomnolence) 1187
Parasomnias 1187
Neuro-inflammatory diseases 1188
Multiple sclerosis 1188
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis 1192
Transverse myelitis 1193
Neuromyelitis optica 1193
Paraneoplastic neurological disorders 1193
Neurodegenerative diseases 1194
Movement disorders 1194
Ataxias 1198
Tremor disorders 1199
Dystonia 1200
Hemifacial spasm 1200
Motor neuron disease 1200
Spinal muscular atrophy 1201
Infections of the nervous system 1201
Meningitis 1201
Parenchymal viral infections 1205
Parenchymal bacterial infections 1208
Diseases caused by bacterial toxins 1209
Transmissible spongiform  
encephalopathies 1211
Neurological disease
1138
Higher cerebral function
Orientation
Memory
Speech and language
Localised cortical functions
Cranial nerves
Optic fundi
Papilloedema
Optic atrophy
Cupping of disc (glaucoma)
Hypertensive changes
Signs of diabetes
Observation
Back
Scoliosis
Operative scars
Evidence of spina bifida occulta
Winging of scapula
Neck and skull
Skull size and shape
Neck stiffness and Kernig’s test
Carotid bruit
4
5
• General appearance
• Mood (e.g. anxious, depressed)
• Facial expression (or lack thereof)
• Handedness
• Nutritional status
• Blood pressure
Stance and gait
Posture
Romberg’s test
Arm swing
Pattern of gait
Tandem (heel-toe) gait
1
Sensory
Pin-prick, temperature
Joint position, vibration
Two-point discrimination
7
8
2
3
Motor
Wasting, fasciculation
Abnormal posture
Abnormal movements
Tone (including clonus)
Strength
Coordination
Tendon reflexes
Abdominal reflexes
Plantar reflexes
6
Winging of right scapula
(muscular dystrophy)
Right 12th nerve palsy:
wasting of right side of tongue
Wasting of right thenar
eminence due to cervical rib
Haemorrhagic papilloedema
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Clinical examination of the nervous system
1139
1  Examination of gait and posture
Procedure
Abnormality
Disease
1
Responds to call
No response
Deafness
Delirium
2
Rising from chair
Difficulty rising
Proximal muscle weakness
Joint stiffness
3
Examine posture
Retropulsion/anteropulsion
Stooped
Postural instability
Parkinsonism
Parkinsonism
4
Examine arms during walking
Reduced arm swing
Parkinsonism, upper motor neuron lesion
5
Examine routine walking
Circumduction (stiff leg moves outwards in 
‘circular’ manner)
Upper motor neuron lesion
‘Slapping’ due to foot drop
Lower motor neuron lesion L5 root or 
common peroneal nerve
Narrow-based, short strides
Parkinsonism
Wide-based, short strides (marche à petits 
pas, magnetic gait)
Frontal lobe lesion
Wide-based, irregular strides
Cerebellar lesion
High-stepping gait
Dorsal column lesion/sensory neuropathy
4  Examination of cranial nerves
Nerve
Name
Tests
I
Olfactory
Ask patient about sense of smell (only examine if 
reported change)
II
Optic
Visual acuity
Visual fields
‘Swinging’ torch test for relative afferent pupillary defect
Ophthalmoscopy
III
Oculomotor
Eye movements (nystagmus)
Eyelid movement
Pupil size, symmetry, reactions
IV
Trochlear
Eye movements
V
Trigeminal
Facial sensation
Corneal reflex
Ask patient about taste
VI
Abducens
Eye movements
VII
Facial
Facial symmetry and movements
Ask patient about taste
VIII
Vestibulocochlear
Hearing (rub fingertips next to each ear)
Tuning fork tests (Rinne and Weber)
Hallpike test for benign positional vertigo
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Gag reflex (sensory)
X
Vagus
Palatal elevation (uvula deviates to side opposite lesion)
Gag reflex (motor)
Cough (bovine)
XI
Accessory
Look for wasting of trapezius/sternocleidomastoid
Elevation of shoulders
Turning head to right and left
XII
Hypoglossal
Look for wasting/fasciculation
Tongue protrusion (deviates to side of lesion)
6  Root values of tendon 
reflexes
Reflex
Root value
Upper limb
Biceps jerk
C5/C6
Supinator jerk
C5/C6
Triceps jerk
C7
Finger jerk
C8
Lower limb
Knee jerk
L3/L4
Ankle jerk
S1
•	 Pupils: tend to be smaller, 
which makes fundoscopy more 
difficult.
•	 Limb tone: difficult to assess 
because of poor relaxation and 
concomitant joint disease.
•	 Ankle reflexes: may be bilaterally 
absent.
•	 Gait assessment: more difficult 
because of concurrent 
musculoskeletal disease and 
pre-existing neurological deficits.
•	 Sensory testing: especially 
difficult when there is cognitive 
impairment.
•	 Vibration sense: may be reduced in 
the lower legs.
Neurological examination 
in old age
Neurological disease
26
1140
Neurology has long been misperceived as a specialty 
in which intricate clinical examination and numerous 
investigations are required to diagnose obscure and 
untreatable conditions. In fact, it requires careful history-
taking with a lesser contribution from targeted examina-
tion and considered investigation. The development of 
specific, effective treatments has made accurate diagno-
sis essential.
The brain, spinal cord and peripheral nerves combine 
to allow us to perceive and react to the external world, 
while maintaining a stable internal environment. The 
brain provides a platform for processing information 
and forming a response and, in doing so, both forms 
and is affected by our personality and mental state. 
Nervous system disorders are common, accounting for 
around 10% of the UK’s general practice consultations, 
20% of acute medical admissions, and most chronic 
physical disability. While pathological and anatomical 
•	 Status epilepticus (p. 1159)
•	 Stroke (if thrombolysis available) (p. 1237)
•	 Guillain–Barré syndrome (p. 1224)
•	 Myasthenia gravis (if bulbar and/or respiratory) (p. 1226)
•	 Spinal cord compression (p. 1220)
•	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage (p. 1246)
•	 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (p. 249)
26.1  Neurological emergencies
Fig. 26.1  Cells of the nervous system. (CSF = cerebrospinal fluid) 
Astrocyte foot processes
surround the brain capillary
(site of blood–brain barrier)
Capillary
Red blood
cell in capillary
Tight
junction
Capillary
endothelial
cell
Astrocyte
Synapse
Neuron
Oligodendrocyte
Axon
CSF
Ependymal cell
Sensory cell
body in dorsal
root ganglion
Motor neuron
cell body in
anterior horn
Spinal cord
grey matter
Node of Ranvier
Vas
nervorum
Sensory
axon
Motor axon
Schwann cell
localisation is important, skill is required to identify 
those neurological symptoms not associated with neuro-
logical disease, to differentiate patients requiring investi-
gation and treatment from those who need reassurance.
Initially, it is important to exclude conditions that 
constitute neurological emergencies (Box 26.1). If the 
presentation is not an emergency, more time can be 
taken to reach a diagnosis. The history should provide 
a hypothesis for the site and nature of the potential 
pathology, which a focused examination may refine and 
inform what further investigation would be useful. A 
discussion with the patient about possible interventions 
and rehabilitation may then take place.
As Stroke has become a specific subspecialty in many 
centres, it is described in a separate chapter, although it 
is clearly a neurological condition. This chapter should 
be read with it, to help clarify how the presentation, 
diagnosis and management of stroke differ from other 
conditions.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
Cells of the nervous system
The nervous system comprises billions of connections 
between billions of specialised cells, supplied by a com-
plex network of specialised blood vessels. In addition to 
neurons, there are three types of glial cells. Astrocytes 
Functional anatomy and physiology 
26
1141
form the structural framework for neurons and control 
their biochemical environment. Astrocyte foot processes 
are intimately associated with blood vessels, forming the 
blood–brain barrier (Fig. 26.1). Oligodendrocytes are 
responsible for the formation and maintenance of the 
myelin sheath, which surrounds axons and is essential 
for the rapid transmission of action potentials by salta-
tory conduction. Microglial cells derive from monocytes/
macrophages and play a role in fighting infection and 
removing damaged cells. Peripheral neurons have axons 
invested in myelin made by Schwann cells. Ependymal 
cells line the cerebral ventricles.
Generation and transmission of 
the nervous impulse
The role of the central nervous system (CNS) is to gener-
ate outputs in response to external stimuli and changes 
in internal conditions. Each neuron receives input by 
synaptic transmission from dendrites (branched projec-
tions of other neurons), which may sum to produce 
output in the form of an action potential. This is con-
ducted down axons, with synaptic transmission to other 
neurons or, in the motor system, to muscle cells. These 
processes require the maintenance of an electrochemical 
gradient across neuron cell membranes by specialised 
membrane ion channels. Synaptic transmission involves 
the release of neurotransmitters that modulate the func-
tion of the target cell by interacting with structures on 
the cell surface, including ion channels and other cell 
surface receptors (Fig. 26.2). At least 20 different neuro-
transmitters are known to act at different sites in the 
nervous system, and all are potentially amenable to 
pharmacological manipulation.
The neuronal cell bodies may receive synaptic input 
from thousands of other neurons. The synapsing neuron 
terminals are also subject to feedback regulation via 
receptor sites on the pre-synaptic membrane, modifying 
the release of transmitter across the synaptic cleft. In 
addition to such acute effects, some neurotransmitters 
produce long-term modulation of metabolic function or 
gene expression. This effect probably underlies more 
complex processes in, for example, long-term memory.
Functional anatomy of  
the nervous system
Major components of the nervous system and their inter-
relationships are depicted in Figure 26.3.
Fig. 26.3  The major anatomical components of the nervous 
system. 
Posterior
Anterior
Cerebral
hemispheres
Sensation
and
perception
Cerebellum
Brainstem
Spinal cord
Autonomic
Autonomic
Behaviour
and
motor
GI tract
Sensory
receptor
Heart and
circulation
Muscle
Neuromuscular
junction
Bladder
Reproductive
organs
Fig. 26.2  Neurotransmission and neurotransmitters. (1) An action 
potential arriving at the nerve terminal depolarises the membrane and this 
opens voltage-gated calcium channels. (2) Entry of calcium causes the 
fusion of synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitters with the pre-synaptic 
membrane and release of the neurotransmitter across the synaptic cleft.  
(3) The neurotransmitter binds to receptors on the post-synaptic membrane 
either (A) to open ligand-gated ion channels which, by allowing ion entry, 
depolarise the membrane and initiate an action potential (4), or (B) to bind to 
metabotrophic receptors that activate an effector enzyme (e.g. adenylyl 
cyclase) and thus modulate gene transcription via the intracellular second 
messenger system, leading to changes in synthesis of ion channels or 
modulating enzymes. (5) Neurotransmitters are taken up at the pre-synaptic 
membrane and/or metabolised. (cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate; 
DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid; mRNA = messenger ribonucleic acid) 
Transcription
factor
Microtubules in
axon down which
neurotransmitters
and/or precursors
are transported
1
Ca2+
Voltage-gated
calcium
channels
Action
potential
2
3
3
4
5
Ions
Ions
G-protein
mRNA
DNA
Cell
nucleus
Translation
New ion channel
or modulating
enzyme
Second
messengers
e.g. cAMP
A
B
Neurological disease
26
1142
The parietal lobes integrate sensory perception. The 
primary sensory cortex lies in the post-central gyrus 
of the parietal lobe. Much of the remainder is devoted 
to ‘association’ cortex, which processes and interprets 
input from the various sensory modalities. The supra-
marginal and angular gyri of the dominant parietal lobe 
form part of the language area (p. 1169). Close to these 
are regions dealing with numerical function. The non-
dominant parietal lobe is concerned with spatial aware-
ness and orientation.
The temporal lobes contain the primary auditory 
cortex and primary vestibular cortex. On the inner 
medial sides lie the olfactory cortex and the para­
hippocampal cortex, which is involved in memory 
function. The temporal lobes also contain much of the 
limbic system, including the hippocampus and the 
amygdala, which are involved in memory and emo-
tional pro­cessing. The dominant temporal lobe also 
participates in language functions, particularly verbal 
Cerebral hemispheres
The cerebral hemispheres coordinate the highest level 
of nervous function, the anterior half dealing with exec-
utive (‘doing’) functions and the posterior half con-
structing a perception of the environment. Each cerebral 
hemisphere has four functionally specialised lobes (Fig. 
26.4 and Box 26.2), but some functions are lateralised, 
and this depends on cerebral dominance (i.e. the hemi-
sphere in which language is represented). Cerebral 
dominance aligns limb dominance with language func-
tion: in right-handed individuals the left hemisphere is 
almost always dominant, while around half of left-
handers have a dominant right hemisphere.
The frontal lobes are concerned with executive func-
tion, movement, behaviour and planning. In addition to 
the primary and supplementary motor cortex, there are 
specialised areas for the control of eye movements, 
speech (Broca’s area) and micturition.
Lobe
Function
Effects of damage
Cognitive/behavioural
Associated physical signs
Positive phenomena
Frontal
Personality
Emotional control
Social behaviour
Contralateral motor 
control
Language
Micturition
Disinhibition
Lack of initiation
Antisocial behaviour
Impaired memory
Expressive dysphasia
Incontinence
Impaired smell
Contralateral hemiparesis
Frontal release signs1
Seizures – often 
nocturnal with motor 
activity
Versive head 
movements
Parietal: 
dominant
Language
Calculation
Dysphasia
Acalculia
Dyslexia
Apraxia3
Agnosia5
Contralateral hemisensory loss
Astereognosis2
Agraphaesthesia4
Contralateral homonymous 
lower quadrantanopia
Asymmetry of optokinetic 
nystagmus (OKN)
Focal sensory seizures
Parietal: 
non-dominant
Spatial orientation
Constructional skills
Neglect of contralateral side
Spatial disorientation
Constructional apraxia
Dressing apraxia
Contralateral hemisensory loss
Astereognosis2
Agraphaesthesia4
Contralateral homonymous 
lower quadrantanopia
Asymmetry of OKN
Focal sensory seizures
Temporal: 
dominant
Auditory perception
Language
Verbal memory
Smell
Balance
Receptive aphasia
Dyslexia
Impaired verbal memory
Contralateral homonymous 
lower quadrantanopia
Complex hallucinations 
(smell, sound, vision, 
memory)
Temporal: 
non-dominant
Auditory perception
Melody/pitch perception
Non-verbal memory
Smell
Balance
Impaired non-verbal 
memory
Impaired musical skills 
(tonal perception)
Contralateral homonymous 
upper quadrantanopia
Complex hallucinations 
(smell, sound, vision, 
memory)
Occipital
Visual processing
Visual inattention
Visual loss
Visual agnosia
Homonymous hemianopia 
(macular sparing)
Simple visual 
hallucinations (e.g. 
phosphenes, zigzag 
lines)
1Grasp reflex, palmomental response, pout response.
2Inability to determine three-dimensional shape by touch.
3Inability to perform complex movements in the presence of normal motor, sensory and cerebellar function.
4Inability to ‘read’ numbers or letters drawn on hand, with the eyes shut.
5Inability to recognise familiar objects, e.g. faces.
26.2  Cortical lobar functions
Functional anatomy and physiology 
26
1143
the face and eyes) and coordinate sensory input from the 
special sense organs and the face, nose, mouth, larynx 
and pharynx. They also relay autonomic messages, 
including pupillary, salivary and lacrimal functions. The 
comprehension (Wernicke’s area). Musical processing 
occurs across both temporal lobes, rhythm on the domi-
nant side and melody/pitch on the non-dominant.
The occipital lobes are responsible for visual interpre-
tation. The contralateral visual hemifield is represented 
in each primary visual cortex, with surrounding areas 
processing specific visual submodalities such as colour, 
movement or depth, and the analysis of more complex 
visual patterns such as faces.
Deep to the grey matter in the cortices, and the white 
matter (composed of neuronal axons), are collections of 
cells known as the basal ganglia that are concerned with 
motor control; the thalamus, which is responsible for 
the level of attention to sensory perception; the limbic 
system, concerned with emotion and memory; and the 
hypothalamus, responsible for homeostasis, such as 
temperature and appetite control. The cerebral ventri-
cles contain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which cushions 
the brain during cranial movement.
CSF is formed in the lateral ventricles and protects 
and nourishes the CNS. The CSF flows from third to 
fourth ventricles and through foramina in the brainstem 
to dissipate over the surface of the CNS, eventually 
being reabsorbed into the cerebral venous system (see 
Fig. 26.41, p. 1217).
The brainstem
In addition to containing all the sensory and motor path-
ways entering and leaving the hemispheres, the brain-
stem houses the nuclei and projections of the cranial 
nerves, as well as other important collections of neurons 
in the reticular formation (Fig. 26.5). Cranial nerve nuclei 
provide motor control to muscles of the head (including 
Fig. 26.4  The anatomy of the cerebral cortex. 
Parietal lobe
Face
Primary vestibular cortex
Parahippocampal cortex
Temporal lobe
Corpus callosum
Frontal lobe
Foot
Supplementary motor area
Superior temporal gyrus
Broca’s area
Inferior frontal gyrus
Frontal lobe
Primary motor cortex
Frontal eye field
Leg
Central sulcus
Primary sensory cortex
Supramarginal gyrus
Angular gyrus
Parietal lobe
Wernicke’s area
Primary auditory cortex
Occipital lobe
Temporal lobe
Primary visual cortex
Occipital lobe
Fig. 26.5  Anatomy of the brainstem. 
Cranial nerves
Cerebellum
10th
9th
8th
7th
6th
5th
3rd
4th
Pontine
nuclei
Sensory
tracts
Motor
tracts
Pyramidal
motor tract
Reticular
system
12th
11th
Neurological disease
26
1144
reticular formation is predominantly involved in the 
control of conjugate eye movements, the maintenance of 
balance, cardiorespiratory control and the maintenance 
of arousal.
The spinal cord
The spinal cord is the route for virtually all communica-
tion between the extracranial structures and the CNS. 
Afferent and efferent fibres are grouped in discrete 
bundles but collections of cells in the grey matter 
are responsible for lower-order motor reflexes and 
the primary processing of sensory information, includ-
ing pain.
Sensory peripheral nervous system
The sensory cell bodies of peripheral nerves are situated 
just outside the spinal cord, in the dorsal root ganglia 
in the spinal exit foramina, whilst the distal ends of 
their neurons utilise various specialised endings for the 
conversion of external stimuli into action potentials. 
Sensory nerves consist of a combination of large, fast, 
myelinated axons (which carry information about joint 
position sense and commands to muscles) and smaller, 
slower, unmyelinated axons (which carry information 
about pain and temperature, as well as autonomic 
function).
Motor peripheral nervous system
The anterior horns of the spinal cord comprise lower 
motor cell bodies. To increase conduction speed, periph-
eral motor nerve axons are wrapped in myelin produced 
by Schwann cells. Motor neurons release acetylcholine 
across the neuromuscular junction, which changes 
the muscle end-plate potential and initiates muscle 
contraction.
The autonomic system
The autonomic system regulates the cardiovascular and 
respiratory systems, the smooth muscle of the gastro­
intestinal tract, and many exocrine and endocrine 
glands throughout the body. The autonomic system is 
controlled centrally by diffuse modulatory systems in 
the brainstem, limbic system, hypothalamus and frontal 
lobes, which are concerned with arousal and back-
ground behavioural responses to threat. Autonomic 
output divides functionally and pharmacologically into 
two divisions: the parasympathetic and sympathetic 
systems.
The motor system
A programme of movement formulated by the pre-
motor cortex is converted into a series of signals in the 
motor cortex that are transmitted to the spinal cord in 
the pyramidal tract (Fig. 26.6). This passes through the 
internal capsule and the ventral brainstem before decus-
sating in the medulla to enter the lateral columns of the 
spinal cord. The pyramidal tract ‘upper motor neurons’ 
synapse with the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord 
grey matter, which form the lower motor neurons.
Any movement necessitates changes in posture and 
muscle tone, sometimes in quite separate muscle groups 
to those involved in the actual movement. The motor 
system consists of a hierarchy of controls that maintain 
body posture and muscle tone, on which any movement 
is superimposed. In the grey matter of the spinal cord, 
the lowest order of the motor hierarchy controls reflex 
responses to stretch. Muscle spindles sense lengthening 
of the muscle; they provide the afferent side of the 
stretch reflex and initiate a monosynaptic reflex leading 
to protective or reactive muscle con­traction. Inputs from 
the brainstem are largely inhibitory. Polysynaptic con-
nections in the spinal cord grey matter control more 
complex reflex actions of flexion and extension of the 
limbs that form the basic building blocks of coordinated 
actions, but complete control requires input from the 
extrapyramidal system and the cerebellum.
Lower motor neurons
Lower motor neurons in the anterior horn of the 
spinal cord innervate a group of muscle fibres termed 
a ‘motor unit’. Loss of lower motor neurons causes loss 
of contraction within this unit, resulting in weakness 
and reduced muscle tone. Subsequently, denervated 
muscle fibres atrophy, causing muscle wasting, and 
depolarise spontaneously, causing ‘fibrillations’. Except 
in the tongue, these are usually only perceptible on 
electromyelography (EMG; p. 1152). With the passage 
of time, neighbouring intact neurons sprout to provide 
re-innervation, but the neuromuscular junctions of the 
enlarged motor units are unstable and depolarise spon-
taneously, causing fasciculations (which are large 
enough to be visible to the naked eye). Fasciculations 
Fig. 26.6  The motor system. Neurons from the motor cortex descend 
as the pyramidal tract in the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle to the 
ventral brainstem, where most cross low in the medulla (A). In the spinal 
cord the upper motor neurons form the corticospinal tract in the lateral 
column before synapsing with the lower motor neurons in the anterior 
horns. The activity in the motor cortex is modulated by influences from the 
basal ganglia and cerebellum. Pathways descending from these structures 
control posture and balance (B). 
Neuromuscular
junction
Skeletal
muscle
Anterior
horn cells
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
Spinal cord
Foot
Hand
Mouth
Cortical
pyramidal cells
Motor
cortex
Basal
ganglia
Cerebellum
Descending
control of
posture and
balance
Pyramidal
tract A
B
Functional anatomy and physiology 
26
1145
(brady­kinesia), which characteristically reduce in size 
with repetition, as well as postural instability, which can 
precipitate falls.
The cerebellum
The cerebellum fine-tunes and coordinates movements 
initiated by the motor cortex. It also participates in the 
planning and learning of skilled movements through 
reciprocal connections with the thalamus and cortex, 
and in articulation of speech. A lesion in a cerebellar 
hemisphere causes lack of coordination on the same side 
of the body. Cerebellar dysfunction impairs the smooth-
ness of eye movements, causing nystagmus and renders 
speech dysarthric. In the limbs, the initial movement is 
normal, but as the target is approached, the accuracy of 
the movement deteriorates, producing an ‘intention 
tremor’. The distances of targets are misjudged (dys­
metria), resulting in ‘past-pointing’. The ability to 
produce rapid, accurate, regularly alternating move-
ments is also impaired (dysdiadochokinesis). The central 
vermis of the cerebellum is concerned with the coordina-
tion of gait and posture. Disorders of this therefore 
produce a characteristic ataxic gait (see below).
Vision
The neurological organisation of visual pathways is 
shown in Figure 26.7. Fibres from ganglion cells in the 
retina pass to the optic disc and then backwards through 
the lamina cribrosa to the optic nerve. Nasal optic nerve 
fibres (subserving the temporal visual field) cross at 
the chiasm, but temporal fibres do not. Hence, fibres in 
each optic tract and further posteriorly carry representa-
tion of contralateral visual space. From the lateral geni­
culate nucleus, lower fibres pass through the temporal 
lobes on their way to the primary visual area in the 
occipital cortex, while the upper fibres pass through the 
parietal lobe.
therefore imply chronic partial denervation with 
re-innervation.
Upper motor neurons
Upper motor neurons have both inhibitory and excita-
tory influence on the function of anterior horn motor 
neurons. Lesions affecting the upper motor neuron 
result in increased tone, most evident in the strongest 
muscle groups (i.e. the extensors of the lower limbs and 
the flexors of the upper limbs). The weakness of upper 
motor neuron lesions is conversely more pronounced in 
the opposing muscle groups. Loss of inhibition will also 
lead to brisk reflexes and enhanced reflex patterns of 
movement, such as flexion withdrawal to noxious 
stimuli and spasms of extension. The increased tone is 
more apparent during rapid stretching (‘spastic catch’), 
but may suddenly give way with sustained tension (the 
‘clasp-knife’ phenomenon). More primitive reflexes are 
also released, manifest as extensor plantar responses. 
Spasticity may not be present until some weeks after the 
onset of an upper motor neuron lesion. Chronic spas­
ticity in a patient with a spinal cord lesion may also be 
exacerbated by increased sensory input – for example, 
from a pressure sore or urinary tract infection.
The extrapyramidal system
Circuits between the basal ganglia and the motor cortex 
constitute the extrapyramidal system, which controls 
muscle tone, body posture and the initiation of move-
ment (see Fig. 26.6). Lesions of the extrapyramidal 
system produce an increase in tone that, unlike spas­
ticity, is continuous throughout the range of movement 
at any speed of stretch (‘lead pipe’ rigidity). Involuntary 
movements are also a feature of extrapyramidal lesions 
(p. 1165), and tremor in combination with rigidity 
produces typical ‘cogwheel’ rigidity. Extrapyramidal 
lesions also cause slowed and clumsy movements 
Fig. 26.7  Visual pathways and visual field defects. Schematic representation of eyes and brain in transverse section. 
Retina
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Lateral geniculate body
Optic 
radiation
Lower fibres in 
temporal lobe
Upper fibres in anterior 
parietal lobe
Occipital cortex
Visual fields
L
R
Visual field defects
R
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
1
3
4
5
6
L
Neurological disease
26
1146
concepts, occurs predominantly in the lower parts of the 
anterior parietal lobe (the angular and supramarginal 
gyri). The temporal speech comprehension region is 
referred to as Wernicke’s area (Fig. 26.9). Other parts of 
the temporal lobe contribute to verbal memory, where 
lexicons of meaningful words are ‘stored’. Parts of the 
non-dominant parietal lobe appear to contribute to non-
verbal aspects of language in recognising meaningful 
intonation patterns (prosody).
The frontal language area is in the posterior end of 
the dominant inferior frontal gyrus known as Broca’s 
area. This receives input from the temporal and parietal 
lobes via the arcuate fasciculus. The motor commands 
generated in Broca’s area pass to the cranial nerve nuclei 
in the pons and medulla, as well as to the anterior horn 
cells in the spinal cord. Nerve impulses to the lips, 
tongue, palate, pharynx, larynx and respiratory muscles 
result in the series of ordered sounds recognised as 
speech. The cerebellum also plays an important role in 
coordinating speech, and lesions of the cerebellum lead 
to dysarthria, where the problem lies in motor articula-
tion of speech.
The somatosensory system
Sensory information from the limbs ascends the nervous 
system in two anatomically discrete systems (Fig. 26.10). 
Fibres from proprioceptive organs and those mediating 
well-localised touch (including vibration) enter the 
spinal cord at the posterior horn and pass without syn-
apsing into the ipsilateral posterior columns. Neural 
fibres conveying pain and temperature sensory informa-
tion (nociceptive neurons) synapse with second-order 
neurons that cross the midline in the spinal cord before 
ascending in the contralateral anterolateral spino­
thalamic tract to the brainstem.
The second-order neurons of the dorsal column 
sensory system cross the midline in the upper medulla 
to ascend through the brainstem. Here they lie just 
medial to the (already crossed) spinothalamic pathway. 
Normally, the eyes move conjugately (in unison), 
though horizontal convergence allows visual fusion of 
objects at different distances. The control of eye move-
ments begins in the cerebral hemispheres, particularly 
within the frontal eye fields, and the pathway then 
descends to the brainstem with input from the visual 
cortex, superior colliculus and cerebellum. Horizontal 
and vertical gaze centres in the pons and mid-brain, 
respectively, coordinate output to the ocular motor 
nerve nuclei (3, 4 and 6), which are connected to each 
other by the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) (Fig. 
26.8). The MLF is particularly important in coordinating 
horizontal movements of the eyes. The extraocular 
muscles are then supplied by the oculomotor (3rd), 
trochlear (4th) and abducens (6th) cranial nerves.
The pupillary response to light is due to a combina-
tion of parasympathetic and sympathetic activity. Para-
sympathetic fibres originate in the Edinger–Westphal 
subnucleus of the 3rd nerve, and pass with the 3rd nerve 
to synapse in the ciliary ganglion before supplying the 
constrictor pupillae of the iris. Sympathetic fibres origi-
nate in the hypothalamus, pass down the brainstem and 
cervical spinal cord to emerge at T1, return up to the 
eye in association with the internal carotid artery, and 
supply the dilator pupillae.
Speech
Much of the cerebral cortex is involved in the process of 
forming and interpreting communicating sounds, espe-
cially in the dominant hemisphere (see Box 26.2, p. 1142). 
Decoding of speech sounds (phonemes) is carried out in 
the upper part of the posterior temporal lobe. The attri-
bution of meaning, as well as the formulation of the 
language required for the expression of ideas and 
Fig. 26.8  Control of conjugate eye movements. Downward 
projections pass from the cortex to the pontine lateral gaze centre  
(A). The pontine gaze centre projects to the 6th cranial nerve nucleus  
(B), which innervates the ipsilateral lateral rectus and projects to the 
contralateral 3rd nerve nucleus (and hence medial rectus) via the medial 
longitudinal fasciculus (MLF). Tonic inputs from the vestibular apparatus  
(C) project to the contralateral 6th nerve nucleus via the vestibular nuclei. 
B
A
C
MLF
6th
8th
4th
3rd
Pontine
lateral gaze
centre
Lateral rectus
Right
Medial rectus
Left
Fig. 26.9  Areas of the cerebral cortex involved in the generation 
of spoken language. 
Arcuate
fasciculus
Posterior language
comprehension
area (Wernicke's)
Broca's
area
Auditory
cortex
Bulbar
muscles
Corticobulbar
tract
Verbal
memory
Functional anatomy and physiology 
26
1147
(near the ears) descend within the brainstem to the 
upper part of the spinal cord before synapsing, the 
second-order neurons crossing the midline and then 
ascending with the spinothalamic fibres. Fibres convey-
ing sensation from progressively more forward areas of 
the face descend a shorter distance in the brainstem. 
Thus, sensory loss in the face from low brainstem lesions 
is in a ‘balaclava helmet’ distribution, as the longer 
descending trigeminal fibres are affected. Both the dorsal 
column and spinothalamic tracts end in the thalamus, 
relaying from there to the parietal cortex.
Pain
Pain is a complex percept that is only partly related 
to activity in nociceptor neurons (Fig. 26.11). In the pos-
terior horn of the spinal cord, the second-order neuron 
of the spinothalamic tract is affected by a number of 
influences in addition to its synapse with the fibres 
from nociceptors. Branches from the larger mechanocep-
tor fibres destined for the posterior column also synapse 
with the second-order spinothalamic neurons and with 
interneurons of the grey matter of the posterior horn. 
The nociceptor neurons release neurotransmitters (such 
as substance P), in addition to excitatory transmitters, 
which influence the excitability of the spinothalamic 
neurons. Activity in the posterior horn neurons is modu-
lated by fibres descending from the peri-aqueductal 
grey matter of the mid-brain and raphe nuclei of the 
medulla. Neurons of this ‘descending analgesia system’ 
are activated by endogenous opiate (endorphin) pep-
tides. The spinal cord’s posterior horn is therefore 
much more than a relay station in pain transmission; its 
complexity allows it to ‘gate’ and modulate painful sen-
sation before it ascends in the spinothalamic tract. In the 
diencephalon, the perception of pain is further influ-
enced by the rich interconnections of the thalamus with 
the limbic system.
Brainstem lesions can therefore cause sensory loss affect-
ing all modalities of the contralateral side of the body. 
Sensory loss on the face due to brainstem lesions is 
dependent on the anatomy of the trigeminal fibres 
within the brainstem. Fibres from the back of the face 
Fig. 26.10  The main somatic sensory pathways. 
Vestibulospinal
tract
Lateral
spinothalamic
tract
Pain,
temperature
and poorly
localised touch
Joint position,
vibration
and accurate
touch
Dorsal
column
Gracile and
cuneate nuclei
Thalamus
Parietal
cortex
Fig. 26.11  The pain perception system. 
Mechanoceptor
(mechanical stimuli)
Nociceptor
(pain stimuli)
Spinal cord
grey matter
Crossing
spinothalamic
tract neuron
Posterior
horn
Dorsal
column
Descending
pain perception
modulation
Raphe nuclei
of medulla
Peri-aqueductal
grey matter
Limbic system
Pain perception
Spinothalamic
tract
Neurological disease
26
1148
Sphincter control
The sympathetic supply to the bladder leaves from 
T11–L2 to synapse in the inferior hypogastric plexus, 
while the parasympathetic supply leaves from S2–4. In 
addition, a somatic supply to the external (voluntary) 
sphincter arises from S2–4, travelling via the pudendal 
nerves.
Storage of urine is maintained by inhibiting para­
sympathetic activity and thus relaxing the detrusor 
muscle of the bladder wall. Continence is maintained by 
simultaneous sympathetic and somatic (via the puden-
dal nerve) mediated tonic contraction of the urethral 
sphincters. Voiding is usually under conscious control, 
and triggered by relaxation of tonic inhibition on the 
pontine micturition centre from higher centres, leading 
to relaxation of the pelvic floor muscles and external and 
internal urethral sphincters, along with parasympathetic-
mediated detrusor contraction.
Personality and mood
The physiology and pathology of mood disorders are 
discussed elsewhere (Ch. 10) but it is important to 
remember that any process affecting brain function will 
have some effect on mood and affect. Conversely, mood 
disorder will have a significant effect on perception and 
function. It can be difficult to disentangle whether psy-
chological and psychiatric changes are the cause or the 
effect of any neurological symptoms.
Sleep
The function of sleep is unknown but it is required for 
good health. Sleep is controlled by the reticular activat-
ing system in the upper brainstem and diencephalon. It 
is composed of different stages that can be visualised on 
electroencephalography (EEG). As drowsiness occurs, 
normal EEG background alpha rhythm disappears and 
activity becomes dominated by deepening slow-wave 
activity. As sleep deepens and dreaming begins, the 
limbs become flaccid, movements are ‘blocked’ and EEG 
signs of rapid eye movements (REM) are superimposed 
Name of syndrome
Site of lesions
Clinical features
Weber
Anterior cerebral peduncle 
(mid-brain)
Ipsilateral 3rd palsy
Contralateral upper motor neuron 7th palsy
Contralateral hemiplegia
Claude
Cerebral peduncle
Involving red nucleus
Ipsilateral 3rd palsy
Contralateral cerebellar signs
Parinaud
Dorsal mid-brain (tectum)
Vertical gaze palsy
Convergence disorders
Convergence retraction nystagmus
Pupillary and lid disorders
Millard–Gubler
Ponto-medullary junction
Ipsilateral 6th palsy
Ipsilateral lower motor neuron 7th palsy
Contralateral hemiplegia
Wallenberg
Lateral medulla
Ipsilateral 5th, 9th, 10th, 11th palsy
Ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome
Ipsilateral cerebellar signs
Contralateral spinothalamic sensory loss
Vestibular disturbance
26.3  Major focal brainstem syndromes
on the slow wave. REM sleep persists for a short spell 
before another slow-wave spell starts, the cycle repeat-
ing several times throughout the night. REM periods 
become longer as the sleep period progresses. REM 
sleep seems to be the most important part of the sleep 
cycle for refreshing cognitive processes, and REM sleep 
deprivation causes tiredness, irritability and impaired 
judgement.
Localising lesions in the brainstem
After taking a history and examining the patient, the 
clinician should have an idea of the nature and site of 
any pathology. Given the density of tracts and nuclei in 
the brainstem (see Fig. 26.5), detailed localisation may 
be possible on the basis of history and examination 
alone, to be confirmed or refuted by investigation.
Brainstem lesions typically present with symptoms 
due to cranial nerve, cerebellar and upper motor neuron 
dysfunction and are most commonly caused by vascular 
disease. Since the anatomy of the brainstem is very pre-
cisely organised, it is usually possible to localise the site 
of a lesion on the basis of careful history and examina-
tion in order to determine exactly which tracts/nuclei 
are affected, usually invoking the fewest number of 
lesions.
For example, in a patient presenting with sudden 
onset of upper motor neuron features affecting the right 
face, arm and leg in association with a left 3rd nerve 
palsy, the lesion will be in the left cerebral peduncle in 
the brainstem and the pathology is likely to have been a 
small stroke, as the onset was sudden. This combination 
of signs is known as Weber’s syndrome, and is one of 
several well-described brainstem syndromes, which are 
listed in Box 26.3. The effects of individual cranial nerve 
deficits are discussed in the sections on eye movements 
(p. 1169) and on facial weakness, sensory loss in brain-
stem lesions, dysphonia and dysarthria, and bulbar 
symptoms (pp. 1163, 1165, 1168 and 1173).
Investigation of neurological disease
26
1149
properties of radioactive tracers to mark cerebral blood 
flow at the time of injection. This can be useful in 
investigating dementia or epilepsy. SPECT can also 
be used in the diagnosis of movement disorders: for 
example, by examining dopamine activity to assess the 
function of the basal ganglia in patients with possible 
parkinsonism.
Functional MRI (fMRI) can be used to assess blood 
flow during specific tasks (e.g. speaking, remembering, 
calculation), which can provide ‘maps’ of cortical func-
tion that are accurate enough to help plan lesionectomy 
and epilepsy surgery. Similarly, MR spectroscopy is 
being developed to identify the chemical composition of 
specific regions, providing clues as to whether lesions 
are ischaemic, neoplastic or inflammatory.
Head and orbit
Plain skull X-rays are now largely restricted to the 
diagnosis of fractures and sinus disease. CT or MRI is 
needed for intracranial imaging. CT will show bone and 
calcification well, and will easily image collections of 
blood. It will also detect abnormalities of the brain and 
ventricles, such as atrophy, tumours, cysts, abscesses, 
vascular lesions and hydrocephalus. Diagnostic yield is 
often improved by the use of intravenous contrast and 
thinner slicing using spiral CT. Surrounding bone struc-
tures render posterior fossa CT images less useful, and 
CT is less sensitive to white matter changes than MRI.
MRI resolution is unaffected by bone and so is more 
useful in the investigation of posterior fossa disease. Its 
sensitivity to cortical and white matter changes makes 
it effective in picking up inflammatory conditions such 
as multiple sclerosis, and in investigating epilepsy. 
INVESTIGATION OF NEUROLOGICAL 
DISEASE
Experienced clinicians will make around 90% of neuro-
logical diagnoses on history alone, with a lesser 
contribution from examination and investigation. As 
investigations become more complex and more easily 
available, it is tempting to adopt a ‘scan first, think later’ 
approach to neurology. The frequency of ‘false-positive’ 
results, the wide range of normality and the unnecessary 
expense, inconvenience and worry caused to patients 
should encourage a more thoughtful approach. Investi-
gation may include assessment of structure (imaging) 
and function (neurophysiology). Neurophysiological 
testing has become so complex that in many countries 
it constitutes a separate specialty focusing on electro­
encephalography, evoked potentials, nerve conduction 
studies and electromyography.
Neuroimaging
Neurological imaging has traditionally allowed assess-
ment of structure only. Various techniques are available, 
including X-rays (plain X-rays, computed tomography 
(CT), CT angiography, myelography and angiography), 
magnetic resonance (MR imaging (MRI), MR angiogra-
phy (MRA)) and ultrasound (Doppler imaging of blood 
vessels). The uses and limitations of each of these are 
shown in Box 26.4.
It is now possible to use imaging techniques to assess 
CNS function. Single photon emission clinical tomog­
raphy (SPECT) scanning can use the lipid-soluble 
Technique
Applications
Advantages
Disadvantages
Comments
X-ray/CT
Plain X-rays, CT, CTA
Radiculography
Myelography
Intra-arterial 
angiography
Widely available
Relatively cheap
Relatively quick
Ionising radiation
Contrast reactions
Invasive (myelography and 
angiography)
X-rays: used for fractures 
or foreign bodies
CT: first line for stroke
Intra-arterial angiography: 
gold standard for vascular 
lesions
MRI
Structural imaging
MRA
Functional MRI
MR spectroscopy
High-quality soft 
tissue images, useful 
for posterior fossa 
and temporal lobes
No ionising radiation
Non-invasive
Expensive
Less widely available
MRA images blood flow, not 
vessel anatomy
Claustrophobic
Pacemakers contraindicate MRI
Contrast (gadolinium) reactions
Functional MR and 
spectroscopy: mainly 
research tools
Ultrasound
Doppler
Duplex scans
Cheap
Quick
Non-invasive
Operator-dependent
Poor anatomical definition
Screening tool to assess 
need for carotid 
endarterectomy
Radio-isotope
Isotope brain scan
SPECT
PET
In vivo imaging of 
functional anatomy 
(ligand binding,  
blood flow)
Poor spatial resolution
Ionising radiation
Expensive
Not widely available
Isotope scans obsolete. 
SPECT: useful in movement 
disorders, epilepsy and 
dementias
PET: mainly research tool
(CT = computed tomography; CTA = computed tomographic angiography; MRA = magnetic resonance angiography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; 
PET = positron emission tomography; SPECT = single photon emission clinical tomography)
26.4  Imaging techniques for the nervous system
Neurological disease
26
1150
intervertebral discs, but also about their effects on the 
spinal cord and nerve roots. Myelography is an invasive 
technique involving injection of contrast into the lumbar 
theca. While the outline of the nerve roots and spinal 
cord provides information about abnormal structure, 
the accuracy and wide availability of MRI have reduced 
the need for this. Myelography may still be used for 
technical reasons or where MRI is unavailable, contra­
indicated, or precluded by the patient’s claustrophobia. 
Examples of the cervical spine imaged by plain X-rays, 
myelography and MRI are shown in Figure 26.13.
Blood vessels
Imaging of the extra- and intracranial blood vessels and 
disturbance of arterial or venous blood flow is described 
in Chapter 27.
Different MRI techniques will increase sensitivity to 
acute ischaemic stroke and may allow detection of 
abnormalities by filtering signals from other tissues (e.g. 
adipose tissues in the orbits).
Examples of brain imaged by the various techniques 
are shown in Figure 26.12.
Cervical, thoracic and  
lumbar spine
Plain X-rays are useful in the investigation of trauma to 
vertebrae, but their value in providing information 
about non-bony tissues is limited, which makes them 
far less helpful in the assessment of inflammatory and 
degenerative conditions of the spine. MRI has trans-
formed the investigation of these areas, since it can 
give information not only about the vertebrae and 
Fig. 26.12  Different techniques of imaging the head and brain.  A Skull X-ray showing lytic skull lesion (eosinophilic granuloma – arrow).  B CT 
showing complete middle cerebral artery infarct (arrows).  C MRI showing widespread areas of high signal in multiple sclerosis (arrows).  D SPECT after 
caudate infarct showing relative hypoperfusion of overlying right cerebral cortex (arrows). 
A
B
C
D
Investigation of neurological disease
26
1151
certain dementias such as Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease 
(p. 1211).
Since sleep induces marked changes in cerebral activ-
ity, EEG can be useful in characterising those conditions 
where sleep patterns are disturbed. In paroxysmal dis-
orders such as epilepsy, EEG is at its most useful when 
it captures activity during one of the events in question. 
Up to 5% of some normal populations may demonstrate 
epileptiform discharges on EEG which prevent its use as 
a screening test for epilepsy. Over 50% of patients with 
proven epilepsy will have a normal ‘routine’ EEG, and, 
conversely, the presence of epileptiform features does 
not of itself make a diagnosis (most notably in younger 
patients with a family history of epilepsy). In view of 
this, the EEG should not be used where epilepsy is 
merely ‘suspected’.
The EEG in epilepsy is predominantly used in its 
classification and prognosis, and in some patients to 
localise the seat of epileptiform discharges when surgery 
is being considered. During an epileptic seizure, high-
voltage disturbances of background activity (‘dis-
charges’) will often be noted. These may be generalised, 
as in the 3-Hz ‘spike and wave’ of childhood absence 
epilepsy, or more focal, as in localisation-related epilep-
sies (Fig. 26.14). Techniques such as hyperventilation or 
photic stimulation can be used to increase the yield of 
epileptiform changes, particularly in the generalised epi-
lepsy syndromes. While some argue that it is possible to 
detect ‘spikes’ and ‘sharp waves’ to lend support to a 
clinical diagnosis, these are non-specific and therefore 
not diagnostic.
Nerve conduction studies
Electrical stimulation of a nerve causes an impulse 
to travel both efferently and afferently along the 
Neurophysiological testing
Electroencephalography
The electroencephalogram (EEG) is used to detect elec-
trical activity arising in the cerebral cortex. The EEG 
involves placing electrodes on the scalp to record the 
amplitude and frequency of the resulting waveforms. 
With closed eyes, the normal background activity is 
8–13 Hz (known as alpha rhythm), most prominent 
occipitally and suppressed on eye opening. Other fre-
quency bands seen over different parts of the brain 
in different circumstances are beta (faster than 13/s), 
theta (4–8/s) and delta (slower than 4/s). Normal 
EEG changes evolve with age and with alertness; 
lower frequencies predominate in the very young and 
during sleep.
In recent years, digital technology has allowed longer, 
cleaner EEG recordings that can be analysed in a number 
of ways and recorded alongside contemporaneous video 
of any clinical ‘event’. Meanwhile, the development of 
intracranial recording allows more sensitive monitoring 
via surgically placed electrodes in and around lesions to 
help increase the efficacy and improve the safety of epi-
lepsy surgery.
Abnormalities in the EEG result from a number of 
conditions. Examples include an increase in fast fre-
quencies (beta) seen with sedating drugs such as ben­
zodiazepines, or marked focal slowing noted over a 
structural lesion such as a tumour or an infarct. Improved 
quality and accessibility of imaging have made EEG 
redundant in lesion localisation, except in the specialist 
investigation of epilepsy (p. 1182). EEG remains useful 
in progressive and continuous disorders such as reduced 
consciousness (p. 1159), in encephalitis (p. 1205), and in 
Fig. 26.13  Different techniques of imaging the cervical spine.  A Lateral X-ray showing bilateral C6/7 facet dislocation.  B Myelogram showing 
widening of cervical cord due to astrocytoma (arrows).  C MRI showing posterior epidural compression from adenocarcinomatous metastasis to the 
posterior arch of T1 (arrows). 
A
B
C
C6
C7
Neurological disease
26
1152
increasing CMAP with high-frequency RNS is seen in 
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (p. 1227).
Electromyography
Electromyography (EMG) is usually performed with 
NCS, and involves needle recording of muscle electrical 
potential during rest and contraction. At rest, muscle is 
electrically silent but loss of nerve supply causes muscle 
membrane to become unstable, manifest as fibrillations, 
positive sharp waves (‘spontaneous activity’) or fascicu-
lations. During muscle contraction, motor unit action 
potentials are recorded. Axonal loss or destruction will 
result in fewer motor units. Resultant sprouting of 
remaining units will lead to increasing size of each indi-
vidual unit on EMG. Myopathy, in contrast, will cause 
muscle fibre splitting, which will result in a large number 
of smaller units on EMG. Other abnormal activity, such 
as myotonic discharges, may signify abnormal ion 
channel conduction, as in myotonic dystrophy or myo-
tonia congenita.
Specialised single fibre EMG (SFEMG) can be used to 
investigate neuromuscular junction transmission. Meas-
uring ‘jitter’ and ‘blocking’ can identify the effect of anti-
bodies in reducing the action of acetylcholine on the 
receptor.
Evoked potentials
The cortical response to visual, auditory or electrical 
stimulation can be measured on an EEG as an evoked 
potential (EP). If a stimulus is provided – for example, 
to the eye – the tiny EEG response can be discerned 
when averaging 100–1000 repeated stimuli. Assessing 
the latency (the time delay) and amplitude can give 
information about the integrity of the relevant pathway. 
under­lying axons. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) 
make use of this, recording action potentials as they pass 
along peripheral nerves and (with motor nerves) as they 
pass into the muscle belly. Digital recording has 
enhanced sensitivity and reproducibility of these tiny 
potentials. By measuring the time taken to traverse a 
known distance, it is possible to calculate nerve conduc-
tion velocities (NCVs). Healthy nerves at room tempera-
ture will conduct at a speed of 40–50 m/s. If the recorded 
potential is smaller than expected, this provides evi-
dence of a reduction in the overall number of function-
ing axons. Significant slowing of conduction velocity, 
in contrast, suggests impaired saltatory conduction 
due to peripheral nerve demyelination. Such changes in 
NCS may be diffuse (as in a hereditary demyelinating 
peripheral neuropathy, p. 1223), focal (as in pressure 
palsies, p. 1224) or multifocal (e.g. Guillain–Barré syn-
drome, p. 1224; mononeuritis multiplex, p. 1224). The 
information gained can allow the disease responsible for 
peripheral nerve dysfunction to be better deduced (see 
Box 26.99, p. 1223).
Stimulation of motor nerves allows for the recording 
of compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) over 
muscles (Fig. 26.15). These are around 500 times 
larger than sensory nerve potentials, typically around 
1–20 millivolts. Since a proportion of stimulated impulses 
in motor nerves will ‘reflect’ back to the anterior horn 
cell body (forming the ‘F’ wave), it is also possible to 
obtain some information about the condition of nerve 
roots.
Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) at 3–15/s pro-
vides consistent CMAPs in healthy muscle. In myasthe-
nia gravis (p. 1226), where there is partial blockage of 
acetylcholine receptors, however, there is a diagnostic 
fall (decrement) in CMAP amplitude. In contrast, an 
Fig. 26.14  EEGs in epilepsy.  A Generalised epileptic discharge, as seen in epilepsy syndromes such as childhood absence or juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy.  B Focal sharp waves over the right parietal region (circled), with spread of discharge to cause a generalised tonic–clonic seizure. 
1
1
A
B
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
5
4
3
2
10
9
8
7
15 14 13 12
6
1
16
1
Secondary generalised
seizure
Investigation of neurological disease
26
1153
Routine blood tests
Many systemic conditions that can affect the nervous 
system can be identified by simple blood tests. Nutri-
tional deficiencies, metabolic disturbances, inflamma-
tory conditions, or infections may all present or be 
associated with neurological symptoms, and basic blood 
tests (full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 
C-reactive protein, biochemical screening) may provide 
clues. Specific blood tests will be highlighted in the rel-
evant subsections of this chapter.
Immunological tests
Recent developments have seen a host of new immune-
mediated conditions emerge in clinical neurology, with 
effects ranging from muscle and neuromuscular junction 
disturbance (causing weakness and muscle pain) to spe-
cific neuronal ion channels (causing cognitive decline, 
epilepsy and psychiatric changes). The last decade has 
seen the identification of many causative antibodies (see 
Boxes 26.62 and 26.63, p. 1194), and it is likely that further 
conditions will turn out to have an immune basis.
Genetic testing
An increasing number of inherited neurological condi-
tions can now be diagnosed by DNA analysis (p. 60). 
These include diseases caused by increased numbers 
of trinucleotide repeats, such as Huntington’s disease 
(p. 1198), myotonic dystrophy (p. 1228) and some types 
of spinocerebellar ataxia (p. 1199). Mitochondrial DNA 
can also be sequenced to diagnose relevant disorders 
(p. 60).
Lumbar puncture
Lumbar puncture (LP) is the technique used to obtain 
a CSF sample and provides an indirect measure of 
intracranial pressure. After local anaesthetic injection, a 
needle is inserted between lumbar spinous processes 
MRI now provides more information about CNS path-
ways, thus reducing reliance on EPs. In practice, visual 
evoked potentials (VEPs) are most commonly used to 
help differentiate CNS demyelination from small-vessel 
white-matter changes (Fig. 26.16).
Magnetic stimulation
Central conduction times can also be measured using 
electromagnetic induction of action potentials in the 
cortex or spinal cord by the local application of special-
ised coils. Again, MRI has made this largely redundant, 
other than for research.
Fig. 26.15  Motor nerve conduction tests. 
Electrodes (R) on the muscle (abductor pollicis 
here) record the compound muscle action potential 
(CMAP) after stimulation at the median nerve at 
the wrist (S1) and from the elbow (S2). The velocity 
from elbow to wrist can be determined if the 
distance between the two stimulating electrodes (d) 
is known. A prolonged L1 (L = latency) would be 
caused by dysfunction distally in the median nerve 
(e.g. in carpal tunnel syndrome). A prolonged  
L2 is caused by slow nerve conduction (as in 
demyelinating neuropathy). The F wave is a small 
delayed response that appears when the electrical 
signal travels backwards to the anterior horn cell, 
sparking a second action potential in a minority of 
fibres (see text). (NCV = nerve conduction velocity) 
Anterior
horn cells
Antidromic
conduction
Generates
F wave
F wave
CMAP
Abductor
pollicis
brevis
Median nerve
NCV =
d
d
L2 – L1
S2 
S1 
L1 
L2 
R 
Amplitude
Fig. 26.16  Visual evoked responses (VER) recording. The 
abnormality is in the left hemisphere, with delay in latency and a reduction 
in signal of the P100. 
5uV
5uV
5uV
5uV
5uV
5uV
5uV
5uV
5uV
5uV
100
200
300
100
200
300
L
R
ms
ms
P100
P100
Neurological disease
26
1154
intravascular coagulation or anticoagulant treatment), 
then caution should be exercised or specific measures 
should be taken. LP can be safely performed in patients 
on antiplatelet drugs or low-dose heparin, but may be 
unsafe in patients who are fully anticoagulated due to 
the increased risk of epidural haematoma.
About 30% of LPs are followed by a postural head-
ache, due to reduced CSF pressure. The frequency of 
headache can be reduced by using smaller or atraumatic 
needles. Other rarer complications involve transient 
radicular pain, and pain over the lumbar region during 
the procedure. Aseptic technique renders secondary 
infections such as meningitis extremely rare.
Biopsy
Biopsies of nervous tissue (peripheral nerve, muscle, 
meninges or brain) are occasionally required for 
diagnosis.
Nerve biopsy can help in the investigation of periph-
eral neuropathy. Usually, a distal sensory nerve (sural 
or radial) is targeted. Histological examination can help 
identify underlying causes, such as vasculitides or infil-
trative disorders like amyloid. Nerve biopsy should not 
be undertaken lightly since there is an appreciable mor-
bidity; it should be reserved for cases where the diagno-
sis is in doubt after routine investigations and where it 
will influence management.
Muscle biopsy is performed more frequently and is 
indicated for the differentiation of myositis and myo­
pathies. These conditions can usually be distinguished 
by histological examination, and enzyme histochemistry 
can be useful when mitochondrial diseases and storage 
diseases are suspected. The quadriceps muscle is most 
commonly biopsied but other muscles may also be 
sampled if they are involved clinically. Although pain 
and infection can follow the procedure, these are less of 
a problem than after nerve biopsy.
(usually between L3 and L4) through the dura and into 
the spinal canal. Intracranial pressure can be deduced (if 
patients are lying on their side) and CSF removed for 
analysis. CSF pressure measurement is important in the 
diagnosis and monitoring of idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (p. 1217). In this condition, the LP itself is 
therapeutic.
CSF is normally clear and colourless, and the tests 
that are usually performed include a naked eye exami-
nation of the CSF and centrifugation to determine the 
colour of the supernatant (yellow, or xanthochromic, 
some hours after subarachnoid haemorrhage (p. 1246). 
Routine analysis will involve a cell count, as well as 
assay of glucose and protein.
CSF assessment is important in investigating infec-
tions (meningitis or encephalitis), subarachnoid haemor-
rhage and inflammatory conditions (multiple sclerosis, 
sarcoidosis and cerebral lupus). Normal values and 
abnormalities found in specific conditions are shown in 
Box 26.5.
More sophisticated analysis allows measurement of 
antibody formation solely within the CNS (oligoclonal 
bands), genetic analysis (e.g. polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) for herpes simplex or tuberculosis), immunologi-
cal tests (paraneoplastic antibodies) and cytology (to 
detect malignant cells).
If there is a cranial space-occupying lesion causing 
raised intracranial pressure, LP presents a theoretical 
risk of downward shift of intracerebral contents, a 
potentially fatal process known as coning (p. 1212). 
Consequently, LP is contraindicated if there is any 
clinical suggestion of raised intracranial pressure 
(papilloedema), depressed level of consciousness, or 
focal neurological signs suggesting a cerebral lesion, 
until imaging (by CT or MRI) has excluded a space-
occupying lesion or hydrocephalus. When there is a risk 
of local haemorrhage (thrombocytopenia, disseminated 
Normal
Subarachnoid 
haemorrhage
Acute bacterial 
meningitis
Viral meningitis
Tuberculous meningitis
Multiple 
sclerosis
Pressure
50–250 mm 
of water
Increased
Normal/
increased
Normal
Normal/increased
Normal
Colour
Clear
Blood-stained
Xanthochromic
Cloudy
Clear
Clear/cloudy
Clear
Red cell count
(× 106/L)
0–4
Raised
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
White cell 
count
(× 106/L)
0–4
Normal/slightly 
raised
1000–5000 
polymorphs
10–2000 
lymphocytes
50–5000 lymphocytes
0–50 
lymphocytes
Glucose
> 50–60% of 
blood level
Normal
Decreased
Normal
Decreased
Normal
Protein
< 0.45 g/L
Increased
Increased
Normal/
increased
Increased
Normal/
increased
Microbiology
Sterile
Sterile
Organisms on 
Gram stain 
and/or culture
Sterile/virus 
detected
Ziehl–Nielson/auramine 
stain or tuberculosis 
culture positive
Sterile
Oligoclonal 
bands
Negative
Negative
Can be positive
Can be positive
Can be positive
Often positive
26.5  How to interpret CSF results
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1155
called ‘numbness’, while there are many possible inter-
pretations of ‘dizziness’. These must be clarified; even in 
emergency situations, a clear, accurate history is the 
foundation of any management plan. While the story 
should come primarily from the patient, input from 
eye-witnesses and family members is crucial if the 
patient is unable to provide details or if there has been 
loss of consciousness. This need for corroboration and 
clarification means the telephone is as important as any 
investigation.
The aim of the history is to answer two key issues: 
where is the lesion and what is the lesion (Box 26.7)? 
These should remain uppermost in the doctor’s mind 
whilst eliciting the history. Some common combina­
tions of symptoms may suggest particular locations 
for a lesion (Box 26.8). Enquiry about handedness is 
important; lateralisation of the dominant hand helps 
designate the dominant hemisphere, which in turn may 
help to localise any pathologies, or to plan rehabilitation 
or treatment strategies in asymmetrical disorders such 
as stroke or Parkinson’s disease.
Epidemiology must be borne in mind; how likely is 
it that this particular patient has any specific condition 
under consideration? For example, a 20-year-old with 
right-sided headache and tenderness will not have tem-
poral arteritis, but this is an important possibility if such 
symptoms present in a 78-year-old female.
Determining the evolution and speed of onset and 
progression of a disease is important (Box 26.9). For 
example, if right-hand weakness occurred overnight, it 
would suggest a stroke in an older person or an acute 
entrapment neuropathy in a younger one. Evolution 
over several days, however, might make demyelination 
(multiple sclerosis) a possible diagnosis, or perhaps a 
subdural haematoma if the weakness was preceded by 
a head injury in an older person taking warfarin. Pro-
gression over weeks might bring an intracranial mass 
lesion or motor neuron disease into the differential. Slow 
progression over a year or so, with difficulty in using the 
hand, could suggest a degenerative process such as 
Parkinson’s disease. The impact on day-to-day activities, 
such as walking, climbing stairs and carrying out fine 
hand movements, should also be established in order to 
gauge the level of associated disability.
Brain biopsy is required when imaging fails to clarify 
the nature of intracerebral lesions: for example, in unex-
plained degenerative diseases such as unusual cases of 
dementia and in patients with brain tumour. Most biop-
sies are performed stereotactically through a burr-hole 
in the skull, which lowers complication rates. Neverthe-
less, haemorrhage, infection and death still occur and 
brain biopsy should only be considered if a diagnosis is 
otherwise elusive.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN 
NEUROLOGICAL DISEASE
While history is important in all medical specialties, it is 
especially key in neurology, where many neurological 
diagnoses have no confirmatory test. History-taking 
allows doctor and patient to get to know one another – 
many neurological diseases follow chronic paths, and 
this may be the first of many such consultations. It also 
allows the clinician to obtain information about the 
patient’s affect, cognition and psychiatric state.
History-taking is a highly active process and, whilst 
there are generic templates (Box 26.6), each indi­
vidual story will follow its own course, and diagnostic 
considerations during the history will guide further 
questioning.
It is important to be clear about what patients mean 
by certain words. Patients may find it difficult to 
describe symptoms – for instance, weakness may be 
Introduction
•	 Age and sex
•	 Handedness
Presenting complaint
•	 Symptoms (clarify: see text)
•	 Overall pattern: intermittent or persistent?
If intermittent, how often do symptoms occur and how 
long do they last?
•	 Speed of onset: seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, 
months, years, decades?
•	 Better, worse or the same over time?
•	 Associated symptoms (including non-neurological)
•	 Disability caused by symptoms
Change in walking
Difficulty with fine hand movements, e.g. writing, fastening 
buttons, using cutlery
•	 Effect on work, family life and leisure
Background
•	 Previous neurological symptoms and whether similar to 
current symptoms
•	 Previous medical history
•	 Domestic situation
•	 Driving licence status
•	 Medications (current and at time of symptom onset)
•	 Alcohol/smoking habits
•	 Recreational drug and other toxin exposure
•	 Family history and developmental history
•	 What are patient’s thoughts/fears/concerns?
26.6  How to take a neurological history
Where is the lesion?
•	 Is it neurological?
•	 If so, to which part of the nervous system does it localise?
Central versus peripheral
Sensory versus motor versus both
What is the lesion?
•	 Hereditary or congenital
•	 Acquired
Traumatic
Infective
Neoplastic
Degenerative
Inflammatory or immune-mediated
Vascular
Functional
26.7  The key diagnostic questions
Neurological disease
26
1156
patients, whether presenting in clinic or as emergencies, 
have primary syndromes (Box 26.10). The tempo of 
evolution of headache is critical; sudden-onset head-
ache, maximal immediately, is always a ‘red flag’ (Box 
26.11) and should prompt rapid assessment in hospital 
for possible subarachnoid hemorrhage or other sinister 
causes, even though only 10–25% of patients harbour 
serious pathology. Clues to other possible causes (e.g. 
rash in meningitis) should be sought (p. 1201). Headache 
that evolves over hours to days is much less likely to be 
sinister.
Estimates of the frequency and duration of specific 
events are essential when taking details of a paroxysmal 
disorder such as migraine and epilepsy. Vague terms 
such as ‘a lot’ or ‘sometimes’ are unhelpful, and it can 
assist the patient if choices are given to estimate numbers, 
such as once a day, week or month.
Many neurological symptoms are not explained by 
disease. Describing these as ‘functional’ is less pejorative 
and more acceptable to patients than ‘psychogenic’  
or ‘hysterical’. Functional symptoms require considera-
ble experience in diagnosis, and are frequently missed 
(p. 1175).
Headache and facial pain
Headache is common and causes considerable worry, 
but rarely represents sinister disease. The causes may be 
divided into primary (benign) or secondary, and most 
Combination of symptoms/signs
Probable site
Possible pathology
Other important information
Painless loss of hemilateral 
function
Cerebral cortex
Usually vascular, inflammatory 
or neoplastic
Associated systemic symptoms
Tempo of evolution
Pyramidal weakness of all four 
limbs or both legs, bladder 
signs, sensory loss
Spinal cord
Usually vascular, inflammatory 
or neoplastic
Associated systemic symptoms
Tempo of evolution
Cranial nerve lesions, with limb 
pyramidal signs or sensory loss 
± sphincter disturbance
Brainstem
Mid-brain
Pons
Medulla
Usually vascular or 
inflammatory
Rarely neoplastic
Associated systemic symptoms
Tempo of evolution
Visual loss + pyramidal signs 
and/or cerebellar signs
Widespread cerebral lesions
Usually inflammatory
Less commonly vasculitic
Tempo of evolution
Weakness and/or sensory loss in 
a combination of individual 
peripheral nerves
Several peripheral nerves 
(‘mononeuritis multiplex’)
Usually inflammatory or diabetic
Associated systemic symptoms
Widespread LMN and UMN signs
Upper and lower motor 
neurons
Motor neuron disease
Cervical myeloradiculopathy
Associated localised cervical 
symptoms
Distal loss of sensation and/or 
weakness
Generalised peripheral 
nerves
See causes of neuropathy  
(p. 1223)
Associated systemic symptoms
(LMN/UMN = lower/upper motor neuron)
26.8  How to ‘localise’ neurological disease
Onset
Evolution
Possible causes
Sudden 
(minutes 
to hours)
Stable/improvement
Vascular (stroke/transient 
ischaemic attack (TIA))
Nerve entrapment 
syndromes
Functional
Gradual
Progressive over 
days
Demyelination
Infection
Gradual
Progressive over 
weeks to months
Neoplastic/paraneoplastic
Gradual
Progressive over 
months to years
Genetic
Degenerative
26.9  The evolution of symptoms
Primary headache syndromes
•	 Migraine (with or without aura)
•	 Tension-type headache
•	 Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia (including cluster 
headache)
•	 Primary stabbing/coughing/exertional/sex-related headache
•	 Thunderclap headache
•	 New daily persistent headache syndrome
Secondary causes of headache
•	 Medication overuse headache (chronic daily headache)
•	 Intracerebral bleeding (subdural haematoma, subarachnoid or 
intracerebral haemorrhage)
•	 Raised intracranial pressure (brain tumour, idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension)
•	 Infection (meningitis, encephalitis, brain abscess)
•	 Inflammatory disease (temporal arteritis, other vasculitis, 
arthritis)
•	 Referred pain from other structures (orbit, 
temporomandibular joint, neck)
For full diagnostic listings see www.ihs-classification.org/en/
26.10  Primary and secondary 
headache syndromes
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1157
It is important to establish whether the headache 
comes and goes, with periods of no headache in between 
(usually migraine), or whether it is present all or almost 
all the time. Associated symptoms, such as preceding 
visual symptoms, nausea/vomiting or photophobia/
phonophobia, may support a diagnosis of migraine, 
but others, such as progressive focal symptoms or con-
stitutional upset like weight loss or fever, may suggest 
a more sinister cause (e.g. cancer or meningitis). The 
behaviour of the patient during headache is often 
instructive; migraine patients typically retire to bed to 
sleep in a dark room, whereas cluster headache often 
induces agitated and restless behaviour.
Headache duration may indicate a diagnosis; head-
aches that have been present for months or years are 
almost never sinister (although paradoxically worry 
patients), whereas new-onset headache, especially in the 
elderly, is more of a concern. In a patient over 60 years 
with head pain localised to one or both temples, tempo-
ral arteritis (p. 1117) should be considered, especially if 
temporal pulses are absent and/or the arteries are 
enlarged and tender. Most outpatients with headache 
will have migraine (intermittent, lasting a few hours, 
associated with migrainous symptoms) or chronic daily 
headache syndrome (often present for months to years, 
without associated symptoms and refractory to analge-
sia). These are easy to recognise but patients are often 
very worried about their symptoms, so it is important to 
elicit such concerns and to explain why sinister disease 
is unlikely and investigation is rarely required. Sinusitis, 
‘eye strain’, food allergies and uncomplicated hyperten-
sion are almost never the explanation for persistent 
headache.
Ocular pain
Assuming ocular disease (such as acute glaucoma) has 
been excluded, ocular pain may be due to trigeminal 
autonomic cephalalgias (TACs) or, rarely, inflammatory 
or infiltrative lesions at the apex of the orbit or the 
Symptom
Possible explanation
Sudden onset (maximal 
immediately or within minutes)
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Cerebral venous sinus 
thrombosis
Pituitary apoplexy
Meningitis
Focal neurological symptoms 
(other than for typically 
migrainous)
Intracranial mass lesion
Vascular
Neoplastic
Infection
Constitutional symptoms
Weight loss
General malaise
Pyrexia
Meningism
Rash
Meningoencephalitis
Neoplastic (lymphoma or 
metastases)
Inflammatory (vasculitic)
Raised intracranial pressure 
(worse on wakening/lying  
down, associated vomiting)
Intracranial mass lesion
New onset aged > 60 yrs
Temporal arteritis
26.11  ‘Red flag’ symptoms in headache
cavernous sinus, when 3rd, 4th, 5th or 6th cranial nerve 
involvement is usually evident.
Facial pain
Pain in the face can be due to dental or temporoman-
dibular joint problems. Acute sinusitis is usually appar-
ent from other features of sinus congestion/infection 
and may cause localised pain over the affected sinus, but 
is almost never the explanation for persistent facial pain 
or headache.
Facial pain is not uncommon in migraine but some 
syndromes can present solely with facial pain. The most 
common neurological causes of facial pain are trigemi-
nal neuralgia, herpes zoster (shingles) and post-herpetic 
neuralgia, all characterised by their extreme severity. In 
trigeminal neuralgia, the patient describes bouts of brief 
(seconds), lancinating pain (‘electric shocks’), most fre-
quently felt in the second and third divisions of the 
nerve and often triggered by talking or chewing. Facial 
shingles most commonly affects the first (ophthalmic) 
division of the trigeminal nerve, and pain usually pre-
cedes the rash. Post-herpetic neuralgia may follow, typi-
cally a continuous burning pain throughout the affected 
territory, with marked sensitivity to light touch (allo­
dynia) and resistance to treatment. Destructive lesions 
of the trigeminal nerve usually cause numbness rather 
than pain.
Persistent idiopathic facial pain is most frequently 
seen in middle-aged women, who report persistent pain, 
with no abnormal signs or investigations, and is similar 
to other forms of idiopathic chronic pain.
Dizziness, blackouts and ‘funny turns’
Episodic lost or altered consciousness is a frequent 
symptom in primary care and hospital practice. The 
terms used for such spells vary so much among 
patients that they should not be taken for granted. Some 
patients use ‘blackout’ to describe a purely visual 
symptom, rather than loss of consciousness. Some 
individuals may understand ‘dizziness’ to mean an 
abnormal perception of movement (vertigo), but others 
will mean a feeling of faintness, and yet others unsteadi-
ness (Box 26.12). The clinician thus needs to elucidate 
the exact nature of the symptoms that the patient experi-
ences (Fig. 26.17).
The history should always be supplemented by a 
direct eye-witness account if available. Often a history 
of ‘shaking’ as described to the first aider will become 
‘fitting’ when described to the ambulance crew, which 
then is reported as ‘definite seizure’ in the emergency 
room. Careful history with corroboration will usually 
establish whether there has been full consciousness, 
altered consciousness, vertigo, transient amnesia or 
something else. Vertigo is caused by an alteration in 
function of the peripheral vestibular organs or the 
central control mechanisms of balance and posture, and 
will be discussed elsewhere (p. 1167).
Loss of consciousness
Consciousness may be defined as an awareness of the 
environment and ability to respond to it. Loss of con-
sciousness (LOC), other than in sleep, suggests a global 
dysfunction of the brain. This most commonly occurs 
Neurological disease
26
1158
pseudo­seizure) need to be considered in the differential 
diagnosis.
No amount of investigation can replace a clear history 
in these circumstances. The subjective experience is 
important, but objective description from an eye-witness 
(even if only by telephone) is equally helpful. Features 
in the history useful in distinguishing a seizure from 
syncope are shown in Box 26.13.
because of temporary loss of blood supply to the whole 
brain (syncope or faint). Alternatively, LOC can occur 
due to a sudden electrical dysfunction of the brain, as 
occurs during a seizure. Whilst most episodes of tran-
sient LOC are due to syncope or seizure, psychogenic 
blackouts (also known as non-epileptic seizure or 
Fig. 26.17  A diagnostic approach to the patient with dizziness, funny turns or blackouts. (Neurological causes are shown in green.) 
Labyrinthine
dysfunction
• Infection
• ‘Vestibular
   neuronitis’
• Benign
   positional
   vertigo
• Ménière’s
   disease
• Ischaemia/
   infarction
• Trauma
• Perilymph
   fistula
• Other
   (e.g. drugs,
   otosclerosis
   etc.)
Central vestibular
dysfunction
• ‘Physiological’
   (visual–vestibular
   mismatch)
• Demyelination
• Migraine
• Posterior fossa
   mass lesion
• Vertebro-basilar
   ischaemia
• Other
   (e.g. disorders of
   cranio-vertebral
    junction)
• Ataxia
• Weakness
• Loss of joint
   position sense
• Gait dyspraxia
• Joint disease
• Visual
   disturbance
• Fear of falling
  (Ch. 7)
Impaired cerebral
perfusion
(Ch. 18)
• Hypoglycaemia
   (Ch. 21)
• Anxiety*
• Hyperventilation
• Post-concussive
   syndrome
• Panic attack
• Non-epileptic
   attack
• Epileptic
   seizure
Presyncope
(reduced cerebral
perfusion)
Syncope
(loss of cerebral
perfusion)
Loss of consciousness (‘blackout’)
Sensation of movement?
(vertigo)
Loss of balance?
Lightheaded?
Other
description
Dizzy turn or blackout
* Anxiety is the most common cause
  of dizziness in those under 65 years
Seizure
Syncope
Aura (e.g. olfactory)
+
–
Cyanosis
+
–
Tongue-biting
+
–/+
Post-ictal confusion
+
–
Post-ictal amnesia
+
–
Post-ictal headache
+
–
Rapid recovery
–
+
26.13  How to differentiate seizures from syncope
•	 Prevalence: common, affecting up to 30% of people aged 
> 65 yrs.
•	 Symptoms: most frequently described as a combination of 
unsteadiness and lightheadedness.
•	 Most common causes: postural hypotension, cardiovascular 
disease, cervical spondylosis. Many patients have more than 
one underlying cause.
•	 Arrhythmia: can present with lightheadedness either at rest 
or on activity.
•	 Anxiety: frequently associated with dizziness but rarely the 
only cause.
•	 Falls: multidisciplinary workup is required if dizziness is 
associated with falls.
26.12  Dizziness in old age
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1159
more subtle. Cyanosis, pyrexia, acidosis and sweating 
may occur, and complications include aspiration, hypo-
tension, cardiac arrhythmias and renal or hepatic failure.
In patients with pre-existing epilepsy, the most likely 
cause is a fall in anti-epileptic drug levels. In de novo 
status epilepticus, it is essential to exclude precipitants 
such as infection (meningitis, encephalitis), neoplasia 
and metabolic derangement (hypoglycaemia, hypo­
natraemia, hypocalcaemia). Treatment and investigation 
are outlined in Box 26.14.
Coma
Conscious level should be measured using the Glasgow 
Coma Scale (GCS, Box 26.15). Although developed 
for use in head injury, GCS is widely used in medical 
coma, but disorders that affect language or limb func­
tion (e.g. left hemisphere stroke, locked-in syndrome) 
may reduce its usefulness. Nevertheless, it provides 
useful prognostic information, and serial recordings 
Syncope
Typically, syncope is preceded by a brief feeling of light-
headedness. Neurocardiogenic syncope (p. 555) is more 
likely on standing, and may be provoked by pain or 
emotion. There may be darkening of vision, ringing in 
the ears, symptoms of hyperventilation, distal tingling, 
feelings of nausea, clamminess or sweating. The LOC is 
gradual and brief, and the patient recovers quickly 
without confusion as long as he or she has assumed a 
horizontal position. There is often some brief stiffening 
and limb twitching, which requires differentiation from 
seizure-like movements. It is rare for syncope to cause 
injury or to cause amnesia after regaining awareness. 
During a syncopal attack, incontinence of urine can 
occur. Tongue-biting is less common in syncope and, if 
present, usually involves little trauma.
Cardiac syncope (p. 555), caused by a sudden drop in 
cardiac output, may be provoked by exertion in those 
with severe aortic stenosis, ischaemia or hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy, or without warning in 
patients with cardiac arrhythmia.
Seizures
The diagnosis of generalised tonic–clonic seizures, in 
which there is loss of consciousness, falling to the ground 
and clonic movements (p. 1180), is easy but lack of eye-
witness accounts can leave uncertainty. Less dramatic 
seizures, such as absences (p. 1181) or some focal sei-
zures (p. 1180), which cause alteration of consciousness 
without the patient falling to the ground, may merely be 
experienced as ‘lost time’. Since epileptic seizures are the 
result of specific processes that vary from patient to 
patient, their manifestation tends to be intermittent and 
stereotyped and often clusters in time, for reasons 
incompletely understood.
Non-epileptic attack disorder, psychogenic  
seizures, pseudoseizures, psychogenic  
non-epileptic seizures
This disorder is recognised in all cultures but nomencla-
ture has yet to be standardised. Around 10% of patients 
referred to a first seizure clinic will have LOC resulting 
from psychological reactions to circumstances or trau-
matic life events. Clinical pointers to the diagnosis 
include specific emotional triggers, partially retained 
awareness, dramatic movements or vocalisation, very 
prolonged duration (up to hours), rapid recovery or 
subsequent emotional distress. Diagnosis is important, 
as such patients are at significant risk of being harmed 
by inappropriate treatment if they are assumed to have 
epilepsy. Conversely, a hasty diagnosis may lead to 
treatment being withheld in atypical or prolonged sei-
zures. Specialist help is necessary to plan management.
Status epilepticus
Status epilepticus is seizure activity not resolving spon-
taneously, or recurrent seizure with no recovery of con-
sciousness in between. Persisting seizure activity has a 
recognised mortality and is a medical emergency.
Diagnosis is usually clinical and can be made on the 
basis of the description of prolonged rigidity and/or 
clonic movements with loss of awareness. As seizure 
activity becomes prolonged, movements may become 
Initial
•	 Ensure airway is patent; give oxygen to prevent cerebral 
hypoxia
•	 Check pulse, blood pressure, BM stix® and respiratory rate
•	 Secure intravenous access
•	 Send blood for:
Glucose, urea and electrolytes, calcium and magnesium, 
liver function, anti-epileptic drug levels
Full blood count and clotting screen
Storing a sample for future analysis (e.g. drug misuse)
•	 If seizures continue for > 5 mins: give diazepam 10 mg IV 
(or rectally) or lorazepam 4 mg IV; repeat once only after 
15 mins
•	 Correct any metabolic trigger, e.g. hypoglycaemia
Ongoing
If seizures continue after 30 mins
•	 IV infusion (with cardiac monitoring) with one of:
Phenytoin: 15 mg/kg at 50 mg/min
Fosphenytoin: 15 mg/kg at 100 mg/min
Phenobarbital: 10 mg/kg at 100 mg/min
•	 Cardiac monitor and pulse oximetry
Monitor neurological condition, blood pressure, respiration; 
check blood gases
If seizures still continue after 30–60 mins
•	 Transfer to intensive care
Start treatment for refractory status with intubation, 
ventilation and general anaesthesia using propofol or 
thiopental
EEG monitor
Once status controlled
•	 Commence longer-term anticonvulsant medication with  
one of:
Sodium valproate 10 mg/kg IV over 3–5 mins, then 
800–2000 mg/day
Phenytoin: give loading dose (if not already used as above) 
of 15 mg/kg, infuse at < 50 mg/min, then 300 mg/day
Carbamazepine 400 mg by nasogastric tube, then 
400–1200 mg/day
•	 Investigate cause
26.14  Management of status epilepticus
Neurological disease
26
1160
can plot improvement or deterioration. It is important 
to record the three components of the scale, rather 
than just the sum score. Thus, a description of eye-
opening (E2) and withdrawing (M4) to pain and making 
sounds only (V2) provides a much more useful picture 
than GCS 8.
Persisting loss of consciousness or coma (defined 
as GCS ≤ 8) occurs if the arousal mechanisms in the 
Eye-opening (E)
•	 Spontaneous
4
•	 To speech
3
•	 To pain
2
•	 Nil
1
Best motor response (M)
•	 Obeys commands
6
•	 Localises
5
•	 Withdraws
4
•	 Abnormal flexion
3
•	 Extensor response
2
•	 Nil
1
Verbal response (V)
•	 Orientated
5
•	 Confused conversation
4
•	 Inappropriate words
3
•	 Incomprehensible sounds
2
•	 Nil
1
Coma score = E + M + V
Always present GCS as breakdown, not a sum score 
(unless 3 or 15)
•	 Minimum sum
3
•	 Maximum sum
15
26.15  Glasgow Coma Scale
Metabolic disturbance
•	 Drug overdose
•	 Diabetes mellitus
Hypoglycaemia
Ketoacidosis
Hyperosmolar coma
•	 Hyponatraemia
•	 Uraemia
•	 Hepatic failure
•	 Respiratory failure
•	 Hypothermia
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Thiamin deficiency
Trauma
•	 Cerebral contusion
•	 Extradural haematoma
•	 Subdural haematoma
•	 Global axonal injury 
(deceleration)
Vascular disease
•	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
•	 Brainstem infarction/
haemorrhage
•	 Intracerebral haemorrhage
•	 Cerebral venous sinus 
thrombosis
Infections
•	 Meningitis
•	 Encephalitis
•	 Cerebral abscess
•	 Systemic sepsis
Others
•	 Epilepsy
•	 Brain tumour
•	 Functional (‘pseudo-coma’)
26.16  Causes of coma
brainstem and diencephalon are disturbed, and localises 
to either the brainstem or both cerebral hemispheres. 
There are many causes of coma (Box 26.16), including 
neurological (structural or non-structural brain disease) 
or non-neurological (e.g. type II respiratory failure). The 
mode of onset of coma and any precipitating event is 
crucial to establishing the cause, and should be obtained 
from family or other witnesses (by telephone if 
Preconditions for considering a diagnosis of brain death
•	 The patient is deeply comatose
(a)  There must be no suspicion that coma is due to depressant drugs, such as narcotics, hypnotics, tranquillisers
(b)	 Hypothermia has been excluded – rectal temperature must exceed 35°C
(c)	 There is no profound abnormality of serum electrolytes, acid–base balance or blood glucose concentrations, and any metabolic or 
endocrine cause of coma has been excluded
•	 The patient is maintained on a ventilator because spontaneous respiration has been inadequate or has ceased. Drugs, including 
neuromuscular blocking agents, must have been excluded as a cause of the respiratory failure
•	 The diagnosis of the disorder leading to brain death has been firmly established. There must be no doubt that the patient is suffering 
from irremediable structural brain damage
Tests for confirming brain death
•	 All brainstem reflexes are absent
(a)	 The pupils are fixed and unreactive to light
(b)	 The corneal reflexes are absent
(c)	 The vestibulo-ocular reflexes are absent – there is no eye movement following the injection of 20 mL of ice-cold water into each 
external auditory meatus in turn
(d)	 There are no motor responses to adequate stimulation within the cranial nerve distribution
(e)	 There is no gag reflex and no reflex response to a suction catheter in the trachea
•	 No respiratory movement occurs when the patient is disconnected from the ventilator long enough to allow the carbon dioxide 
tension to rise above the threshold for stimulating respiration (PaCO2 must reach 6.7 kPa (50 mmHg))
The diagnosis of brain death should be made by two experienced doctors, one of whom should be a consultant and the other a consultant 
or specialist registrar. The tests are usually repeated after an interval of 24 hours, depending on the clinical circumstances, before brain 
death is finally confirmed.
26.17  UK criteria for the diagnosis of brain death
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1161
necessary). Failure to obtain an adequate history for 
patients in coma is a common cause of diagnostic delay. 
Once the patient is stable from a cardiorespiratory per-
spective, examination should include accurate assess-
ment of conscious level (see below) and thorough 
general medical examination, looking for clues such as 
needle tracks indicating drug abuse, rashes, fever and 
focal signs of infection, including neck stiffness or evi-
dence of head injury. Focal neurological signs may 
suggest a structural explanation (stroke or tumour) or 
may be falsely localising (p. 1212).
Brain death and minimally 
conscious states
Coma is loss of consciousness related to loss of brain 
function. Brain death is a state in which cortical and 
brainstem function is irreversibly lost. Diagnostic crite-
ria for brain death vary between countries (Box 26.17); 
if satisfied, these criteria allow support to be withdrawn 
and natural death to occur. Diagnosing brain death is 
complex and should only be done by a clinician with 
appropriate expertise, as clinical differentiation from 
reduced consciousness can be challenging (Box 26.18). 
The ‘locked-in’ syndrome, in which the patient is para-
lysed except for eye movements, requires preserved 
hemisphere function (and thus consciousness), but a 
strategically placed lesion in the ventral pons (usually 
infarction) causes complete paralysis. The vegetative 
state implies some retention of brainstem function and 
minimal cortical function, with loss of awareness of the 
environment. Minimally conscious states imply reten-
tion of awareness and intact brainstem function. Confi-
dent distinction between these states is important and 
requires careful assessment, often over a period of time. 
Brain death is, by definition, irreversible, but other states 
may offer hope for improvement. Difficult ethical issues 
regarding management often arise.
Diagnosis
Features
Investigation
Prognosis
Brain death
See Box 26.17
Cranial imaging for primary cause
EEG – no electrical activity
Cranial Doppler – no cortical blood 
flow
Invariably fatal
Vegetative 
state (VS)
‘Persistent 
VS’ > 1 mth
‘Permanent 
VS’ > 1 yr
No reaction to verbal stimuli
Some reaction to noxious stimuli
Sleep–wake cycles (periods of eye 
opening)
Maintained respiratory drive
Intact brainstem reflexes
Occasional automatic movements 
(yawning, swallowing)
Cranial imaging for primary cause
Maintained cortical blood flow
Prognosis better post trauma
Minimally 
conscious 
state
Some reaction to verbal stimuli
Some reaction to noxious stimuli
Spontaneous movements
Intact brainstem reflexes
EEG demonstrates reactivity
Locked-in 
syndrome
Some retained cranial nerve reflexes
Some response to verbal stimuli (e.g. 
eye movements to communicate)
No limb movement to noxious stimuli
Imaging for primary cause
Depends on cause – recovery 
unlikely to progress beyond  
6 mths
26.18  Classification of brain death and reduced conscious states
Delirium
Delirium is a common result of cortical impairment and 
is more common in old age. It manifests as a disturbance 
of arousal with global impairment of mental function 
causing drowsiness with disorientation, perceptual 
errors and muddled thinking. Fluctuation is typical and 
confusion is often worse at night. Emotional disturbance 
(anxiety, irritability or depression) and psychomotor 
changes (agitation, restlessness or retardation) are 
common. The assessment and management of this con-
dition are covered in more detail on page 173.
Amnesia
Memory disturbance is a common symptom. In the 
absence of significant functional impairment (e.g. inabil-
ity to work, dyspraxias, loss of daily function), many 
patients will prove to have benign memory dysfunction 
related to age, mood or psychiatric disorders. Investiga-
tion and treatment of the dementias are discussed else-
where (p. 250).
Temporary loss of memory may be due to a transient 
toxic confusional state, the post-ictal period after seizure, 
or transient global amnesia. These are usually distin-
guished on the basis of the history.
Transient global amnesia
This predominantly affects middle-aged patients with 
an abrupt, discrete loss of anterograde memory function 
lasting up to a few hours. During the episode, patients 
are unable to record new memories, and this results in 
repetitive questioning, the hallmark of this condition. 
Consciousness is preserved and patients may perform 
even complex motor acts normally. During the attack 
there is retrograde amnesia for the events of the past 
Neurological disease
26
1162
is selectively impaired in Korsakoff’s syndrome (often 
secondary to alcohol) or bilateral temporal lobe damage. 
It can also be seen in conjunction with other types of 
dementia. Progressive deterioration over months sug-
gests an underlying dementia, but it is important to 
perform a full medical assessment to detect any under­
lying medical problem.
It is important to identify and treat depression 
(p. 243) in patients with memory loss. Depression 
may present as a ‘pseudo-dementia’, with concentration 
and memory impairment as dominant features, and 
this is often reversible with antidepressant medication. 
However, any patient with dementia (particularly of the 
Alzheimer’s type) may develop depression in the early 
stages of their illness. Specific causes of progressive 
dementia, with their treatment and investigation, are 
listed elsewhere (p. 250).
Weakness
The assessment of weakness requires the application of 
basic anatomy, physiology and some pathology to the 
interpretation of the history and clinical findings. Points 
to consider are shown in Boxes 26.19 and 26.20, and in 
Figure 26.18. The pattern and evolution of weakness and 
the clinical signs provide clues to the site and nature of 
the lesion.
few days, weeks or years. After 4–6 hours, memory func-
tion and behaviour return to normal but the patient has 
persistent, complete amnesia for the duration of the 
attack itself. There are no seizure markers and, unlike 
epileptic amnesia, transient global amnesia recurs in 
around 10–20% only. A vascular aetiology is unlikely 
and amnesia may be due to a benign process similar to 
migraine, occurring in the hippocampus. The patient has 
no physical signs and, if imaging is normal and no 
seizure markers are present, then the patient can be 
reassured.
Persistent amnesia
Patients with persistent memory disturbance must have 
serious neurological disease excluded. Symptoms cor-
roborated by relatives or colleagues are likely to be more 
significant than those noted by the patient only. Where 
poor concentration is at the heart of cognitive deteriora-
tion, it is more likely to be due to an underlying mood 
disorder.
It is important to assess the timing of onset and to 
establish which aspects of memory are affected. Com-
plaints of getting lost or of losing complex abilities 
are more pathological than word-finding difficulties. 
Disturbance of episodic or working memory (previously 
called ‘short-term memory’) must be distinguished from 
semantic memory (memory for concept-based knowl-
edge unrelated to specific experiences). Episodic memory 
Upper motor neuron lesion
Lower motor neuron lesion
Inspection
Normal (may be wasting in chronic lesions)
Wasting, fasciculation
Tone
Increased with clonus
Normal or decreased, no clonus
Pattern of weakness
Preferentially affects extensors in arms, flexors in leg
Hemiparesis, paraparesis or tetraparesis
Typically focal, in distribution of nerve root or 
peripheral nerve, with associated sensory changes
Deep tendon reflexes
Increased
Decreased/absent
Plantar response
Extensor (Babinski sign)
Flexor
26.19  Distinguishing signs in upper versus lower motor neuron syndromes
Clinical finding
Likely level of lesion/diagnosis
Pattern and distribution
Isolated muscles
Radiculopathy or mononeuropathy
Both limbs on one side (hemiparesis)
Cerebral hemisphere, less likely cord or brainstem
One limb
Neuronopathy, plexopathy, cord/brain
Both lower limbs (paraparesis)
Spinal cord; look for a sensory level
Fatigability
Mysasthenia gravis
Bizarre, fluctuating, not following anatomical rules
Functional
Signs
Upper motor neuron
Brain/spinal cord
Lower motor neuron
Peripheral nervous system
Evolution of the weakness
Sudden and improving
Stroke/mononeuropathy
Evolving over months or years
Meningioma, cervical spondylotic myelopathy
Gradually worsening over days or weeks
Cerebral mass, demyelination
Associated symptoms
Absence of sensory involvement
Motor neuron disease, myopathy, myasthenia
26.20  How to assess weakness
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1163
Fig. 26.18  Patterns of motor loss according to the anatomical site of the lesion. 
Cerebral
hemispheres
Spinal cord
Anterior horn,
motor root,
plexus and
peripheral nerve
Lower 
motor
neuron
lesion
Upper limbs
Lower limbs
Upper
motor
neuron
lesion
Paraplegia
Tetraplegia
Contralateral
hemiplegia
It is important to establish whether the patient 
has loss of power rather than reduced sensation or 
generalised fatigue. Pain may restrict movement and 
thus mimic weakness. Paradoxically, sensory neglect 
(p. 1164) may leave patients unaware of even severe 
weakness.
Patients with parkinsonism may complain of weak-
ness; extrapyramidal signs of rigidity (cogwheel or lead 
pipe) and bradykinesia should be evident, and a resting 
tremor, usually asymmetrical, may provide a further 
clue (p. 1194). Observation is as important as formal 
strength testing. Movement restricted by pain should be 
apparent, and other features (contractures, wasting, fas-
ciculations, abnormal movements/postures) all provide 
diagnostic clues. Simple observation of the patient 
walking into the consulting room may be diagnostic.
Weakness is a common functional symptom. Func-
tional weakness does not conform to typical organic 
patterns, and the signs in Box 26.19 are absent. On 
examination, the signs are often variable (e.g. the 
patient can walk but appears to have no leg movement 
when assessed on the couch), and strength may appear 
to ‘give way’, with the patient able to achieve full 
power for brief bursts. This does not occur in disease. 
Hoover’s sign is useful to confirm functional weakness, 
and relies on the normal phenomenon of simultaneous 
hip extension when the contralateral hip flexes. In func-
tional weakness, one may see hip extension weakness 
(rare in organic disease), which then returns to full 
strength on testing contralateral hip flexion. This sign 
may be demonstrated to the patient in a non-
confrontational manner, to show that the potential limb 
power is intact.
Facial weakness
Facial nerve palsy (Bell’s palsy)
One of the most common causes of facial weakness is 
Bell’s palsy, a lower motor neuron lesion of the 7th 
(facial) nerve, affecting all ages and both sexes.
The lesion is within the facial canal. Symptoms 
usually develop subacutely over a few hours, with pain 
around the ear preceding the unilateral facial weakness. 
Patients often describe the face as ‘numb’, but there is 
no objective sensory loss (except to taste if the chorda 
tympani is involved). Hyperacusis may occur if the 
nerve to stapedius is involved, and there may be dimin-
ished salivation and tear secretion. Examination reveals 
an ipsilateral lower motor neuron facial nerve palsy. 
Vesicles in the ear or on the palate may indicate primary 
herpes zoster infection (p. 318).
Steroids improve recovery rates if started within 
72 hours of onset but antiviral drugs are not effective. 
Taping the eye shut overnight helps prevent exposure 
keratitis and corneal abrasion. About 80% of patients 
recover spontaneously within 12 weeks. Plastic surgery 
may be considered for the minority left with facial 
disfigurement after 12 months. Recurrence is unusual 
and should prompt further investigation. Aberrant 
re-innervation may occur during recovery, producing 
unwanted facial movements, such as eye closure when 
the mouth is moved (synkinesis), or ‘crocodile tears’ 
(tearing during salivation).
Unlike Bell’s palsy, lesions with an upper motor 
neuron origin partly spare the upper face. Cortical 
lesions may cause a facial weakness either in isolation 
or with associated hemiparesis and speech difficulties.
Neurological disease
26
1164
Sensory disturbance
Sensory symptoms are common and are frequently 
benign. Patients often find sensory symptoms difficult 
to describe, and sensory examination is difficult for 
both doctor and patient. While neurological disease 
can cause sensory symptoms, systemic disorders can 
also be responsible. Tingling in both hands and around 
the mouth can occur as the result of hyperventilation 
(p. 657) or hypocalcaemia (p. 768). When there is dys-
function of the relevant cerebral cortex, the patient’s 
perception of the wholeness or actual presence of the 
relevant part of the body may be distorted.
Numbness and paraesthesia
The history may give the best clues to localisation and 
pathology. Certain common patterns are recognised: 
in migraine, the aura may consist of spreading tingling 
or paraesthesia, followed by numbness evolving over 
20–30 minutes over one half of the body, often splitting 
the tongue. Sensory loss caused by a stroke or transient 
ischaemic attack (TIA) occurs much more rapidly and 
is typically negative (numbness) rather than positive 
(tingling). Rarely, unpleasant paraesthesia of sensory 
epilepsy spreads within seconds. The sensory alteration 
of inflammatory spinal cord lesions often ascends from 
one or both lower limbs to a distinct level on the trunk 
over hours to days. Psychogenic sensory change can 
occur as a manifestation of anxiety or as part of a conver-
sion disorder (p. 246). In such cases, the distribution 
usually does not conform to a known anatomical pattern 
Fig. 26.19  Patterns of sensory loss.  A Generalised peripheral neuropathy.  B Sensory roots: some common examples.  C Single dorsal column 
lesion (proprioception and some touch loss).  D Transverse thoracic spinal cord lesion.  E Unilateral cord lesion (Brown–Séquard): ipsilateral dorsal 
column (and motor) deficit and contralateral spinothalamic deficit.  F Central cord lesion: ‘cape’ distribution of spinothalamic loss.  G Mid-brainstem 
lesion: ipsilateral facial sensory loss and contralateral loss on body below the vertex.  H Hemisphere (thalamic) lesion: contralateral loss on one side of 
face and body. 
C5
C7
L5
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Unilateral cord lesion
(Brown–Séquard)
Central cord lesion
Mid-brainstem lesion
Hemisphere (thalamic)
lesion
Transverse thoracic
spinal cord lesion
Single dorsal column
lesion
Sensory roots
Generalised peripheral
neuropathy
nor fit with any organic disease. Care must be taken in 
diagnosing non-organic sensory problems; a careful 
history and examination will ensure there is no other 
objective neurological deficit.
Sensory neurological examination needs to be under-
taken and interpreted with care since the findings 
depend, by definition, on subjective reports. However, 
the reported distribution of sensory loss can be useful 
when combined with the coexisting deficits of motor 
and/or cranial nerve function (Fig. 26.19).
Sensory loss in peripheral nerve lesions
Here the symptoms are usually of sensory loss and par-
aesthesia. Single nerve lesions cause disturbance in the 
sensory distribution of the nerve, whereas in diffuse 
neuropathies the longest neurons are affected first, 
giving a characteristic ‘glove and stocking’ distribution. 
If smaller nerve fibres are preferentially affected (e.g. in 
diabetic neuropathy), temperature and pin-prick (pain) 
are reduced, whilst vibration sense and proprioception 
(modalities served by the larger, well-myelinated, 
sensory nerves) may be spared. In contrast, vibration 
and proprioception are particularly affected if the neu-
ropathy is demyelinating in character (p. 1224), produc-
ing symptoms of tightness and swelling with impairment 
of proprioception and vibration sensation.
Sensory loss in nerve root lesions
These typically present with pain as a prominent feature, 
either within the spine or in the limb plexuses. It is often 
felt in the myotome rather than the dermatome. The 
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1165
Cortical lesions are more likely to cause a mixed 
motor and sensory loss. Substantial lesions of the pari-
etal cortex (as in large strokes) can cause severe loss of 
proprioception and may even abolish conscious aware-
ness of the existence of the affected limb(s). The resulting 
loss of function in the limb may be impossible to distin-
guish from paralysis. Pathways are so tightly packed in 
the thalamus that even small lacunar strokes can cause 
isolated contralateral hemisensory loss.
Neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain is a positive neurological symptom 
caused by dysfunction of the pain perception apparatus, 
in contrast to nociceptive pain, which is secondary to 
pathological processes such as inflammation. Neuro-
pathic pain has distinctive features and typically pro-
vokes a very unpleasant, persistent, burning sensation. 
There is often increased sensitivity to touch, so that light 
brushing of the affected area causes exquisite pain (allo-
dynia). Painful stimuli are felt as though they arise from 
a larger area than that touched, and spontaneous bursts 
of pain may also occur. Pain may be elicited by other 
modalities (allodynia) and is considerably affected by 
emotional influences. The most common causes of neu-
ropathic pain are diabetic neuropathies, trigeminal and 
post-herpetic neuralgias, and trauma to a peripheral 
nerve. Treatment of these syndromes can be difficult. 
Drugs that modulate various parts of the nociceptive 
system, such as gabapentin, carbamazepine or tricyclic 
antidepressants, may help. Localised treatment (topical 
treatment or nerve blocks) sometimes succeeds but may 
increase the sensory deficit and worsen the situation. 
Electrical stimulation has occasionally proved success-
ful. For further information, see Chapter 12.
Abnormal movements
Disorders of movement lead to either extra, unwanted 
movement (hyperkinetic disorders) or too little move-
ment (hypokinetic disorders) (Box 26.21). In either case, 
the lesion often localises to the basal ganglia, although 
some tremors are related to cerebellar or brainstem dis-
turbance. Functional movement disorders are common, 
and may mimic all of the organic syndromes below. The 
most important hypokinetic disorder is Parkinson’s 
disease (p. 1194). Parkinsonism is a clinical description 
of a collection of symptoms, including tremor, brady­
kinesia and rigidity. Whilst the history is always impor-
tant, observation is clearly vital; much of the skill in 
diagnosing movement disorders lies in pattern recogni-
tion. Once it is established whether the problem is 
hypo- or hyperkinetic, the next task is to categorise the 
movements further, accepting that there is often overlap. 
Videoing the movements (with the patient’s permis-
sion), so that they can be shown to a movement disorder 
expert, may provide a quick diagnosis in cases of 
uncertainty.
Tremor
Tremor is caused by alternating agonist/antagonist 
muscle contractions and produces a rhythmical oscilla-
tion of the body part affected. In the assessment of 
tremor, the position, body part affected, frequency and 
nerve root involved may be deduced from the der-
matomal pattern of sensory loss, although overlap may 
lead to this being smaller than expected.
Sensory loss in spinal cord lesions
Transverse lesions of the spinal cord produce loss of all 
sensory modalities below that segmental level, although 
the clinical level may only be manifest 2–3 segments 
lower than the anatomical site of the lesion. Very often, 
there is a band of paraesthesia or hyperaesthesia at the 
top of the area of sensory loss. Clinical examination may 
reveal dissociated sensory loss, i.e. different patterns in 
the spinothalamic and dorsal columnar pathways. If the 
transverse lesion is vascular due to anterior spinal artery 
thrombosis, the spinothalamic pathways may be affected 
while the posterior one-third of the spinal cord (the 
dorsal column modalities) may be spared.
Lesions damaging one side of the spinal cord will 
produce loss of spinothalamic modalities (pain and tem-
perature) on the opposite side, and of dorsal column 
modalities (joint position and vibration sense) on the 
same side of the body – the Brown–Séquard syndrome 
(p. 1221).
Lesions in the centre of the spinal cord (such as 
syringomyelia: see Box 26.98 and Fig. 26.46, p. 1222) 
spare the dorsal columns but involve the spino­
thalamic fibres crossing the cord from both sides over 
the length of the lesion. There is no sensory loss in seg-
ments above and below the lesion; this is described as 
‘suspended’ sensory loss. There is sometimes reflex loss 
at the level of the lesion if afferent fibres of the reflex arc 
are affected.
An isolated lesion of the dorsal columns is not uncom-
mon in multiple sclerosis. This produces a characteristic 
unpleasant, tight feeling over the limb(s) involved and, 
while there is no loss of pin-prick or temperature sensa-
tion, the associated loss of proprioception may severely 
limit function of the affected limb(s).
Sensory loss in brainstem lesions
Lesions in the brainstem can be associated with sensory 
loss, but the distribution depends on the site of the 
lesion. A lesion limited to the trigeminal nucleus or its 
sensory projections will cause ipsilateral facial sensory 
disturbance. For example, pain resembling trigeminal 
neuralgia can be seen in patients with multiple sclerosis. 
The anatomy of the trigeminal connections means that 
lesions in the medulla or spinal cord can give rise to 
‘balaclava’ patterns of sensory loss (p. 1147). Sensory 
pathways running up from the spinal cord can also be 
damaged in the brainstem, resulting in simultaneous 
sensory loss in arm(s) and/or leg(s).
Sensory loss in hemispheric lesions
The temporal, parietal and occipital lobes receive sensory 
information regarding the various modalities of touch, 
vision, hearing and balance (see Box 26.2, p. 1142). The 
initial points of entry into the cortex are the respective 
primary cortical areas (see Fig. 26.4, p. 1143). Damage 
to any of these primary areas will result in reduction or 
loss of the ability to perceive that particular modality: 
‘negative’ symptomatology. Abnormal excitation of 
these areas can result in a false perception (‘positive’ 
symptoms), the most common of which is migrainous 
visual aura (flashing lights or teichopsiae).
Neurological disease
26
1166
prolonged levodopa treatment for Parkinson’s 
disease. Other causes are shown in Box 26.23.
•	 Athetosis: slower, writhing movement of the limbs, 
often combined with chorea and having similar 
causes.
•	 Ballism: a more dramatic form of chorea, causing 
often-violent flinging movements of one limb 
(monoballism) or one side of the body 
(hemiballism). The lesion localises to the 
contralateral subthalamic nucleus and the most 
common cause is stroke.
•	 Dystonia: sustained involuntary muscle contraction 
that causes abnormal postures or movement. It may 
amplitude should be considered, as these provide diag-
nostic clues (Box 26.22).
Other hyperkinetic syndromes
Non-rhythmic involuntary movements include chorea, 
athetosis, ballism, dystonia, myoclonus and tics. They 
are categorised by clinical appearance, and coexistence 
and overlap are common, such as in choreoathetosis.
•	 Chorea: jerky, brief, purposeless involuntary 
movements, appearing as fidgety movements 
affecting different areas; they suggest disease in  
the caudate nucleus (as in Huntington’s disease,  
p. 1198) and are a common complication of 
Description
Features
Examples
Hypokinetic disorders
Parkinsonism
Akinesia
Rigidity
Tremor
Loss of postural reflexes
Other features depending on cause
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease
Other degenerative syndromes
Drug-induced
(See Box 26.64)
Catatonia
Mutism
Sustained posturing and waxy flexibility
Usually psychiatric; if neurological, is most 
commonly of vascular origin
Hyperkinetic disorders
Tremor
Rhythmical oscillation of body part (see 
Box 26.22)
Essential tremor
Parkinson’s disease
Drug-induced
Chorea
Jerky, brief, involuntary movements
Huntington’s disease
Drug-induced
Tics
Stereotyped, repetitive movements, 
briefly suppressible
Tourette’s syndrome
Myoclonus
Shock-like muscle jerks
Epilepsy
Hypnic jerks (p. 1187)
Focal cortical disease
Dystonia
Sustained muscle contraction causing 
abnormal postures ± tremor
Genetic
Generalised dystonic syndromes
Focal dystonias in adults (e.g. torticollis)
Others
Various
Paroxysmal hyperkinetic dyskinesias
Hemifacial spasm
Tardive syndromes
26.21  Movement disorders
Body part affected
Position
Frequency
Amplitude
Character
Physiological
Both arms > legs
Posture, movement
High
Small (fine)
Enhanced by anxiety, 
emotion, drugs, toxins
Parkinsonism
Unilateral or 
asymmetrical
Arm > leg, chin, 
never head
Rest
Postural and 
re-emergent may 
occur
Low (3–4 Hz)
Moderate
Typically pill-rolling, thumb 
and index finger, other 
features of parkinsonism
Essential 
tremor
Bilateral arms, head
Movement
High (8–10 Hz)
Low to moderate
Family history; 50% respond 
to alcohol
Dystonic
Head, arms, legs
Posture
Variable
Variable
Other features of dystonia, 
often jerky tremors
Functional
Any
Any
Variable
Variable
Distractible
26.22  Causes and characteristics of tremors
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1167
damage to which gives rise to sensory (including visual) 
inattention, disorders of spatial perception, and disrup-
tion of spatially orientated behaviour, leading to apraxia. 
Apraxia is the inability to perform complex, organised 
activity in the presence of normal basic motor, sensory 
and cerebellar function (after weakness, numbness and 
ataxia have been excluded as causes). Examples of 
complex motor activities include dressing, using cutlery 
and geographical orientation. Other abnormalities that 
can result from damage to the association cortex involve 
difficulty reading (dyslexia) or writing (dysgraphia), or 
the inability to recognise familiar objects (agnosia). The 
results of damage to particular lobes of the brain are 
given in Box 26.2 (p. 1142).
Altered balance and vertigo
Balance is a complicated dynamic process that requires 
ongoing modification of both axial and limb muscles to 
compensate for the effects of gravity and alterations in 
body position and load (and hence centre of gravity) in 
order to prevent a person from falling. This requires 
input from a variety of sensory modalities (visual, ves-
tibular and proprioceptive), processing by the cere­
bellum and brainstem, and output via a number of 
descending pathways (e.g. vestibulospinal, rubrospinal 
and reticulospinal tracts).
Disorders of balance can therefore arise from any 
part of this process. Disordered input (loss of vision, 
vestibular disorders or lack of joint position sense), 
processing (damage to vestibular nuclei or cerebellum) 
or motor function (spinal cord lesions, leg weakness 
of any cause) can all impair balance. The patient may 
complain of different symptoms, depending on the 
location of the lesion. For example, loss of joint position 
sense or cerebellar function may result in a sensation of 
unsteadiness, while damage to the vestibular nuclei 
or labyrinth may result in an illusion of movement such 
as vertigo (see below). A careful history is vital. Since 
vision can often compensate for lack of joint position 
sense, patients with peripheral neuropathies or dorsal 
column loss will often find their problem more notice-
able in the dark.
Examination of such patients may yield physical 
signs that again depend on the site of the lesion. Sensory 
abnormalities may be manifest as altered visual acuities 
or visual fields, possibly with abnormalities on fundo­
scopy, altered eye movements (including nystagmus, 
p. 1171), impaired vestibular function (p. 1186) or lack 
of joint position sense. Disturbance of cerebellar function 
may be manifest as nystagmus, dysarthria or ataxia, or 
difficulty with gait (unsteadiness or inability to perform 
tandem gait, p. 1168). Leg weakness, if present, will be 
detectable on examination of the limbs.
Vertigo
Vertigo is defined as an abnormal perception of move-
ment of the environment or self, and occurs because of 
conflicting visual, proprioceptive and vestibular infor-
mation about a person’s position in space. Vertigo com-
monly arises from imbalance of vestibular input and 
is within the experience of most people, since this is 
the ‘dizziness’ that occurs after someone has spun 
round vigorously and then stops. Bilateral labyrinthine 
be generalised (usually in childhood-onset genetic 
syndromes) or, more commonly, focal/segmental 
(such as in torticollis, when the head is twisted 
repeatedly to one side). Some dystonias only occur 
with specific tasks, such as writer’s cramp or other 
occupational ‘cramps’. Dystonic tremor is associated, 
and is asymmetrical and of large amplitude.
•	 Myoclonus: brief, isolated, random jerks of muscle 
groups. This is physiological at the onset of sleep 
(hypnic jerks). Similarly, a myoclonic jerk is a 
component of the normal startle response, which 
may be exaggerated in some rare (mostly genetic) 
disorders. Myoclonus may occur in disorders of the 
cerebral cortex, such as some forms of epilepsy. 
Alternatively, myoclonus can arise from subcortical 
structures or, more rarely, from segments of the 
spinal cord.
•	 Tics: stereotyped repetitive movements, such as 
blinking, winking, head shaking or shoulder 
shrugging. Unlike dyskinesias, the patient may be 
able to suppress them, although only for a short 
time. Isolated tics are common in childhood and 
usually disappear. Tourette’s syndrome is defined 
by the presence of multiple motor and vocal tics 
that may evolve over time; it is frequently 
associated with psychiatric disease, including 
obsessive compulsions, depression, self-harm or 
attention deficit disorder. Tics may also occur in 
Huntington’s and Wilson’s diseases, or after 
streptococcal infection.
Abnormal perception
The parietal lobes are involved in the higher processing 
and integration of the primary sensory information. This 
takes place in areas referred to as ‘association’ cortex, 
Hereditary
•	 Huntington’s disease (HD) 
and HD-like syndromes
•	 Wilson’s disease
•	 Neuroacanthocytosis
•	 Dentato-rubro-pallidoluysian 
atrophy
•	 Benign hereditary chorea
•	 Paroxysmal dyskinesias
Cerebral birth injury (including kernicterus)
Cerebral trauma
Drugs
•	 Levodopa
•	 Antipsychotics
•	 Anticonvulsants
•	 Oral contraceptive
Metabolic
•	 Disorders affecting thyroid, 
parathyroid, glucose, 
sodium, calcium and 
magnesium balance
•	 Pregnancy
Autoimmune
•	 Post-streptococcal 
(Sydenham’s chorea)
•	 Antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome
•	 Systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE)
Structural lesions of basal ganglia (usually caudate)
•	 Vascular
•	 Demyelination
•	 Brain tumour
26.23  Causes of chorea
Neurological disease
26
1168
dysfunction often causes some unsteadiness. Labyrin-
thine vertigo usually lasts days at a time, though it may 
recur, whilst vertigo arising from central (brainstem) 
disorders is often persistent and accompanied by other 
brainstem signs. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
(p. 1186) lasts a few seconds on head movement. A care-
ful history will reveal the likely cause in most patients.
Abnormal gait
Many neurological disorders can affect gait. Observing 
patients as they walk into the consulting room can be 
very informative, although formal examination is also 
important. Neurogenic gait dis­orders need to be distin-
guished from those due to skeletal abnormalities, usually 
characterised by pain producing an antalgic gait, or 
limp. Gait alteration incompatible with any anatomical 
or physiological deficit may be due to functional 
disorders.
Pyramidal gait
Upper motor neuron lesions cause characteristic exten-
sion of the affected leg. The resultant tendency for the 
toes to strike the ground on walking requires the leg 
to swing outwards at the hip (circumduction). Never­
theless, a shoe on the affected side worn down at the 
toes may provide evidence of this type of gait. In hemi-
plegia, the asymmetry between affected and normal 
sides is obvious on walking, but in paraparesis both 
lower limbs swing slowly from the hips in extension and 
are dragged stiffly over the ground – described as 
‘walking in mud’.
Foot drop
In normal walking, the heel is the first part of the foot to 
hit the ground. A lower motor neuron lesion affecting 
the leg will cause weakness of ankle dorsiflexion, result-
ing in a less controlled descent of the foot, which makes 
a slapping noise as it hits the ground. In severe cases, 
the foot will have to be lifted higher at the knee to allow 
room for the inadequately dorsiflexed foot to swing 
through, resulting in a high-stepping gait.
Myopathic gait
During walking, alternating transfer of the body’s 
weight through each leg requires adequate hip abduc-
tion. In proximal muscle weakness, usually caused by 
muscle disease, the hips are not properly fixed by these 
muscles and trunk movements are exaggerated, produc-
ing a rolling or waddling gait.
Ataxic gait
An ataxic gait can result from lesions in the cerebellum, 
vestibular apparatus or peripheral nerves. Patients with 
lesions of the central portion of the cerebellum (the 
vermis) walk with a characteristic broad-based gait ‘as 
if drunk’ (cerebellar function is particularly sensitive to 
alcohol). Patients with acute vestibular disturbances 
walk similarly but the accompanying vertigo is charac-
teristic. Inability to walk heel to toe may be the only sign 
of less severe cerebellar dysfunction.
Proprioceptive defects can also cause an ataxic 
gait. The impairment of joint position sense makes 
walking unreliable, especially in poor light. The feet 
tend to be placed on the ground with greater emphasis, 
pre­sumably to enhance proprioceptive input, resulting 
in a ‘stamping’ gait.
Apraxic gait
In an apraxic gait, power, cerebellar function and prop-
rioception are normal on examination of the legs. The 
patient may be able to carry out complex motor tasks 
(e.g. bicycling motion) while recumbent and yet cannot 
formulate the motor act of walking. In this higher cere-
bral dysfunction, the feet appear stuck to the floor and 
the patient cannot walk. Gait apraxia is a sign of diffuse 
bilateral hemisphere disease (such as normal pressure 
hydrocephalus) or diffuse frontal lobe disease.
Marche à petits pas
This gait is characterised by small, slow steps and 
marked instability. It differs from the festination found 
in Parkinson’s disease (see below) in that it lacks increas-
ing pace and freezing. The usual cause is small-vessel 
cerebrovascular disease, and there are accompanying 
bilateral upper motor neuron signs.
Extrapyramidal gait
The rigidity and bradykinesia of basal ganglia dysfunc-
tion (p. 1194) lead to a stooped posture and characteristic 
gait difficulties, with problems initiating walking and 
controlling the pace of the gait. Patients may become 
stuck whilst trying to start walking or when walking 
through doorways (‘freezing’). The centre of gravity will 
be moved forwards to aid propulsion, which, with poor 
axial control, can lead to an accelerating pace of shuf-
fling and difficulty stopping. This produces the festinant 
gait: initial stuttering steps that quickly increase in fre-
quency while decreasing in length.
Abnormal speech and language
Speech disturbance may be isolated to disruption of 
sound output (dysarthria) or may involve language 
disturbance (dysphasia). Dysphonia (reduction in the 
sound/volume) is usually due to mechanical laryngeal 
disruption, whereas dysarthria is more typically neuro-
logical in origin. Dysphasia is always neurological 
and localises to the dominant cerebral hemisphere 
(usually left, regardless of handedness). Combinations 
of speech and swallowing problems are explained 
below (p. 1173).
Dysphonia
Dysphonia describes hoarse or whispered speech. The 
most common cause is laryngitis, but dysphonia can also 
result from a lesion of the 10th cranial nerve or disease 
of the vocal cords, including laryngeal dystonia. Parkin-
sonism may cause hypophonia with marked reduction 
in speech volume, often in association with dysarthria, 
making speech difficult to understand.
Dysarthria
Dysarthria is characterised by poorly articulated or 
slurred speech and can occur in association with lesions 
of the cerebellum, brainstem and lower cranial nerves, 
as well as in myasthenia or myopathic disease. Lan-
guage function is not affected. The quality of the speech 
tends to differ depending on the cause, but it can be very 
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1169
(non-existent words). Examples include Wernicke’s 
aphasia (which localises to the superior posterior tem-
poral lobe), transcortical sensory aphasia, conduction 
aphasia and anomic aphasia.
Non-fluent aphasias, also called expressive apha-
sias, are difficulties in articulating, but in most cases 
there is relatively good auditory verbal comprehension. 
Examples include Broca’s aphasia (associated with 
pathologies in the inferior frontal region), transcortical 
motor aphasia and global aphasia.
‘Pure’ aphasias are selective impairments in reading, 
writing or the recognition of words. These disorders 
may be quite selective. For example, a person is able 
to read but not write, or is able to write but not read. 
Examples include pure alexia, agraphia and pure 
word deafness.
Dysphasia (a focal symptom) is frequently misinter-
preted as confusion (which is non-focal). Dysphasia can 
be misheard/misspelt as dysphagia, and for this reason 
some prefer to use ‘aphasia’ to avoid confusion.
Disturbance of smell
Symptomatic olfactory loss almost always is due to local 
causes (nasal obstruction), follows head injury or is idio­
pathic. Hyposmia may occur early in Parkinson’s 
disease. Frontal lobe lesions are a rare cause. Positive 
olfactory symptoms may arise from Alzheimer’s disease 
or epilepsy.
Visual disturbance and  
ocular abnormalities
Disturbances of vision may be due to primary ocular 
disease or to disorders of the central connections and 
visual cortex. Visual symptoms are usually negative 
(loss of vision) but sometimes are positive, most 
commonly in migraine. Eye movements may be dis-
turbed, giving rise to double vision (diplopia) or blurred 
vision.
Visual loss
Visual loss can occur as the result of lesions in any areas 
between the retina and the visual cortex. Patterns of 
difficult to distinguish the different types clinically (Box 
26.24). Dysarthria is discussed further in the section on 
bulbar symptoms (p. 1173).
Dysphasia
Dysphasia (or aphasia) is a disorder of the language 
content of speech. It can occur with lesions over a 
wide area of the dominant hemisphere (Fig. 26.20). Dys-
phasia may be categorised according to whether the 
speech output is fluent or non-fluent. Fluent aphasias, 
also called receptive aphasias, are impairments related 
mostly to the input or reception of language, with dif-
ficulties either in auditory verbal comprehension or in 
the repetition of words, phrases or sentences spoken by 
others. Speech is easy and fluent, but there are difficul-
ties related to the output of language as well, such as 
paraphasia (either substitution of similar-sounding 
non-words, or incorrect words) and neologisms 
Type
Site
Characteristics
Associated features
Myopathic
Muscles of speech
Indistinct, poor articulation
Weakness of face, tongue and neck
Myasthenic
Motor end plate
Indistinct with fatigue and dysphonia
Fluctuating severity
Ptosis, diplopia, facial and neck weakness
Bulbar
Brainstem
Indistinct, slurred, often nasal
Dysphagia, diplopia, ataxia
‘Scanning’
Cerebellum
Slurred, impaired timing and 
cadence, ‘sing-song’
Ataxia of limbs and gait, tremor of  
head/limbs
Nystagmus
Spastic 
(‘pseudo-bulbar’)
Pyramidal tracts
Indistinct, breathy, mumbling
Poor rapid tongue movements, increased 
reflexes and jaw jerk
Parkinsonian
Basal ganglia
Indistinct, rapid, stammering, quiet
Tremor, rigidity, slow shuffling gait
Dystonic
Basal ganglia
Strained, slow, high-pitched
Dystonia, athetosis
26.24  Causes of dysarthria
Fig. 26.20  Classification of cortical speech problems. 
(1) Wernicke’s aphasia: fluent dysphasia with poor comprehension and 
poor repetition. (2) Conduction aphasia: fluent aphasia with good 
comprehension and poor repetition. (3) Broca’s aphasia: non-fluent aphasia 
with good comprehension and poor repetition. (4) Transcortical sensory 
aphasia: fluent aphasia with poor comprehension and good repetition.  
(5) Transcortical motor aphasia: non-fluent aphasia with good 
comprehension and good repetition. Large lesions affecting all of regions 
1–5 cause global aphasia. 
3
5
2
1
4
Sylvian
fissure
Central
sulcus
Neurological disease
26
1170
the headache. Simple flashes of light (phosphenes) may 
indicate damage to the retina (e.g. detachment) or to 
the primary visual cortex. Formed visual hallucinations 
may be caused by drugs, or may be due to epilepsy or 
‘release phenomena’ in a blind visual field (Charles 
Bonnet’s syndrome).
Double vision
Subtle double vision (diplopia) may be reported as 
blurred rather than double vision and most commonly 
arises from misalignment of the eyes. Monocular diplo-
pia is rare and indicates ocular disease, while binocular 
diplopia suggests a probable neurological cause. Closing 
either eye in turn will abort binocular diplopia. Once 
the presence of binocular diplopia is confirmed, it should 
be established whether the diplopia is maximal in any 
particular direction of gaze, whether the images are 
separated horizontally or vertically, and whether there 
are any associated symptoms or signs, such as ptosis or 
pupillary disturbance.
Binocular diplopia occurs when eye movement is 
impaired, so that the image is not projected to the same 
points on the two retinae. It may result from central 
disorders or from disturbance of the ocular motor 
nerves, muscles or the neuromuscular junction (see Fig. 
26.8, p. 1146). The pattern of double vision, along with 
any associated features, usually allows inference of 
which nerves/muscles are affected, whilst the mode of 
onset and other features (e.g. fatigability in myasthenia) 
provide further clues about the cause.
The causes of ocular motor nerve palsies are listed in 
Box 26.26.
visual field loss are explained by the anatomy of the 
visual pathways (see Fig. 26.7, p. 1145). Associated clini-
cal manifestations are described in Box 26.25. Visual 
symptoms affecting one eye only are liable to be due to 
lesions anterior to the optic chiasm.
Transient visual loss is quite common and sudden-
onset visual loss lasting less than 15 minutes is likely to 
have a vascular origin. It may be difficult to know 
whether the visual loss was monocular (carotid circula-
tion) or binocular (vertebrobasilar circulation), and it can 
help to ask if the patient tried closing each eye in turn 
to see whether the symptom affected one eye or both. 
Visual field testing is an important part of the examina-
tion, either at the bedside or formally with perimetry. 
Field defects become more symmetrical (congruous), the 
closer the lesion comes to the visual cortex.
Migrainous visual symptoms are very common and, 
when associated with typical headache and other 
migraine features, rarely pose a diagnostic challenge. 
However, they may occur in isolation, making distinc-
tion from TIA difficult, but TIAs typically cause negative 
(transient blindness) symptoms, whereas migraine 
causes positive phenomena (see below). TIAs often last 
for a shorter time (a few minutes), compared to the 10–
60-minute duration of migraine aura, and will have an 
abrupt onset and end, unlike the gradual evolution of a 
migraine aura.
Positive visual phenomena
The most common cause is migraine; patients may 
describe silvery zigzag lines (fortification spectra) or 
flashing coloured lights (teichopsia), usually preceding 
Site of lesion
Common causes
Complaint
Visual field loss
Associated physical signs
Retina/optic disc
Vascular disease 
(including vasculitis)
Glaucoma
Inflammation
Partial/complete visual 
loss depending on site, 
involving one or both eyes
Altitudinal field defect
Arcuate scotoma
Reduced acuity
Visual distortion (macula)
Abnormal retinal 
appearance
Optic nerve
Optic neuritis
Sarcoidosis
Tumour
Leber’s hereditary 
optic neuropathy
Partial/complete loss of 
vision in one eye
Often painful
Central vision particularly 
affected
Central or paracentral 
scotoma
Monocular blindness
Reduced acuity
Reduced colour vision
Relative afferent pupillary 
defect
Optic atrophy (late)
Optic chiasm
Pituitary tumour
Craniopharyngioma
Sarcoidosis
May be none
Rarely diplopia (‘hemifield 
slide’)
Bitemporal hemianopia
Pituitary function 
abnormalities
Optic tract
Tumour
Inflammatory disease
Disturbed vision to one 
side of midline
Incongruous contralateral 
homonymous hemianopia
Temporal lobe
Stroke
Tumour
Inflammatory disease
Disturbed vision to one 
side of midline
Contralateral 
homonymous upper 
quadrantanopia
Memory/language 
disorders
Parietal lobe
Stroke
Tumour
Inflammatory disease
Disturbed vision to one 
side of midline
Bumping into things
Contralateral 
homonymous lower 
quadrantanopia
Contralateral sensory 
disturbance
Asymmetry of optokinetic 
nystagmus
Occipital lobe
Stroke
Tumour
Inflammatory disease
Disturbed vision to one 
side of midline
Difficulty reading
Bumping into things
Homonymous hemianopia 
(may be macula-sparing)
Damage to other structures 
supplied by posterior 
cerebral circulation
26.25  Clinical manifestations of visual field loss
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1171
The brainstem and the cerebellum are involved in 
maintaining eccentric positions of gaze. Lesions will 
therefore allow the eyes to drift back in towards primary 
position, producing nystagmus with fast component 
beats in the direction of gaze (gaze-evoked nystagmus). 
This is the most common type of ‘central’ nystagmus; it 
is most commonly bidirectional and not usually accom-
panied by vertigo. Other signs of brainstem dysfunction 
may be evident. Brainstem disease may also cause verti-
cal nystagmus.
Unilateral cerebellar lesions may result in gaze-
evoked nystagmus when looking in the direction of 
the lesion, where the fast phases are directed towards 
the side of the lesion. Cerebellar hemisphere lesions 
also cause ‘ocular dysmetria’, an overshoot of target-
directed, fast eye movements (saccades) resembling 
‘past-pointing’ in limbs.
Nystagmus also occurs as a consequence of drug 
toxicity and nutritional deficiency (e.g. thiamin). The 
severity is variable, and it may or may not result in 
visual degradation, though it may be associated with 
a sensation of movement of the visual world (oscil­
lopsia). Nystagmus may occur as a congenital phe­
nomenon, in which case both phases are equal and 
‘pendular’ rather than having alternating fast and slow 
components.
Ptosis
Various disorders may cause drooping of the eyelids 
(ptosis) and these are listed in Box 26.27.
Nystagmus
Nystagmus describes a repetitive to-and-fro move-
ment of the eyes. Usually slow drifts are the primary 
abnormal movement, each followed by fast (corrective) 
phases. Nystagmus occurs because the control systems 
of the eyes are defective, causing them to drift off target; 
corrections then become necessary to return fixation to 
the object of interest, causing nystagmus. The direction 
of the fast phase is usually designated as the direction 
of the nystagmus because it is easier to see. Nystagmus 
may be horizontal, vertical or torsional, and usually 
involves both eyes synchronously. It may be a physio-
logical phenomenon in response to sustained vestibular 
stimulation or movement of the visual world (opto­
kinetic nystagmus). There are many causes of pathologi-
cal nystagmus, the most common sites of lesions being 
the vestibular system, brainstem and cerebellum.
In vestibular lesions, damage to one of the horizontal 
canals or its connections will allow the tonic output from 
the healthy, contralateral side to cause the eyes to drift 
towards the side of the lesion. This elicits recurrent com-
pensatory fast movements away from the side of the 
lesion, manifest as unidirectional horizontal nystagmus. 
Vertical and torsional components can be seen with 
damage to other parts of the vestibular apparatus. The 
nystagmus of peripheral labyrinthine lesions is accom-
panied by vertigo and usually by nausea, vomiting and 
unsteadiness, but as the CNS habituates, the nystagmus 
disappears (fatigues) quite quickly. Central vestibular 
nystagmus is more persistent.
Site
Common pathology
Nerve(s) involved
Associated features
Brainstem
Infarction
Haemorrhage
Demyelination
Intrinsic tumour
3 (mid-brain)
6 (ponto-medullary junction)
Contralateral pyramidal signs
Ipsilateral lower motor neuron facial 
palsy
Other brainstem/cerebellar signs
Intrameningeal
Meningitis (infective/malignant)
3, 4 and/or 6
Meningism, features of primary 
disease course
Raised intracranial pressure
6
Papilloedema
3 (uncal herniation)
Features of space-occupying lesion
Aneurysms
3 (posterior communicating artery)
6 (basilar artery)
Pain
Features of subarachnoid  
haemorrhage
Cerebello-pontine angle tumour
6
8, 7, 5 nerve lesions (order of 
likelihood)
Ipsilateral cerebellar signs
Trauma
3, 4 and/or 6
Other features of trauma
Cavernous 
sinus
Infection/thrombosis
Carotid artery aneurysm
Caroticocavernous fistula
3, 4 and/or 6
May be 5 nerve involvement also
Pupil may be fixed, mid-position
(sympathetic plexus on carotid may 
also be affected)
Superior orbital 
fissure
Tumour (e.g. sphenoid wing 
meningioma)
Granuloma
3, 4 and/or 6
May be proptosis, chemosis
Orbit
Vascular (e.g. diabetes, vasculitis)
Infections
Tumour
Granuloma
Trauma
3, 4 and/or 6
Pain
Pupil often spared in vascular 3rd 
nerve palsy
26.26  Common causes of damage to cranial nerves 3, 4 and 6
Neurological disease
26
1172
Abnormal pupillary responses
Abnormal pupillary responses may arise from lesions at 
several points between the retina and brainstem. Lesions 
of the oculomotor nerve, ciliary ganglion and sympa-
thetic supply produce characteristic ipsilateral disorders 
of pupillary function. ‘Afferent’ defects result from 
damage to an optic nerve, impairing the direct response 
of a pupil to light, although leaving the consensual 
response from stimulation of the normal eye intact. 
Structural damage to the iris itself can also result in 
pupillary abnormalities. Causes are given in Box 26.28. 
An example is shown in Figure 26.21.
Mechanism
Causes
Associated clinical features
3rd nerve palsy
Isolated palsy (see Box 26.26)
Central/supranuclear lesion
Ptosis is usually complete
Extraocular muscle palsy (eye ‘down and out’)
Depending on site of lesion, other cranial nerve palsies (e.g. 4, 
5 and 6) or contralateral upper motor neuron signs
Sympathetic lesion 
(Horner’s syndrome: 
see Fig. 26.21)
Central (hypothalamus/brainstem)
Peripheral (lung apex, carotid artery 
pathology)
Idiopathic
Ptosis is partial
Lack of sweating on affected side
Depending on site of lesion, brainstem signs, signs of apical 
lung/brachial plexus disease, or ipsilateral carotid artery stroke
Myopathic
Myasthenia gravis
Dystrophia myotonica
Extraocular muscle palsies
More widespread muscle weakness, with fatigability in 
myasthenia
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia
Other characteristic features of individual causes
Other
Pseudo-ptosis (e.g. blepharospasm)
Local orbital/lid disease
Age-related levator dehiscence
Eyebrows depressed rather than raised
May be local orbital abnormality
26.27  Common causes of ptosis
Fig. 26.21  Right-sided Horner’s syndrome due to paravertebral 
metastasis at T1. There is ipsilateral partial ptosis and a small 
pupil. 
Disorder
Cause
Ophthalmological features
Associated features
3rd nerve palsy
See Box 26.27
Dilated pupil
Extraocular muscle palsy (eye is typically 
‘down and out’)
Complete ptosis
Other features of 3rd nerve palsy 
(see Box 26.27)
Horner’s syndrome 
(see Fig. 26.21)
Lesion to sympathetic 
supply
Small pupil
Partial ptosis
Iris heterochromia (if congenital)
Ipsilateral failure of sweating 
(anhidrosis)
Holmes–Adie 
syndrome (tonic pupil)
Lesion of ciliary 
ganglion (usually 
idiopathic)
Dilated pupil
Light-near dissociation (accommodate 
but do not react to light)
Vermiform movement of iris during 
contraction
Disturbance of accommodation
Generalised areflexia
Argyll Robertson pupil
Dorsal mid-brain lesion 
(syphilis or diabetes)
Small, irregular pupils
Light-near dissociation
Other features of tabes dorsalis  
(p. 1209)
Local pupillary 
damage
Trauma/inflammatory 
disease
Irregular pupils, often with adhesions to 
lens (synechiae)
Variable degree of reactivity
Other features of trauma/underlying 
inflammatory disease (e.g. cataract, 
blindness etc.)
Relative afferent 
pupillary defect 
(Marcus Gunn pupil)
Damage to optic nerve
Pupils symmetrical but degree of 
dilatation depends on which eye 
stimulated
Decreased visual acuity/colour 
vision
Central scotoma
Papilloedema/optic disc pallor
26.28  Pupillary disorders
Presenting problems in neurological disease
26
1173
trauma and degenerative conditions (e.g. Friedreich’s 
ataxia, p. 1199).
Hearing disturbance
Each cochlear organ has bilateral cortical representation, 
so unilateral hearing loss is a result of peripheral organ 
damage. Bilateral hearing dysfunction is usual, and is 
most commonly due to age-related degeneration or 
noise damage, although infection and drugs (particu-
larly diuretics and aminoglycoside antibiotics) can be a 
primary cause. Prominent deafness may suggest a mito-
chondrial disorder (see Box 26.109, p. 1229).
Bulbar symptoms – dysphagia  
and dysarthria
Swallowing is a complex activity involving the coordi-
nated action of lips, tongue, soft palate, pharynx and 
larynx, which are innervated by cranial nerves 7, 9, 10, 
11 and 12. Structural causes of dysphagia are considered 
on page 851. Neurological mechanisms are vulnerable to 
damage at different points, resulting in dysphagia that 
is usually accompanied by dysarthria. Tempo is again 
crucial: acute onset of dysphagia may occur as a result 
of brainstem stroke or a rapidly developing neuropathy, 
Papilloedema
There are several causes of swelling of the optic disc, but 
the term ‘papilloedema’ is reserved for swelling second-
ary to raised intracranial pressure, when obstructed axo-
plasmic flow from retinal ganglion cells results in 
swollen nerve fibres, which in turn cause capillary and 
venous congestion, producing papilloedema. The earli-
est sign is the cessation of venous pulsation seen at the 
disc, progression causing the disc margins to become 
red (hyperaemic). Disc margins become indistinct and 
haemorrhages may occur in the retina (Fig. 26.22). Lack 
of papilloedema never excludes raised intracranial pres-
sure. Other causes of optic disc swelling are listed in Box 
26.29. Some normal variations of disc appearance (e.g. 
optic nerve drusen) can mimic disc swelling.
Optic atrophy
Loss of nerve fibres causes the optic disc to appear pale, 
as the choroid becomes visible (Fig. 26.23). A pale disc 
(optic atrophy) follows optic nerve damage, and causes 
include previous optic neuritis or ischaemic damage, 
long-standing papilloedema, optic nerve compression, 
Fig. 26.22  Mechanism of optic disc oedema (papilloedema).  A Normal.  B Disc oedema (e.g. due to cerebral tumour).  C Fundus photograph 
of the left eye showing optic disc oedema with a small haemorrhage on the nasal side of the disc. 
Choroid
Optic disc
CSF
Optic
nerve
Central retinal vein
Meningeal sheath
Retinal
veins
Choroid
Increased
CSF pressure
Optic
nerve
Venous
dilatation
Swollen
optic disc
Axonal transport
block
Swollen axons
A
B
C
Fig. 26.23  Fundus photograph of the left eye of a patient with 
familial optic atrophy. Note marked pallor of optic disc. 
Raised intracranial pressure (papilloedema)
•	 Cerebral mass lesion (tumour, abscess)
•	 Obstructive hydrocephalus
•	 Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Obstruction of ocular venous drainage
•	 Central retinal vein occlusion
•	 Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Systemic disorders affecting retinal vessels
•	 Hypertension
•	 Vasculitis
•	 Hypercapnia
Optic nerve damage
•	 Demyelination (optic neuritis/papillitis)
•	 Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy
•	 Anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy
•	 Toxins (e.g. methanol)
•	 Infiltration of optic disc
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Glioma
•	 Lymphoma
26.29  Common causes of optic disc swelling
Neurological disease
26
1174
Pseudobulbar
Bulbar
Genetic
–
Kennedy’s disease (X-linked bulbospinal neuronopathy)
Vascular
Bilateral hemisphere (lacunar) infarction
Medullary infarction (see Box 26.3, p. 1148)
Degenerative
Motor neuron disease (p. 1200)
Motor neuron disease
Syringobulbia
Inflammatory/infective
Multiple sclerosis (p. 1188)
Cerebral vasculitis
Myasthenia (p. 1226)
Guillain–Barré syndrome (p. 1224)
Poliomyelitis (p. 1207)
Lyme disease (p. 334)
Vasculitis
Neoplastic
High brainstem tumours
Brainstem glioma
Malignant meningitis
26.30  Causes of pseudobulbar and bulbar palsy
such as Guillain–Barré syndrome or diphtheria. Inter-
mittent fatigable muscle weakness (including dys-
phagia) would suggest myasthenia gravis. Dysphagia 
developing over weeks or months may be seen in motor 
neuron disease, polymyositis, basal meningitis and 
inflammatory brainstem disease. More slowly develop-
ing dysphagia suggests a myopathy or possibly a brain-
stem or skull-base tumour.
Pathologies affecting lower cranial nerves (9, 10, 11 
and 12) frequently manifest bilaterally, producing 
dysphagia and dysarthria. The term ‘bulbar palsy’ is 
used to describe lower motor neuron lesions, either 
within the medulla or outside the brainstem. The tongue 
is wasted and fasciculating, and palatal movement is 
reduced.
Upper motor neuron innervation of swallowing is 
bilateral, so persistent dysphagia is unusual with a uni-
lateral upper motor lesion (the exception being in the 
acute stages of, for example, a hemispheric stroke). 
Widespread lesions above the medulla will cause upper 
motor neuron bulbar paralysis, known as ‘pseudobulbar 
palsy’. Here the tongue is small and contracted, and 
moves slowly; the jaw jerk is brisk. Causes of bulbar and 
pseudobulbar palsies are shown in Box 26.30.
Bladder, bowel and sexual disturbance
Whilst isolated disturbances of bladder, bowel and 
sexual function are rarely the sole presenting features 
of neurological disease, they are common complica-
tions of many chronic disorders such as multiple sclero-
sis, stroke and dementia, and are frequently found post 
head injury. Abnormalities in these functions con­
siderably reduce quality of life for patients. Incontinence 
and its management are discussed elsewhere (pp. 472, 
918 and 175).
Bladder dysfunction
The anatomy and physiology involved in controlling 
bladder functions are discussed on page 466 but it 
is worth emphasising the role of the pontine micturi­
tion centre, which is itself under higher control via 
inputs from the pre-frontal cortex, mid-brain and 
hypothalamus.
In the absence of conscious control (e.g. in coma or 
dementia), distension of the bladder to near-capacity 
evokes reflex detrusor contraction (analogous to the 
muscle stretch reflex), and reciprocal changes in sympa-
thetic activation and relaxation of the distal sphincter 
result in coordinated bladder emptying.
Damage to the lower motor neuron pathways (the 
pelvic and pudendal nerves) produces a flaccid bladder 
and sphincter with overflow incontinence, often accom-
panied by loss of pudendal sensation. Such damage may 
be due to disease of the conus medullaris or sacral nerve 
roots, either within the dura (as in inflammatory or car-
cinomatous meningitis) or as they pass through the 
sacrum (trauma or malignancy), or due to damage to the 
nerves themselves in the pelvis (infection, haematoma, 
trauma or malignancy).
Damage to the pons or spinal cord results in an 
‘upper motor neuron’ pattern of bladder dysfunction 
due to uncontrolled over-activity of the parasympathetic 
supply. The bladder is small and highly sensitive to 
being stretched. This results in frequency, urgency and 
urge incontinence. Loss of the coordinating control of 
the pontine micturition centre will also result in the phe-
nomenon of detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia, in which 
detrusor contraction and sphincter relaxation are not 
coordinated; the spastic bladder will often try to empty 
against a closed sphincter. This manifests as both 
urgency and an inability to pass urine, which is distress-
ing and painful. The resultant incomplete bladder 
empty­ing predisposes to urinary infection, and the 
prolonged high bladder pressure may result in renal 
failure; post-micturition bladder ultrasound may 
confirm incomplete bladder emptying. More severe 
lesions of the spinal cord, as in spinal cord compression 
or trauma, can result in painless urinary retention, as 
bladder sensation, normally carried in the lateral spino­
thalamic tracts, will be cut off.
Damage to the frontal lobes gives rise to loss of aware­
ness of bladder fullness and consequent incontinence. 
Coexisting cognitive impairment may result in inappro-
priate micturition. These features are seen typically in 
hydrocephalus, frontal tumours, dementia and bifrontal 
subdural haematomas.
When a patient presents with bladder symptoms, it 
is important to try to localise the lesion on the basis 
of history and examination, remembering that most 
bladder problems are not neurological unless there are 
overt neurological signs. Clinical features and manage-
ment are summarised in Box 26.31.
Functional symptoms
26
1175
Rectal dysfunction
The rectum has an excitatory cholinergic input from the 
parasympathetic sacral outflow, and inhibitory sympa-
thetic supply similar to the bladder. Continence depends 
largely on skeletal muscle contraction in the puborectalis 
and pelvic floor muscles supplied by the pudendal 
nerves, as well as the internal and external anal sphinc-
ters. Damage to the autonomic components usually 
causes constipation (a common early symptom in 
Parkinson’s disease) but diabetic neuropathy can be 
associated with diarrhoea. Lesions affecting the conus 
medullaris, the somatic S2–4 roots and the pudendal 
nerves may cause faecal incontinence.
Erectile failure and  
ejaculatory failure
These related functions are under autonomic control via 
the pelvic nerves (parasympathetic, S2–4) and hypogas-
tric nerves (sympathetic, L1–2). Descending influences 
from the cerebrum are important for erection, but it can 
occur as a reflex phenomenon in response to genital 
stimulation. Erection is largely parasympathetic, and 
may be impaired by a number of drugs, including 
anticholinergic, antihypertensive and antidepressant 
agents. Sympathetic activity is important for ejaculation, 
and may be inhibited by α-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(α-blockers). For further information on erectile failure, 
see page 474.
Personality change
While this is often due to psychiatric illness, neuro­
logical conditions that alter the function of the frontal 
lobes can cause personality change and mood disorder 
(see Box 26.2, p. 1142). Personality change due to a 
frontal lobe disorder may occur as the result of structural 
damage due to stroke, trauma, tumour or hydrocepha-
lus. The nature of any change may help localise the 
lesion.
Patients with mesial frontal lesions become increas-
ingly withdrawn, unresponsive and mute (abulic), often 
in association with urinary incontinence, gait apraxia 
and an increase in tone known as gegenhalten, in which 
Site of lesion
Result
Treatment
Atonic (lower 
motor neuron)
Lesions of sacral segments of 
cord (conus medullaris)
Lesions of sacral roots and nerves
Loss of detrusor contraction
Difficulty initiating micturition
Bladder distension with overflow
Intermittent self-catheterisation
In-dwelling catheterisation
Hypertonic (upper 
motor neuron)
Pyramidal tract lesion in spinal 
cord or brainstem
Urgency with urge incontinence
Bladder sphincter incoordination 
(dyssynergia)
Incomplete bladder emptying
Anticholinergics:
Solifenacin
Tolterodine
Imipramine
Intermittent self-catheterisation
Cortical
Post-central
Pre-central
Frontal
Loss of awareness of bladder  
fullness
Difficulty initiating micturition
Inappropriate micturition
Loss of social control
Intermittent or in-dwelling 
catheterisation
26.31  Neurogenic bladder: clinical features and treatment
the patient varies the resistance to movement in propor-
tion to the force exerted by the examiner.
Patients with lesions of the dorsolateral pre-frontal 
cortex develop a dysexecutive syndrome, which involves 
difficulties with speech, motor planning and organisa-
tion. Those with orbitofrontal lesions of the frontal lobes, 
in contrast, become disinhibited, displaying grandiosity 
or irresponsible behaviour. Memory is substantially 
intact but frontal release signs may emerge, such as a 
grasp reflex, palmomental response or pout. Proximity 
to the olfactory bulb and tracts means that inferior 
frontal lobe tumours may be associated with anosmia.
Disturbance to the cortical areas responsible for 
speech or memory can result in changes that may be 
interpreted as changes in personality.
Sleep disturbance
Disturbances of sleep are common and are not usually 
due to neurological disease. Patients may complain of 
insomnia (difficulty sleeping), excessive daytime sleepi-
ness, disturbed behaviour during night-time sleep, para-
somnia (sleep walking and talking, or night terrors) or 
disturbing subjective experiences during sleep and/or 
its onset (nightmares, hypnagogic hallucinations, sleep 
paralysis). A careful history (from the bed-partner as 
well as the patient) usually allows specific causes of 
sleep disturbance to be identified and these are dis-
cussed in more detail on page 1187.
Psychiatric disorders
Psychiatric disorders are described in Chapter 10 but 
may cause or result from neurological problems. Care is 
needed in their identification, as effective management 
will help the underlying neurological illness.
FUNCTIONAL SYMPTOMS
Many patients presenting with neurological symptoms 
do not have a defined neurological disease and are best 
described as having functional symptoms (p. 236). Some 
Neurological disease
26
1176
and patients often become convinced of a serious under-
lying condition. Muscular spasms may worsen this in 
some patients.
Clinical features
The pain of tension headache is usually characterised 
as ‘dull’, ‘tight’ or like a ‘pressure’, and there may be 
a sensation of a band round the head or pressure at 
the vertex. It is of constant character and generalised, 
but often radiates forwards from the occipital region. 
In contrast to migraine, the pain can remain unabated 
for weeks or months without interruption, although 
the severity may vary, and there is no associated vomit-
ing or photophobia. Activities are usually continued 
throughout, and the pain may be less noticeable when 
the patient is occupied. The pain is usually less severe 
in the early part of the day, becoming more troublesome 
as the day goes on. Tenderness may be present over the 
skull vault or in the occiput but is easily distinguished 
from the triggered pains of trigeminal neuralgia and the 
exquisite tenderness of temporal arteritis. Analgesics 
may be taken with chronic regularity despite little effect, 
and may serve to perpetuate the symptoms (see ‘Medi-
cation overuse headache’ below).
Management
Most benefit is given by providing a careful assessment, 
followed by discussion of likely precipitants and reas-
surance that the prognosis is good. Excessive use of 
analgesia, particularly those containing codeine, may 
maintain and exacerbate the headache (analgesic head-
ache). Physiotherapy (with muscle relaxation and stress 
management) may help and low-dose amitriptyline 
can provide benefit. There is evidence that patients 
benefit from a perception that their problem has been 
taken seriously and rigorously assessed. Investigation 
may contribute to such reassurance, especially if con-
cerns about an underlying lesion are strong, but patients 
should understand the purpose and likely outcome of 
such imaging.
Migraine
Migraine usually appears before middle age; it affects 
about 20% of females and 6% of males at some point in 
life. Some patients assume that migraine is a term 
encompassing any severe headache but it has a charac-
teristic presentation, discussed below.
Pathophysiology
The cause of migraine is unknown but there is increas­
ing evidence that the aura (see below) is due to dys­
function of ion channels causing a spreading front of 
cortical depolarisation (excitation) followed by hyper­
polarisation (depression of activity). This process (the 
‘spreading depression of Leão’) spreads over the cortex 
at a rate of about 3 mm/minute, corresponding to 
the aura’s symptomatic spread. The headache phase is 
associated with vasodilatation of extracranial vessels 
and may be relayed by hypothalamic activity. Acti­
vation of the trigeminovascular system is probably 
important. A genetic contribution is implied by fre-
quently positive family history, and similar phenomena 
occurring in disorders such as CADASIL (p. 1242). The 
female preponderance and the frequency of migraine 
attacks at certain points in the menstrual cycle also 
of these are psychogenic (or conversion) disorders. Such 
patients often have unexplained symptoms affecting 
multiple systems and a long list of consultations and 
negative tests from other medical specialties when they 
present. Considering the possibility of a functional 
origin may save the patient further unnecessary, inva-
sive and inconvenient investigation and anxiety.
Weakness and sensory symptoms predominate 
among functional symptoms, but pain or loss of con-
sciousness can occur. Associated symptoms, such as 
tiredness, lethargy, poor concentration, bowel upset 
(irritable bowel syndrome) and gynaecological com-
plaints, are common. A functional origin of neurological 
problems should always be considered, as it can allow 
for more rapid diagnosis and avoid unnecessarily 
painful or hazardous investigation. Some clinical fea-
tures may hint at a functional origin for symptoms (Box 
26.32). It is the clinician’s job to elicit the context of the 
patient’s symptoms in a sensitive and non-judgemental 
way. Whatever the illness, it is important to acknowl-
edge that mood and sleep disturbance will exacerbate 
neurological symptoms, thus increasing disability 
resulting from neurological disorders. The best practi-
tioners have the skill to carry the patient with them 
when describing the patterns of behaviour contributing 
to symptoms.
Assessment to detect an underlying or exacerbating 
mood disorder is vital in all patients, ensuring that 
depression and anxiety are managed to minimise their 
secondary effects on neurological symptoms.
HEADACHE SYNDROMES
Headaches may be classified as primary or secondary, 
depending on the underlying cause (see Box 26.10, 
p. 1156). Secondary headache may be due to structural, 
infective, inflammatory or vascular conditions, which 
are discussed later in this chapter. The primary head-
ache syndromes are described here.
Tension-type headache
This is the most common type of headache and is 
experienced to some degree by the majority of the 
population.
Pathophysiology
Tension headache is incompletely understood. Emotions 
and anxiety are common precipitants and there is some-
times an associated depressive illness. Anxiety about the 
headache itself may lead to continuation of symptoms, 
•	 Situational provocation
•	 Associated psychological disorders
Anxiety
Depression
•	 Lack of anatomical coherence to neurological symptoms
•	 Florid or bizarre descriptions of individual symptoms
•	 History of other medically unexplained symptoms
•	 Hoover’s sign (p. 1163)
•	 Predisposing history of childhood neglect or abuse
26.32  Clinical features suggestive of 
functional disorder
Headache syndromes
26
1177
treatment for either oral contraception or hormone 
replacement, although the increased risk of ischaemic 
stroke is minimal.
Medication overuse headache
With increasing availability of over-the-counter medica-
tion, headache syndromes perpetuated by analgesia 
intake are becoming much more common. Medication 
overuse headache (MOH) can complicate any other 
headache syndrome, but is especially associated with 
migraine and tension headache. The medications that 
are the most common culprits are compound analgesia 
(particularly codeine and other opiate-containing prepa-
rations) and triptans, and MOH is usually associated 
with use on more than 10–15 days per month.
Management is by withdrawal of the responsible 
analgesics; patients should be warned that the initial 
effect will be to exacerbate the headache. Migraine 
prophylactics may be helpful in reducing the rebound 
headaches. In severe cases, hospital admission with or 
without a course of corticosteroids may be helpful.
Cluster headache
Cluster headaches (also known as migrainous neuralgia) 
are much less common than migraine. There is a 5 : 1 
male predominance and onset is usually in the third 
decade.
Pathophysiology
The cause is unknown, but this type of headache differs 
from migraine in its character, lack of genetic predis­
position, lack of provoking dietary factors, opposing 
gender imbalance and different drug effect. Functional 
imaging studies have suggested abnormal hypothalamic 
activity. Patients are more often smokers with a higher 
than average alcohol consumption.
Clinical features
Cluster headache is strikingly periodic, featuring runs of 
identical headaches beginning at the same hour for 
weeks at a time (the eponymous ‘cluster’). Patients may 
experience either one or several attacks within a 24-hour 
period. Cluster headache causes severe, unilateral peri-
orbital pain with autonomic features, such as unilateral 
lacrimation, nasal congestion and conjunctival injection 
(occasionally with the other features of Horner’s syn-
drome). The pain, though severe, is characteristically 
brief (30–90 minutes). In contrast to the behaviour of 
those with migraine, patients are often highly agitated 
during the headache phase. The cluster period is typi-
cally a few weeks, followed by remission for months 
to years, but a small proportion do not experience 
remission.
Management
Acute attacks can usually be halted by subcutaneous 
injections of sumatriptan or by inhalation of 100% 
oxygen. The brevity of the attack probably prevents 
other migraine therapies from being effective. Migraine 
prophylaxis is often ineffective too but attacks can be 
prevented in some patients by sodium valproate, vera-
pamil, methysergide or short courses of oral cortico­
steroids. Patients with severe debilitating clusters can be 
helped with lithium therapy, although this requires 
monitoring (p. 245).
suggest hormonal influences. Oestrogen-containing oral 
contraception sometimes exacerbates migraine, and 
increases the small risk of stroke in patients who suffer 
from migraine with aura. Doctors and patients often 
over-estimate the role of dietary precipitants such as 
cheese, chocolate or red wine. When psychological 
factors contribute, the migraine attack often occurs after 
a period of stress, being more likely on Friday evening 
at the end of the working week or at the beginning of a 
holiday.
Clinical features
Some patients report a prodrome of malaise, irritability 
or behavioural change for some hours or days. Around 
20% of patients experience an aura, and are said to have 
migraine with aura (previously known as classical 
migraine). The aura is most often visual, consisting of 
fortification spectra, which are shimmering, silvery 
zigzag lines that march across the visual fields for up to 
40 minutes, sometimes leaving a trail of temporary 
visual field loss (scotoma). In some there is a sensory 
aura of tingling followed by numbness, spreading 
over 20–30 minutes, from one part of the body to 
another. Dominant hemisphere involvement may also 
cause transient speech disturbance. The 80% of patients 
with characteristic headache but no ‘aura’ are said 
to have migraine without aura (previously called 
‘common’ migraine).
Migraine headache is usually severe and throbbing, 
with photophobia, phonophobia and vomiting lasting 
from 4 to 72 hours. Movement makes the pain worse, 
and patients prefer to lie in a quiet, dark room.
Caution should be taken in ascribing the cause of an 
individual’s limb weakness or isolated aura without 
headache to migraine. In such cases, other structural 
disorders of the brain, or even focal epilepsy, need to be 
considered.
In a smaller number of patients, the symptoms of the 
aura do not resolve, leaving more permanent neuro­
logical disturbance. This persistent migrainous aura may 
occur with or without evidence of brain infarction.
Management
Avoidance of identified triggers or exacerbating factors 
(such as the combined contraceptive pill) may prevent 
attacks. Treatment of an acute attack consists of simple 
analgesia with aspirin, paracetamol or non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents. Nausea may require an 
antiemetic such as metoclopramide or domperidone. 
Severe attacks can be aborted by one of the increasing 
number of ‘triptans’ (e.g. sumatriptan), which are potent 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) agonists. These can be 
administered orally, by subcutaneous injection or by 
nasal spray. Care should be taken to avoid accelerating 
use. Caution is needed with ergotamine preparations 
since they may lead to dependence. Overuse of any 
analgesia, including triptans, may contribute to associ-
ated medication overuse headache.
If attacks are frequent (more than 3–4 per month), 
prophylaxis should be considered. Many drugs can be 
used, but the most frequently used are vasoactive drugs 
(calcium channel blockers and β-adrenoceptor ant­
agonists (β-blockers)), antidepressants (amitriptyline, 
dosulepin) and anti-epileptic drugs (valproate, topiram-
ate). Women with aura should avoid oestrogen 
Neurological disease
26
1178
the trigeminal root is said to have a 90% success rate. 
Otherwise, localised injection of alcohol or phenol into 
a peripheral branch of the nerve may be effective.
Headaches associated with 
specific activities
These usually affect men in their thirties and forties. 
Patients develop a sudden, severe headache with exer-
tion, including sexual activity. There is usually no vom-
iting and no neck stiffness, and the headache lasts less 
than 10–15 minutes, though a less severe dullness may 
persist for some hours. Subarachnoid haemorrhage 
needs to be excluded by CT and/or CSF examination 
(see Fig. 27.12, p. 1246) after a first event. The pathogen-
esis of these headaches is unknown. Although frighten-
ing, attacks are usually brief and patients may only need 
reassurance and simple analgesia for the residual head-
ache. The syndrome may recur, and prevention may be 
necessary with propranolol or indometacin.
Other headache syndromes
A number of rare headache syndromes produce pains 
about the eye similar to cluster headaches (Box 26.33). 
These include chronic paroxysmal hemicrania and 
SUNCT (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform head-
aches with conjunctival injection and tearing). The rec-
ognition of these syndromes is useful since they often 
respond to specific treatments such as indometacin.
EPILEPSY
A seizure can be defined as the occurrence of signs and/
or symptoms due to abnormal, excessive or synchronous 
Trigeminal neuralgia
This is characterised by unilateral lancinating facial 
pain, most commonly involving the second and/or third 
divisions of the trigeminal nerve territory, usually in 
patients over the age of 50 years.
Pathophysiology
Trigeminal neuralgia is thought to be caused by an 
irritative lesion involving the trigeminal root zone, in 
some cases an aberrant loop of artery. Other compres-
sive lesions, usually benign, are occasionally found. 
Trigeminal neuralgia associated with multiple sclerosis 
may result from a plaque of demyelination in the 
brainstem.
Clinical features
The pain is repetitive, severe and very brief. It may be 
triggered by touch, a cold wind or eating. Physical signs 
are usually absent, although the spasms may make the 
patient wince and sit silently (tic douloureux). Similar 
symptoms may occur in multiple sclerosis or with other 
brainstem lesions, in which case there may be associated 
sensory changes in the trigeminal nerve territory or else-
where. There is a tendency for the condition to remit and 
relapse over many years.
Management
The pain usually responds at least partially to car-
bamazepine. It is wise to start with a low dose and 
increase gradually, according to effect. In patients who 
cannot tolerate carbamazepine, gabapentin, pregabalin, 
amitriptyline or steroids may be effective. The possibil-
ity of surgical treatment should be entertained, espe-
cially where response is incomplete in younger patients. 
Decompression of the vascular loop encroaching on 
Character of pain
Duration
Location
Comment
Ice pick
Stabbing
Very brief (split-second)
Variable, usually 
temporoparietal
Benign, more common in 
migraine
Ice cream
Sharp, severe
30–120 secs
Bitemporal/occipital
Obvious trigger by cold 
stimuli
Exertional/
coital
Bursting, thunderclap
Severe for mins then less 
severe for hrs
Generalised
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 
needs to be excluded
Cough
Bursting
Secs to mins
Occipital or generalised
Intracranial pathology 
needs to be excluded 
(especially craniocervical 
junction)
Cluster 
headache 
(migrainous 
neuralgia)
Severe unilateral, with 
ptosis, tearing, conjunctival 
injection, unilateral nasal 
congestion
30–90 mins 1–3 times per 
day
Periorbital
Usually in men, occurring 
in clusters over weeks/
months
Chronic 
paroxysmal 
hemicrania
Severe unilateral with 
cluster headache-like 
autonomic features (see 
above)
5–20 mins, frequently 
through day
Periorbital/temporal
Usually in women, 
responds to indometacin
SUNCT*
Severe, sharp, triggered by 
touch or neck movements
15–120 secs, repetitive 
through day
Periorbital
May respond to 
carbamazepine
*Short-lasting, Unilateral, Neuralgiform headache with Conjunctival injection, Tearing, rhinorrhoea and forehead sweating.
26.33  Benign paroxysmal headaches
Epilepsy
26
1179
potentials. In vivo, epileptic cortex shows repetitive dis-
charges involving large groups of neurons.
Seizures may be related to a localised disturbance in 
the cortex, becoming manifest in the first instance as 
focal seizures. Any disturbance of cortical architecture 
and function can precipitate this, whether focal infec-
tion, tumour, hamartoma or trauma-related scarring. If 
focal seizures remain localised, the symptoms experi-
enced depend on which cortical area is affected. If areas 
in the temporal lobes become involved, then awareness 
of the environment becomes impaired but without asso-
ciated tonic–clonic movements. When both hemispheres 
are involved, either at onset or after spread, the seizure 
becomes generalised (Fig. 26.24).
In seizures that are generalised at onset, the abnormal 
activity probably originates in the central mechanisms 
controlling cortical activation (see Fig. 26.24) and spreads 
rapidly. Such epilepsies constitute around 30% of all 
epilepsy, and are likely to reflect widespread distur-
bance of structure or function. Animal models have 
revealed mutations in genes for ion channels and recep-
tors that cause seizures. In humans, many generalised 
epilepsies will have a genetic basis, and these almost 
always become apparent before the age of 35.
Seizure activity is usually apparent on EEG as 
spike and wave discharges (see Fig. 26.14, p. 1152). 
Other generalised seizure activity may involve merely 
brief loss of awareness (absence seizures), single jerks 
(myoclonus) or loss of tone (atonic seizures), as detailed 
in Box 26.34.
neuronal activity in the brain. ‘Epilepsy’ is the tendency 
to have unprovoked seizures. The lifetime risk of seizure 
is about 5%, although incidence is highest at the extremes 
of age. Whilst the prevalence of active epilepsy in Euro-
pean countries is about 0.5%, the figure in developing 
countries may be higher because of parasitic illnesses 
such as cysticercosis (p. 380).
Historical terms such as ‘grand mal’ (implying tonic–
clonic seizures) and ‘petit mal’ (intended by its origina-
tors to mean ‘absence seizures’ but commonly used to 
describe ‘anything other than grand mal’) have been 
superseded. Subsequent revisions, including terms such 
as ‘complex partial’ and ‘simple partial’, have been 
imprecise and confusing, carrying little information 
about underlying pathology, treatment or prognosis. 
The modern equivalents for these terms will be given 
below, but it is preferable to adhere to the 2010 iteration 
of the International League Against Epilepsy’s classifica-
tion (Box 26.34).
Pathophysiology
To function normally, the brain must achieve an ongo­
ing balance between excitation and inhibition, in order 
to remain responsive to the environment without con-
tinued unrestrained spontaneous activity. The inhibi-
tory transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is 
particularly important, acting on ion channels to enhance 
chloride inflow and reduce the chances of action poten-
tial formation. Excitatory amino acids (glutamate and 
aspartate) allow influx of sodium and calcium, produc-
ing the opposite effect. It is likely that many seizures 
result from an imbalance between this excitation and 
inhibition. Intracellular recordings during seizures dem-
onstrate a paroxysmal depolarisation shift in neuronal 
membrane potential, predisposing to recurrent action 
Generalised seizures
•	 Tonic–clonic (in any 
combination)
•	 Absence
Typical
Atypical
Absence with special 
features
•	 Myoclonic absence
•	 Eyelid myoclonia
•	 Myoclonic
Myoclonic
Myoclonic atonic
Myoclonic tonic
•	 Clonic
•	 Tonic
•	 Atonic
Focal seizures
•	 Without impairment of consciousness or awareness (was 
‘simple partial’)
Focal motor
Focal sensory
•	 With impairment of consciousness or awareness (was 
‘complex partial’)
•	 Evolving to a bilateral, convulsive seizure (was ‘secondarily 
generalised seizure’)
Tonic
Clonic
Tonic–clonic
Unknown
•	 Epileptic spasms
26.34  Classification of seizures 
(2010 ILAE Classification)
Fig. 26.24  The pathophysiological classification of seizures.
 A A focal seizure originates from a paroxysmal discharge in a focal 
area of the cerebral cortex (often the temporal lobe); the seizure may 
subsequently spread to the rest of the brain (secondary generalisation) via 
diencephalic activating pathways.  B In primary generalised seizures the 
abnormal electrical discharges originate from the diencephalic activating 
system and spread simultaneously to all areas of the cortex. 
Focal seizure
± secondary
generalisation
Primary
generalised
seizure
A
B
Neurological disease
26
1180
Seizures arising from the anterior parts of the 
frontal lobe may produce bizarre behaviour patterns, 
including limb posturing, sleep walking, or even frenetic 
ill-directed motor activity with incoherent screaming. 
Video EEG may be necessary to differentiate these from 
psychogenic attacks (which are more common), but 
abruptness of onset, stereotyped nature, relative brevity 
and nocturnal preponderance may indicate the frontal 
onset. Causes of focal seizures are given in Box 26.36.
Generalised seizures
Tonic–clonic seizures.  An initial ‘aura’ may be experi-
enced by the patient, depending on the cortical area 
from which the seizure originates (as above). The 
patient then becomes rigid (tonic) and unconscious, 
falling heavily if standing (‘like a log’) and risking facial 
injury. During this phase, breathing stops and central 
cyanosis may occur. As cortical discharges reduce in 
frequency, the limbs produce jerking (clonic) move-
ments for a variable time. Afterwards, there is a flaccid 
state of deep coma, which can persist for some minutes. 
The patient may be confused, disorientated and/or 
amnesic after regaining consciousness. During the 
attack, urinary incontinence and tongue-biting may 
occur. A severely bitten, bleeding tongue after an 
attack of loss of consciousness is pathognomonic of a 
generalised seizure. Subsequently, the patient usually 
feels unwell and sleepy, with headache and myalgia. 
Clinical features
Seizure type and epilepsy type
To classify seizure type, the clinician should ask first 
whether there is a focal onset, and second whether the 
seizures conform to one of the recognised patterns (see 
Box 26.34). Epilepsy that starts in patients beyond their 
mid-thirties will almost invariably reflect a focal cere-
bral event. Where activity remains focal, this will be 
obvious. Even when generalised tonic–clonic seizures 
occur, seizures beginning in one cortical area will cause 
positive neurological symptoms and signs correspond-
ing to the normal function of that area. Occipital onset 
will cause visual changes (lights and blobs of colour), 
temporal lobe onset will cause false recognition (déjà 
vu), sensory strip involvement will cause sensory altera-
tion (burning, tingling), and motor strip involvement 
will cause jerking.
Patients can experience more than one type of seizure 
attack, and it is important to document each attack type 
and the patient’s age at its onset, along with its fre-
quency, duration and typical features. Any triggers 
should be identified (Box 26.35). The type of seizure, 
other clinical features and investigations can then be 
used to determine the epilepsy syndrome, as discussed 
below. Where there is doubt about the type, this is best 
stated and a full classification should be deferred until 
the evolution of the clinical features clarifies the picture.
Some patients will give a history of a previous local 
cortical insult, and it can be reasonably (but not invari-
ably) inferred that this is the seat of epileptogenesis.
Focal seizures
The classification of focal seizures is shown in Box 26.34. 
They are caused by localised cortical activity with 
retained awareness. The localisation of such symptoms 
is described above. A spreading pattern of seizure may 
occur, the abnormal sensation spreading much faster 
(in seconds) than a migrainous focal sensory attack.
Awareness may become impaired if spread occurs 
to the temporal lobes (previously ‘complex partial 
seizure’). Patients stop and stare blankly, often blinking 
repetitively, making smacking movements of their lips 
or displaying other automatisms, such as picking at their 
clothes. After a few minutes, consciousness returns but 
the patient may be muddled and feel drowsy for a 
period of up to an hour. The age of onset, preceding 
aura, longer duration and post-ictal symptoms usually 
make these easy to differentiate from childhood absence 
seizures (see below).
•	 Sleep deprivation
•	 Missed doses of anti-epileptic drugs in treated  
patients
•	 Alcohol (particularly withdrawal)
•	 Recreational drug misuse
•	 Physical and mental exhaustion
•	 Flickering lights, including TV and computer screens 
(generalised epilepsy syndromes only)
•	 Intercurrent infections and metabolic disturbances
•	 Uncommon: loud noises, music, reading, hot baths
26.35  Trigger factors for seizures
Idiopathic
•	 Benign Rolandic epilepsy of childhood
•	 Benign occipital epilepsy of childhood
Focal structural lesions
Genetic
•	 Tuberous sclerosis  
(p. 1302)
•	 Autosomal dominant frontal 
lobe epilepsy
•	 Autosomal dominant partial 
epilepsy with auditory 
features (ADPEAF)
•	 von Hippel–Lindau disease 
(p. 1216)
•	 Neurofibromatosis  
(p. 1215)
•	 Cerebral migration 
abnormalities
Infantile hemiplegia
Dysembryonic
•	 Cortical dysgenesis
•	 Sturge–Weber syndrome
Mesial temporal sclerosis (associated with febrile convulsions)
Cerebrovascular disease (Ch. 27)
•	 Intracerebral haemorrhage
•	 Cerebral infarction
•	 Arteriovenous malformation
•	 Cavernous haemangioma
Tumours (primary and secondary) (p. 1213)
Trauma (including neurosurgery)
Infective (p. 1201)
•	 Cerebral abscess 
(pyogenic)
•	 Toxoplasmosis
•	 Cysticercosis
•	 Tuberculoma
•	 Subdural empyema
•	 Encephalitis
•	 Human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)
Inflammatory
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Vasculitis
26.36  Causes of focal seizures
Epilepsy
26
1181
Tonic seizures.  These are associated with a generalised 
increase in tone and an associated loss of awareness. 
They are usually seen as part of an epilepsy syndrome 
and are unlikely to be isolated.
Clonic seizures.  Clonic seizures are similar to tonic–
clonic seizures. The clinical manifestations are similar 
but without a preceding tonic phase.
Seizures of uncertain generalised or focal nature
Epileptic spasms.  While these are highlighted in the 
classification system, they are unusual in adult practice 
and occur mainly in infancy. They signify widespread 
cortical disturbance and take the form of marked con-
tractions of the axial musculature, lasting a fraction 
of a second but recurring in clusters of 5–50, often 
on awakening.
Epilepsy syndromes
Many patients with epilepsy fall into specific patterns, 
depending on seizure type(s), age of onset and treat-
ment responsiveness: the so-called electroclinical syn-
dromes (Box 26.38). It is anticipated that genetic testing 
will ultimately demonstrate similarities in molecular 
pathophysiology.
Box 26.39 highlights the more common epilepsy syn-
dromes, which are largely of early onset and are sensi-
tive to sleep deprivation, hyperventilation, alcohol and 
Generalisation from focal seizures
•	 See Box 26.36
Genetic
•	 Inborn errors of metabolism (p. 64)
•	 Storage diseases (p. 450)
•	 Phakomatoses (e.g. tuberous sclerosis, p. 1302)
Cerebral birth injury
Hydrocephalus
Cerebral anoxia
Drugs
•	 Antibiotics: penicillin, isoniazid, metronidazole
•	 Antimalarials: chloroquine, mefloquine
•	 Ciclosporin
•	 Cardiac anti-arrhythmics: lidocaine, disopyramide
•	 Psychotropic agents: phenothiazines, tricyclic 
antidepressants, lithium
•	 Amphetamines (withdrawal)
Alcohol (especially withdrawal)
Toxins
•	 Organophosphates (sarin)
•	 Heavy metals (lead, tin)
Metabolic disease
•	 Hypocalcaemia
•	 Hyponatraemia
•	 Hypomagnesaemia
•	 Hypoglycaemia
•	 Renal failure
•	 Liver failure
Infective
•	 Post-infectious 
encephalopathy
•	 Meningitis (p. 1201)
Inflammatory
•	 Multiple sclerosis (uncommon) (p. 1188)
•	 SLE (p. 1109)
Diffuse degenerative diseases
•	 Alzheimer’s disease (uncommonly) (p. 251)
•	 Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (rarely) (p. 1211)
26.37  Causes of generalised tonic–clonic 
seizures
Witnesses are usually frightened by the event, often 
believe the person to be dying, and may struggle to give 
a clear account of the episode. Some may not describe 
the tonic or clonic phase, and may not mention cyanosis 
or tongue-biting. In less typical episodes, post-ictal con-
fusion, or sequelae such as headache or myalgia, may be 
the main pointers to the diagnosis. Causes of generalised 
tonic–clonic seizures are listed in Box 26.37.
Absence seizures.  Absence seizures (previously ‘petit 
mal’) always start in childhood. The attacks are rarely 
mistaken for focal seizures because of their brevity. They 
can occur so frequently (20–30 times a day) that they are 
mistaken for daydreaming or poor concentration in 
school.
Myoclonic seizures.  These are typically brief, jerking 
movements, predominating in the arms. In epilepsy, 
they are more marked in the morning or on awakening 
from sleep, and tend to be provoked by fatigue, alcohol 
or sleep deprivation.
Atonic seizures.  These are seizures involving brief loss 
of muscle tone, usually resulting in heavy falls with or 
without loss of consciousness. They only occur in the 
context of epilepsy syndromes that involve other forms 
of seizure.
Adolescence to adulthood
•	 Juvenile absence epilepsy (JAE)
•	 Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME)
•	 Epilepsy with generalised tonic–clonic seizures alone
•	 Progressive myoclonus epilepsies (PME)
•	 Autosomal dominant epilepsy with auditory features (ADEAF)
•	 Other familial temporal lobe epilepsies
Less specific age relationship
•	 Familial focal epilepsy with variable foci (childhood to adult)
•	 Reflex epilepsies
Distinctive constellations
•	 Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis 
(MTLE with HS)
•	 Rasmussen’s syndrome
•	 Gelastic (from the Greek word for laughter) seizures with 
hypothalamic hamartoma
•	 Hemiconvulsion–hemiplegia–epilepsy
Epilepsies with structural–metabolic causes
•	 Malformations of cortical development (hemimegalencephaly, 
heterotopias etc.)
•	 Neurocutaneous syndromes (tuberous sclerosis complex, 
Sturge–Weber etc.)
•	 Tumour
•	 Infection
•	 Trauma
•	 Angioma
•	 Perinatal insults
•	 Stroke etc.
Epilepsies of unknown cause
Conditions with epileptic seizures traditionally not diagnosed
•	 Benign neonatal seizures (BNS)
•	 Febrile seizures (FS)
26.38  Electroclinical epilepsy syndromes
Neurological disease
26
1182
confident diagnosis of a recognised epilepsy syndrome 
(e.g. juvenile myoclonic epilepsy) can be made. While 
CT will exclude a major structural cause of epilepsy, 
MRI is required to demonstrate subtle changes such as 
hippocampal sclerosis, which may direct or inform 
surgical intervention.
Management
It is important to explain the nature and cause of sei-
zures to patients and their relatives, and to instruct rela-
tives in the first aid management of seizures (Box 26.42). 
photic stimulation. Epilepsies that do not fit into any of 
these diagnostic categories can be delineated first on the 
basis of the presence or absence of a known structural 
or metabolic condition (presumed cause), and then on 
the basis of the primary mode of seizure onset (general-
ised versus focal).
Investigations
Single seizure
All patients with transient loss of consciousness should 
have a 12-lead ECG. Where seizure is suspected or defi-
nite, patients should have imaging with either CT or 
MRI, although the yield is low unless focal signs are 
present. EEG may help to assess prognosis once a firm 
diagnosis has been made. The recurrence rate after a first 
seizure is approximately 40%, and most recurrent attacks 
occur within a month or two of the first. Further seizures 
are less likely if an identified trigger can be avoided (see 
Box 26.35).
Other investigations for infective, toxic and metabolic 
causes (Box 26.40) may be appropriate. An EEG per-
formed immediately after a seizure may be more helpful 
in showing focal features than if performed after a delay.
Epilepsy
The same investigations are required in a patient with 
suspected epilepsy (Box 26.40). Where more than one 
seizure has occurred, an EEG may help to establish the 
type of epilepsy and guide therapy. As imaging becomes 
more sensitive, focal changes are picked up more often. 
Investigations should be revisited if the epilepsy is 
intractable to treatment.
Inter-ictal EEG is abnormal in only about 50% of 
patients with recurrent seizures, so it cannot be used to 
exclude epilepsy. The sensitivity can be increased to 
about 85% by prolonging recording time and including 
a period of natural or drug-induced sleep, but this 
does not replace a well-taken history. Ambulatory EEG 
recording or video EEG monitoring may help with dif-
ferentiation of epilepsy from other attack disorders if 
these are sufficiently frequent.
Indications for imaging are summarised in Box 26.41. 
Imaging cannot establish a diagnosis of epilepsy but 
identifies any structural cause. It is not required if a 
Age of onset
Type of seizure
EEG features
Treatment
Prognosis
Childhood absence 
epilepsy
4–8 yrs
Frequent brief 
absences
3/sec spike and wave
Ethosuximide
Sodium valproate
Levetiracetam
40% develop GTCS, 
80% remit in adulthood
Juvenile absence 
epilepsy
10–15 yrs
Less frequent 
absences than 
childhood absence
Poly-spike and wave
Sodium valproate
Levetiracetam
80% develop GTCS, 
80% seizure-free in 
adulthood
Juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy
15–20 yrs
GTCS, absences, 
morning myoclonus
Poly-spike and wave, 
photosensitivity
Sodium valproate
Levetiracetam
90% remit with AEDs 
but relapse if AED 
withdrawn
GTCS on awakening
10–25 yrs
GTCS, sometimes 
myoclonus
Spike and wave on 
waking and sleep 
onset
Sodium valproate
Levetiracetam
65% controlled with 
AEDs but relapse off 
treatment
(AED = anti-epileptic drug; GTCS = generalised tonic–clonic seizures)
26.39  Common epilepsy syndromes
•	 Epilepsy starting after the age of 16 yrs
•	 Seizures having focal features clinically
•	 EEG showing a focal seizure source
•	 Control of seizures difficult or deteriorating
26.41  Indications for brain imaging in epilepsy
From where is the epilepsy arising?
•	 Standard EEG
•	 Sleep EEG
•	 EEG with special electrodes 
(foramen ovale, subdural)
What is the cause of the epilepsy?
Structural lesion?
•	 CT
•	 MRI
Metabolic disorder?
•	 Urea and electrolytes
•	 Liver function tests
•	 Blood glucose
•	 Serum calcium, magnesium
Inflammatory or infective disorder?
•	 Full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive 
protein
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 Serology for syphilis, HIV, collagen disease
•	 CSF examination
Are the attacks truly epileptic?
•	 Ambulatory EEG
•	 Videotelemetry
26.40  Investigation of epilepsy
Epilepsy
26
1183
Anticonvulsant therapy
Anticonvulsant drug treatment (anti-epileptic drugs, or 
AEDs) should be considered after more than one unpro-
voked seizure. The decision to start treatment should be 
shared with the patient, to enhance compliance. A wide 
range of drugs is available. These agents either increase 
inhibitory neurotransmission in the brain or alter neuro-
nal sodium channels to prevent abnormally rapid trans-
mission of impulses. In the majority of patients, full 
control is achieved with a single drug. Dose regimens 
should be kept as simple as possible. Guidelines are 
listed in Box 26.45. For seizures of focal onset, one large 
Many people with epilepsy feel stigmatised and may 
become unnecessarily isolated from work and social life. 
It should be emphasised that epilepsy is a common dis-
order that affects 0.5–1% of the population, and that full 
control of seizures can be expected in approximately 
70% of patients (Box 26.43).
Immediate care
Little can or needs to be done for a person during a 
major seizure except for first aid and common-sense 
manœuvres to limit damage or secondary complications 
(see Box 26.42). Advice should be given that on no 
account should anything be inserted into the patient’s 
mouth. The management of status epilepticus is 
described on page 1159.
Lifestyle advice
Patients should be advised to avoid activities where 
they might place themselves or others at risk if they 
have a seizure. This applies at work, at home and 
at leisure. At home, only shallow baths (or showers) 
should be taken. Prolonged cycle journeys should be 
discouraged until reasonable freedom from seizures 
has been achieved. Activities requiring prolonged prox-
imity to water (swimming, fishing or boating) should 
always be carried out in the company of someone 
who is aware of the risks and the potential need for 
rescue measures. Driving regulations vary between 
countries, and the patient should be made aware of these 
(Box 26.44). Certain occupations, such as firefighter or 
airline pilot, are not open to anyone who has a previous 
or active diagnosis of epilepsy; further information is 
available from epilepsy support organisations.
The recognised mortality of epilepsy should be dis-
cussed at around the time of diagnosis. This should be 
done with care and sensitivity, and with the aim of moti-
vating the patient to adapt habits and lifestyle to opti-
mise epilepsy control.
•	 Move person away from danger (fire, water, machinery, 
furniture)
•	 After convulsions cease, turn person into ‘recovery’ position 
(semi-prone)
•	 Ensure airway is clear but do NOT insert anything in mouth 
(tongue-biting occurs at seizure onset and cannot be 
prevented by observers)
•	 If convulsions continue for more than 5 mins or recur without 
person regaining consciousness, summon urgent medical 
attention
•	 Do not leave person alone until fully recovered (drowsiness 
and confusion can persist for up to 1 hr)
26.42  How to administer first aid for seizures
•	 50% are seizure-free, without drugs, for the previous 5 yrs
•	 20% are seizure-free for the previous 5 yrs but continue to 
take medication
•	 30% continue to have seizures in spite of anti-epileptic 
therapy
26.43  Epilepsy: outcome after 20 years
Private use
Single seizure
•	 Cease driving until at least 6 mths have passed without 
recurrence. Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority (DVLA) 
may restore a full licence sooner if recurrence risk is low
Epilepsy (i.e. more than one seizure over the age of 5 yrs)
•	 Cease driving immediately
•	 Licence restored when patient is free from all types of 
seizure for 1 yr or seizures have occurred exclusively during 
sleep for a period of at least 3 yrs
•	 Licence will require renewal every 3 yrs thereafter until 
patient is seizure-free for 10 yrs
Withdrawal of anticonvulsants
•	 Cease driving during withdrawal period and for 6 mths 
thereafter
Vocational drivers (heavy goods and public service vehicles)
•	 No licence permitted if any seizure has occurred after the 
age of 5 yrs until patient is off medication and seizure-free 
for more than 10 yrs, and has no potentially epileptogenic 
brain lesion
26.44  UK driving regulations
•	 Start with one first-line drug (see Box 26.46)
•	 Start at a low dose; gradually increase dose until effective 
control of seizures is achieved or side-effects develop (drug 
levels may be helpful)
•	 Optimise compliance (use minimum number of doses  
per day)
•	 If first drug fails (seizures continue or side-effects develop), 
start second first-line drug, followed if possible by gradual 
withdrawal of first
•	 If second drug fails (seizures continue or side-effects 
develop), start second-line drug in combination with 
preferred first-line drug at maximum tolerated dose (beware 
interactions)
•	 If this combination fails (seizures continue or side-effects 
develop), replace second-line drug with alternative 
second-line drug
•	 If this combination fails, check compliance and reconsider 
diagnosis (Are events seizures? Occult lesion? Treatment 
compliance/alcohol/drugs confounding response?)
•	 Consider alternative, non-drug treatments (e.g. epilepsy 
surgery, vagal nerve stimulation)
•	 Use minimum number of drugs in combination at any one time
26.45  Guidelines for anticonvulsant therapy
Neurological disease
26
1184
study suggests that lamotrigine is the best-tolerated 
monotherapy, which, alongside its favourable side-
effect profile and relative lack of pharmacokinetic inter-
actions, makes it a good first-line drug, although caution 
must be exercised with oral contraceptive use. Unclassi-
fied or specific syndromes respond best to valproate. 
Problems in pregnancy mean that sodium valproate 
should not be used in women of reproductive age unless 
the benefits outweigh the risks. The first choice should 
be an established first-line drug (Box 26.46), with more 
recently introduced drugs as second choice.
Monitoring therapy
Some practitioners confuse epilepsy care with serum 
level monitoring. The newer drugs have much more 
predictable pharmacokinetics than the older ones, and 
the only indication for measuring serum levels is if there 
is doubt that the patient is taking the medication. Blood 
levels need to be interpreted carefully, and dose changes 
made to treat the patient rather than to bring a serum 
level into the ‘therapeutic range’. Some centres advocate 
serum level monitoring during pregnancy (notably with 
lamotrigine) but the evidence of benefit for this is not 
strong.
Epilepsy surgery
Some patients with drug-resistant epilepsy benefit from 
surgical resection of epileptogenic brain tissue. Less 
invasive treatments, including vagal nerve stimulation 
or deep brain stimulation, may also be helpful in some 
patients. All those who continue to experience seizures 
despite appropriate drug treatment should be consid-
ered for surgical treatment. Planning such interventions 
will require intensive specialist assessment and investi-
gation to identify the site of seizure onset and the dis-
pensability of any targets for resection, i.e. whether the 
area of brain involved is necessary for a critical function 
such as vision or motor function.
Withdrawing anticonvulsant therapy
Withdrawal of medication may be considered after a 
patient has been seizure-free for more than 2 years. 
Childhood-onset epilepsy, particularly classical absence 
seizures, carries the best prognosis for successful drug 
withdrawal. Other epilepsy syndromes, such as juvenile 
myoclonic epilepsy, have a marked tendency to recur 
after drug withdrawal.
Seizures that begin in adult life, particularly those 
with partial features, are also likely to recur, especially 
if there is an identified structural lesion. Overall, the 
recurrence rate after drug withdrawal depends on the 
individual’s epilepsy history. An individualised esti-
mate may be gained from the SIGN guideline tables (see 
‘Further information’, p. 1230).
Patients should be advised of the risks of recurrence, 
to allow them to decide whether or not they wish to 
withdraw. If undertaken, withdrawal should be done 
slowly, reducing the drug dose gradually over weeks 
or months. Withdrawal may necessitate precautions 
around driving or occupation (see Box 26.44).
Contraception
Some AEDs induce hepatic enzymes that metabolise 
synthetic hormones, increasing the risk of contraceptive 
failure. This is most marked with carbamazepine, 
phenytoin and barbiturates, but clinically significant 
effects can be seen with lamotrigine and topiramate. If 
the AED cannot be changed, this can be overcome by 
giving higher-dose preparations of the oral contracep-
tive. Sodium valproate and levetiracetam have no inter-
action with hormonal contraception.
Pregnancy and reproduction
Epilepsy presents specific management problems during 
pregnancy (Box 26.47). There is usually great concern 
about teratogenesis associated with AEDs. It is impor-
tant to recognise that the background risk of severe fetal 
Epilepsy type
First-line
Second-line
Third-line
Focal onset and/or 
secondary GTCS
Lamotrigine
Carbamazepine
Levetiracetam
Sodium valproate
Topiramate
Zonisamide
Lacosamide
Clobazam
Gabapentin
Oxcarbazepine
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Pregabalin
Primidone
Tiagabine
GTCS
Sodium valproate
Levetiracetam
Lamotrigine
Topiramate
Zonisamide
Carbamazepine
Phenytoin
Primidone
Phenobarbital
Acetazolamide
Absence
Ethosuximide
Sodium valproate
Lamotrigine
Clonazepam
Myoclonic
Sodium valproate
Levetiracetam
Clonazepam
Lamotrigine
Phenobarbital
N.B. Use as few drugs as possible at the lowest possible dose.
26.46  Guidelines for choice of anti-epileptic drug
Epilepsy
26
1185
malformation in the population is around 2–3%. The 
modern AED most associated with teratogenesis is 
sodium valproate, which, at high dose, increases the risk 
to around 6–7%. Long-term observational studies show 
that most of the commonly used AEDs can be given 
safely in pregnancy.
Pre-conception treatment with folic acid (5 mg daily), 
along with use of the smallest effective doses of as few 
AEDs as possible, may reduce the risk of fetal abnor-
malities. The risks of abrupt AED withdrawal to the 
mother should be stressed.
Seizures may become more frequent during preg-
nancy, particularly if pharmacokinetic changes decrease 
serum levels of AEDs (see Box 26.47).
Menstrual irregularities and reduced fertility are 
more common in women with epilepsy, and are also 
increased by sodium valproate. Patients with epilepsy 
are at greater risk of osteoporosis, almost independently 
of the drug used. Some centres advocate vitamin D sup-
plementation in any patient with epilepsy, but the higher 
female risk of osteoporosis makes this most important 
in women.
Prognosis
The outcome of newly diagnosed epilepsy is generally 
good. Overall, generalised seizures are more readily 
controlled than focal seizures. The presence of a struc-
tural lesion reduces the chances of freedom from sei-
zures. The overall prognosis for epilepsy is shown 
in Box 26.43.
Status epilepticus
Presentation and management are described on page 
1159. While generalised status epilepticus is most easily 
recognised, non-convulsive status may be less dramatic 
and less easily diagnosed. It may cause only altered 
•	 Provision of pre-conception counselling is best practice: 
start folic acid 5 mg daily for 2 mths before conception to 
reduce the risk of fetal malformations.
•	 Fetal malformation: risk is minimised if a single drug 
is used.
Carbamazepine and lamotrigine have the lowest incidence 
of major fetal malformations.
The risk with sodium valproate is higher but should be 
carefully balanced against its benefits.
Levetiracetam may be safe, but avoid other newer drugs if 
possible.
•	 Learning difficulties in children: IQ may be lower when 
children are exposed to valproate in utero, so its use should 
always be considered carefully.
•	 Haemorrhagic disease of the newborn: anticonvulsants 
increase risk. Give oral vitamin K 20 mg daily to the mother 
during the last month of pregnancy and give IM vitamin K 
1 mg to the infant at birth.
•	 Increased frequency of seizures: where breakthrough 
seizures occur, monitor anticonvulsant levels and adjust the 
dose regimen accordingly.
•	 Pharmacokinetic effects of pregnancy: carbamazepine 
levels may fall in the third trimester. Lamotrigine and 
levetiracetam levels may fall early in pregnancy. Some 
advocate monitoring of levels.
26.47  Epilepsy in pregnancy
awareness, confusion or wandering with automatisms. 
In an intensive care unit setting, EEG monitoring is 
essential to ensure that diagnosis and treatment are 
optimised.
Non-epileptic attack disorder
The difficulty with nomenclature is discussed on page 
1179. Patients may present with attacks that resemble 
epileptic seizures but which are caused by psychological 
phenomena and have no abnormal epileptic discharges. 
Such attacks may be very prolonged, sometimes mim-
icking status epilepticus. Epileptic and non-epileptic 
attacks may coexist, and time and effort are needed to 
clarify the relative contribution of each, allowing more 
accurate and comprehensive treatment.
Non-epileptic attack disorder (NEAD) may be accom-
panied by dramatic flailing of the limbs and arching of 
the back, with side-to-side head movements and vocalis-
ing. Cyanosis and severe biting of the tongue are rare, 
but urinary incontinence can occur. Distress and crying 
•	 Incidence and prevalence: late-onset epilepsy is very 
common and the annual incidence in those over 60 yrs is 
rising.
•	 Fits and faints: the features that usually differentiate these 
may be less definitive than in younger patients.
•	 Non-convulsive status epilepticus: can present as 
confusion in the elderly.
•	 Cerebrovascular disease: the underlying cause of seizures 
in 30–50% of patients over the age of 50 yrs. A seizure may 
occur with an overt stroke or with occult vascular disease.
•	 AED regimens: keep as simple as possible and take care to 
avoid interactions with other drugs being prescribed.
•	 Carbamazepine-induced hyponatraemia: increases 
significantly with age; particularly important in patients on 
diuretics or those with heart failure.
•	 Withdrawal of anticonvulsant therapy: late-onset epilepsy 
often recurs when drug treatment is stopped, so drug 
withdrawal should not be attempted where it was 
commenced appropriately.
26.48  Epilepsy in old age
•	 Effect on school/education: seizures, AEDs and 
psychological complications of epilepsy may hamper 
education. Fear may make some educational institutions 
unduly restrictive.
•	 Effect on family relationships: parents may adopt a 
protective role, which can lead to epilepsy (and AEDs) 
becoming a point of assertion and rebellion.
•	 Effect on career choice: epilepsy may exclude or restrict 
employment in the emergency services and armed forces.
•	 Alcohol: may affect sleep pattern; excess may be associated 
with poor AED compliance.
•	 Illicit drugs: may affect seizure threshold and be associated 
with poor AED compliance.
•	 Sleep disturbance: may be worsened by social activities 
and computer games.
•	 Oral contraception: interactions with AED can occur. Use 
may not always be disclosed to parents.
26.49  Epilepsy in adolescence
Neurological disease
26
1186
imbalance and dysequilibrium rather than vertigo; ves-
tibular rehabilitation by a physiotherapist may help.
Benign paroxysmal  
positional vertigo
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is due to 
the presence of otolithic debris from the saccule or 
utricle affecting the free flow of endolymph in the 
semicircular canals (cupulolithiasis). It may follow 
minor head injury but typically is spontaneous. The 
history is diagnostic, with transient (seconds) vertigo 
precipitated by movement (typically, rolling over in 
bed or getting into or out of bed). Although benign, 
and usually self-limiting after a few weeks or months, 
patients are often very alarmed by the symptoms. The 
diagnosis can be confirmed by the ‘Hallpike manœuvre’ 
to demonstrate positional nystagmus (Fig. 26.25). Treat-
ment comprises explanation and reassurance, along 
with positioning procedures designed to return otolithic 
debris from the semicircular canal to saccule or utricle 
(such as the Epley manœuvre) and/or to re-educate the 
brain to cope with the inappropriate signals from the 
labyrinth (such as Cawthorne–Cooksey exercises: see 
‘Further information’).
Ménière’s disease
This is due to an abnormality of the endolymph that 
causes episodes of vertigo accompanied by tinnitus and 
fullness in the ear, each attack typically lasting a few 
hours. Over the years, patients may develop progressive 
deafness (typically low-tone on audiometry). Examina-
tion is typically normal in between attacks. The diagno-
sis is clinical, supported by abnormal audiometry. 
Ménière’s disease is idiopathic, but a similar syndrome 
may be caused by middle ear trauma or infection. Man-
agement includes a low-salt diet, vestibular sedatives for 
acute attacks, and occasionally surgery.
are common following non-epileptic attacks. The dis-
tinction between epileptic attacks originating in the 
frontal lobes and non-epileptic attacks may be especially 
difficult, and may require videotelemetry with pro-
longed EEG recordings. Non-epileptic attacks are three 
times more common in women than in men and have 
been linked with a history of past or ongoing life trauma. 
They are not necessarily associated with formal psychi-
atric illness. Patients and carers may need reassurance 
that hospital admission is not required for every attack. 
Prevention requires psychotherapeutic interventions 
rather than drug therapy (p. 246).
VESTIBULAR DISORDERS
Vertigo is the typical symptom caused by vestibular 
dysfunction, and most patients with vertigo have acute 
vestibular failure, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
or Ménière’s disease. Central (brain) causes of vertigo 
are rare by comparison, with the exception of migraine 
(p. 1176).
Acute vestibular failure
Although commonly called ‘labyrinthitis’ or ‘vestibular 
neuronitis’, acute vestibular failure is a more accurate 
term, as most cases are idiopathic. It usually presents as 
isolated severe vertigo with vomiting and unsteadiness. 
It begins abruptly, often on waking, and many patients 
are initially bed-bound. The vertigo settles within a few 
days, though head movement may continue to provoke 
transient symptoms (positional vertigo) for some time. 
During the acute attack, nystagmus (p. 1171) will be 
present for a few days.
Cinnarizine, prochlorperazine or betahistine pro-
vides symptomatic relief but should not be used long-
term as this may delay recovery. A small proportion of 
patients fail to recover fully, and complain of ongoing 
Fig. 26.25  The Hallpike manœuvre for diagnosis of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). Patients are asked to keep their eyes 
open and look at the examiner as their head is swung briskly backwards through 120° to overhang the edge of the couch.  A Perform first with the 
right ear down.  B Perform next with the left ear down. The examiner looks for nystagmus (usually accompanied by vertigo). In BPPV, the nystagmus 
typically occurs in A or B only and is torsional, the fast phase beating towards the lower ear. Its onset is usually delayed a few seconds, and it lasts  
10–20 seconds. As the patient is returned to the upright position, transient nystagmus may occur in the opposite direction. Both nystagmus and vertigo 
typically decrease (fatigue) on repeat testing. 
B
A
Disorders of sleep
26
1187
inappropriate circumstances such as whilst eating or 
talking. Other characteristic features help distinguish 
this from excessive daytime sleepiness (Box 26.51). 
Symptoms may be due to loss of hypocretin-secreting 
hypothalamic neurons. Diagnosis requires sleep study 
with sleep latency testing (demonstrating rapid onset 
of REM sleep). Treatment is with sodium oxybate, 
modafinil, dexamfetamine or methylphenidate. Cata-
plexy may respond to sodium oxybate, clomipramine or 
venlafaxine.
Parasomnias
Parasomnias are abnormal motor behaviours that occur 
around sleep. They may arise in either REM or non-REM 
sleep, with characteristic features and timing. Non-REM 
parasomnias tend to occur early in sleep. Parasomnias 
should be distinguished from other motor disturbances 
(such as periodic limb movements, hypnic jerks or sleep 
talking) and sleep-onset epileptic seizures (p. 1182). 
History from a sleeping partner or other witness is 
essential.
Non-REM parasomnias
These are due to incomplete arousal from non-REM 
sleep, and manifest as night terrors, sleep walking and 
confusional arousals (sleep drunkenness). They typi-
cally occur within an hour or two of sleep onset, are 
common in children, and usually of no pathological 
significance. Rarely, they persist into adulthood and 
may become increasingly complex, including dressing, 
moving objects, eating, drinking or even acts of violence. 
Patients have little or no recollection of the episodes, 
even though they appear ‘awake’. They may be trig-
gered by alcohol or unfamiliar sleeping situations, and 
can be familial. Treatment is usually not required, but 
clonazepam can be used.
REM sleep behaviour disorder
In REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD), patients ‘act 
out’ their dreams during REM sleep, due to failure of 
the usual muscle atonia. Sleep partners provide typical 
histories of patients ‘fighting’ or ‘struggling’ in their 
sleep, sometimes causing injury to themselves or to their 
partner. They are easily roused from this state, with 
recollection of their dream, unlike in non-REM states. 
RBD is more common in men, and may be an early 
symptom of neurodegenerative diseases such as alpha 
synucleinopathies (p. 1195), perhaps preceding more 
typical symptoms of these conditions by years. Polysom-
nography will confirm absence of atonia during REM 
sleep. Clonazepam is the most successful treatment.
Restless legs syndrome
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is common, with a preva-
lence of up to 10%, but many patients never seek medical 
attention. It is characterised by unpleasant leg (and 
sometimes arm) sensations that are eased by movement 
(motor restlessness); the diagnosis is clinical (Box 26.52). 
It has a strong familial tendency and can present with 
daytime somnolence due to poor sleep. It is usually idio­
pathic, but may be associated with haematinic defi-
ciency, pregnancy, peripheral neuropathy, Parkinson’s 
disease or uraemia. It should be distinguished from 
DISORDERS OF SLEEP
Sleep disturbances include too much sleep (hypersom-
nolence or excessive daytime sleepiness), insufficient or 
poor-quality sleep (insomnia), and abnormal behaviour 
during sleep (parasomnias). Insomnia is usually caused 
by psychological or psychiatric disorders, shift work and 
other environmental causes, pain and so on, and will not 
be discussed further. Many symptoms and disorders 
may affect sleep and sleep quality (e.g. pain, depression/
anxiety, parkinsonism).
Excessive daytime sleepiness 
(hypersomnolence)
There are primary and secondary causes (Box 26.50). The 
most common causes are impaired sleep due to lifestyle 
issues or sleep-disordered breathing (p. 725). Sleepiness 
may be measured using the Epworth Sleepiness Score 
(see Box 19.98, p. 726). Most causes will be identified by 
a detailed history from the patient and their bed partner, 
and a 2-week sleep diary.
Narcolepsy
This has a prevalence of about 1 in 2000, with peak 
onset in adolescence and early middle age. The key 
symptom is sudden, irresistible ‘sleep attacks’, often in 
Primary causes
•	 Narcolepsy
•	 Idiopathic hypersomnolence
•	 Brain injury
Secondary causes (due to poor-quality sleep)
•	 Obstructive sleep apnoea
•	 Pain
•	 Restless legs/periodic limb movements of sleep
•	 Parkinsonism and other neurodegenerative diseases
•	 Depression/anxiety
•	 Medication
•	 Environmental factors (noise, temperature etc.)
26.50  Causes of hypersomnolence
Sleep attacks
•	 Brief, frequent and unlike normal somnolence
Cataplexy
•	 Sudden loss of muscle tone triggered by surprise, laughter, 
strong emotion etc.
Hypnagogic or hypnapompic hallucinations
•	 Frightening hallucinations experienced during sleep onset or 
waking due to intrusion of REM sleep during wakefulness 
(can occur in normal people)
Sleep paralysis
•	 Brief paralysis on waking (can occur in normal people)
26.51  Narcolepsy symptoms
Neurological disease
26
1188
akathisia, the daytime motor restlessness that is an 
adverse effect of anti-psychotic drugs. Treatment, if 
required, is with dopaminergic drugs (dopamine ago-
nists or levodopa, p. 1196) or benzodiazepines.
Periodic limb movements in sleep
Unlike RLS, period limb movements in sleep (PLMS) 
only occurs during sleep and causes repetitive flexion 
movements of the limbs, usually in the early (non-REM) 
stages of sleep. Although patients are unaware of the 
symptoms, they may disturb sleep quality and often 
disturb partners. The pathological significance of PLMS 
is uncertain and it often occurs in normal health. There 
is an overlap with RLS. Treatment is most successful 
with clonazepam or dopaminergic drugs.
NEURO-INFLAMMATORY DISEASES
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an important cause of long-
term disability in adults, especially in the UK, where the 
prevalence is about 120 per 100 000. The annual inci-
dence is around 7 per 100 000, while the lifetime risk of 
developing MS is about 1 in 400. The incidence of MS is 
higher in Northern Europeans, and the disease is about 
twice as common in females.
Pathophysiology
There is evidence that both genetic and environmental 
factors play a causative role. The prevalence of MS is low 
near the equator and increases in the temperate zones of 
both hemispheres. Most importantly, people retain the 
risk of developing the disease in the zone in which they 
grew up, indicating that environmental exposures 
during growth and development are important. Preva-
lence also correlates with environmental factors, such as 
sunlight exposure, vitamin D and exposure to Epstein–
Barr virus (EBV), although causative mechanisms 
remain unclear. Genetic factors are also relevant; the risk 
of familial recurrence in MS is 15%, with highest risk in 
first-degree relatives (age-adjusted risk: 4–5% for sib-
lings and 2–3% for parents or offspring). Monozygotic 
twins have a concordance rate of 30%. The genes 
that predispose to MS are incompletely defined but 
inheritance appears to be polygenic, with influences 
from genes for human leucocyte antigen (HLA) typing, 
interleukin receptors, CLEC16A (C-type lectin domain 
family 16 member A) and CD226 genes. An immune 
hypothesis is supported by increased levels of activated 
T lymphocytes in the CSF and increased immunoglobu-
lin synthesis within the CNS.
Initial CNS inflammation in MS involves entry of 
activated T lymphocytes across the blood–brain barrier. 
A need to move the legs, usually accompanied or caused by 
uncomfortable, unpleasant sensations in the legs, with the 
following features:
•	 only present or worse during periods of rest or inactivity such 
as lying or sitting
•	 partially or totally relieved by movement such as walking or 
stretching, at least as long as the activity continues
•	 generally worse or occurs only in the evening or night.
26.52  Diagnostic criteria for 
restless legs syndrome
Fig. 26.26  Multiple sclerosis.  A Photomicrograph from demyelinating 
plaque, showing perivascular cuffing of blood vessel by lymphocytes. 
 B Brain MRI in multiple sclerosis. Multiple high-signal lesions (arrows) 
seen particularly in the paraventricular region on T2 image.  C In T1 
image with gadolinium enhancement, recent lesions (A arrows) show 
enhancement, suggesting active inflammation (enhancement persists for  
4 weeks); older lesions (B arrows) show no enhancement but low signal, 
suggesting gliosis. 
A
B
C
A
A
A
B
B
Neuro-inflammatory diseases
26
1189
These recognise myelin-derived antigens on the surface 
of the nervous system’s antigen-presenting cells, the 
microglia, and undergo clonal proliferation. The result-
ing inflammatory cascade releases cytokines and initi-
ates destruction of the oligodendrocyte–myelin unit by 
macrophages. Histologically, the resultant lesion is a 
plaque of inflammatory demyelination, most commonly 
in the periventricular regions of the brain, the optic 
nerves, and the subpial regions of the spinal cord (Fig. 
26.26). This begins as a circumscribed area of disintegra-
tion of the myelin sheath, accompanied by infiltration by 
activated lymphocytes and macrophages, often with 
conspicuous perivascular inflammation. After the acute 
attack, gliosis follows, leaving a shrunken grey scar.
Much of the initial acute clinical deficit is caused 
by the effect of inflammatory cytokines on transmission 
of the nervous impulse rather than structural disruption 
of the myelin, and may explain the rapid recovery of 
some deficits and probably the acute benefit from 
corticosteroids. In the long term, accumulating myelin 
loss reduces the efficiency of impulse propagation or 
causes complete conduction block, contributing to sus-
tained impairment of CNS functions. Inflammatory 
mediators released during the acute attack (particularly 
nitric oxide) probably also initiate axonal damage, which 
is a feature of the latter stages of the disease. In estab-
lished MS there is progressive axonal loss, probably due 
to the successive damage from acute attacks and the 
subsequent loss of neurotrophic factors from oligo­
dendrocytes. This axonal loss may account for the phase 
Fig. 26.27  The progression of disability in fulminant, relapsing–
remitting and progressive multiple sclerosis. 
Fulminant
(< 10%)
Relapsing-
remitting
(80%)
Primary
progressive
(10–20%)
Secondary
progressive
Disability
Time
Clinical presentation2
Additional evidence required for diagnosis of MS
Two or more attacks with either
Objective clinical evidence of at least  
2 lesions
or
Objective clinical evidence of 1 attack with 
reasonable evidence (on clinical history) of 
at least 1 prior attack
None
Two or more attacks with objective clinical 
evidence of 1 lesion
Dissemination in ‘space’ demonstrated by MRI
≥ 1 lesion in at least 2 of the MS-typical regions3 (multiple lesions in different sites) or
Await further clinical attack at different anatomical site
One attack with objective clinical evidence  
of ≥ 2 lesions
Dissemination in ‘time’ demonstrated by
Evolving MRI showing combined enhancing (new) and non-enhancing (old) lesions or
New T2 or enhancing lesion on repeat MRI or
Await further (second) clinical attack at different anatomical site
One attack with clinical evidence of only  
1 lesion (clinically isolated syndrome)
Dissemination in ‘space’ demonstrated by
≥ 1 T2 lesion in at least 2 MS-typical regions or
Dissemination in ‘time’, demonstrated by simultaneous enhancing and  
non-enhancing lesions or
New T2 or enhancing lesions on repeat MRI or
Await further (second) clinical attack
Insidious neurological progression suggestive 
of MS
1 yr of progression plus 2 of the following:
Evidence for dissemination in space with ≥ 1 T2 lesions in MS-typical regions
Evidence for dissemination in space based on ≥ 2 lesions in the spinal cord
Positive CSF (evidence of oligoclonal band and/or elevated immunoglobulin (Ig) G index)
1Published by the International Panel on MS Diagnosis (Ann Neurol 2011; 69:292–302). If the clinical presentation in the left-hand column is associated with the 
features in the right-hand column, the diagnosis is MS. If there is incomplete association, the diagnosis is ‘possible MS’.
2Assumes other possible causes for CNS inflammation (e.g. sarcoidosis, SLE) have been excluded.
3MS-typical regions = periventricular, juxtacortical, infratentorial, spinal cord.
26.53  The Macdonald criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (2011)1
of the disease characterised by progressive and persist-
ent disability (Fig. 26.27).
Clinical features
A diagnosis of MS requires the demonstration of other-
wise unexplained CNS lesions separated in time and 
space (Box 26.53). The peak age of onset of MS is the 
Neurological disease
26
1190
Common presentations of multiple sclerosis
•	 Optic neuritis
•	 Relapsing/remitting sensory symptoms
•	 Subacute painless spinal cord lesion
•	 Acute brainstem syndrome
•	 Subacute loss of function of upper limb (dorsal column 
deficit)
•	 6th cranial nerve palsy
Other symptoms and syndromes suggestive of  
CNS demyelination
•	 Afferent pupillary defect and optic atrophy (previous optic 
neuritis)
•	 Lhermitte’s symptom (tingling in spine or limbs on neck 
flexion)
•	 Progressive non-compressive paraparesis
•	 Partial Brown–Séquard syndrome (p. 1221)
•	 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia with ataxia
•	 Postural (‘rubral’, ‘Holmes’) tremor
•	 Trigeminal neuralgia (p. 1178) under the age of 50
•	 Recurrent facial palsy
26.54  Clinical features of multiple sclerosis
Exclude other structural disease and identify plaques  
of demyelination
•	 Image area of clinical involvement (MRI,  
myelography)
Demonstrate other sites of involvement
•	 Imaging (MRI)
•	 Visual evoked potentials
•	 Other evoked potentials
Demonstrate inflammatory nature of lesion(s)
•	 CSF examination
•	 Cell count
•	 Protein electrophoresis (oligoclonal bands)
Exclude other conditions
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) –  
sarcoidosis
•	 Serum B12
•	 Antinuclear antibodies – SLE
•	 Antiphospholipid antibodies
26.55  Investigations in a patient suspected of 
having multiple sclerosis
fourth decade; onset before puberty or after the age of 
60 years is rare. Where there is widespread inflamma-
tion, this usually leads to widespread symptoms and/
or signs. Symptoms and signs of MS usually come on 
over days or weeks, resolving over weeks or months. 
Rarely, a more rapid stroke-like presentation may occur. 
Around 80% of patients have a relapsing and remitting 
clinical course of episodic dysfunction of the CNS with 
variable intervening recovery. Of the remaining 20%, 
most follow a slowly progressive clinical course, while 
a tiny minority have a fulminant variety leading to 
early death (see Fig. 26.27). Frequent relapses with 
incomplete recovery indicate a poor prognosis for the 
patient. Some milder cases have an interval of years or 
even decades between attacks, while in others (particu-
larly if optic neuritis is the initial manifestation) there is 
no recurrence of disease. In some individuals, a phase 
of secondary progression, caused by secondary axonal 
degeneration, supersedes the phase of relapse and 
remission.
There are a number of clinical symptoms and syn-
dromes suggestive of MS, occurring either at presenta-
tion or during the course of the illness (Box 26.54). The 
physical signs observed in MS are determined by the 
anatomical site of demyelination. Combined spinal cord 
and brainstem signs are common, although evidence 
of previous optic neuritis may be found in the form of 
an afferent pupillary deficit. Significant intellectual 
impairment only supervenes late in the disease, when 
loss of frontal functions and impairment of memory are 
common.
The prognosis for patients with MS is difficult to 
predict with confidence, especially early in the disease. 
About 15% of patients have a single attack of demyelina-
tion and do not suffer further events, whilst those with 
relapsing and remitting MS experience, on average, 1–2 
events every 2 years. Approximately 5% of patients die 
within 5 years of disease onset, whilst others have a 
benign outcome. Prognosis is good for patients with 
optic neuritis and only sensory relapses. Overall, about 
one-third of patients are dis­abled to the point of needing 
help with walking after 10 years, and this proportion 
rises to about one-half after 15 years. It would appear 
likely (though this is as yet unproven) that disease-
modifying drugs will have an effect on future 
prognostication.
Investigations
There is no single diagnostic test that is definitive for 
MS, and the results of investigation need to be com­
bined with the clinical picture in order to make a diag-
nosis (Box 26.55). Other conditions should be excluded, 
and investigations should provide support for the diag-
nosis, with evidence for a chronic widespread inflam-
matory condition. Following the first clinical event, 
investigations may help prognosis by confirming the 
disseminated nature of the disease. MRI is the most 
sensitive technique for imaging lesions in brain and 
spinal cord (Fig. 26.28) and in excluding other causes 
that have provoked the neurological deficit. However, 
the MRI appearances in MS may be confused with those 
of small-vessel disease or cerebral vasculitis, and these 
diagnoses should be considered and excluded. Visual 
evoked potentials (p. 1152) can detect clinically silent 
lesions in up to 70% of patients, but auditory and 
somato­sensory evoked potentials are seldom of diag-
nostic value.
The CSF may show a lymphocytic pleocytosis in the 
acute phase and oligoclonal bands of IgG in 70–90% of 
patients between attacks. Oligoclonal bands are not spe-
cific for MS and only denote intrathecal inflammation. 
These can appear in other disorders, which should be 
excluded by examination and other investigations. It is 
important to exclude other potentially treatable condi-
tions, such as infection, vitamin B12 deficiency and spinal 
cord compression.
Neuro-inflammatory diseases
26
1191
Management
The management of MS involves four different strands: 
treatment of the acute episode, prevention of future 
relapses, treatment of complications and management of 
the patient’s disability.
The acute episode
In a function-threatening exacerbation of MS, pulses of 
high-dose steroid, given either intravenously or orally 
over 3–5 days, will shorten the duration of the acute 
episode (Box 26.56). Prolonged administration of ster-
oids does not alter the long-term outcome and causes 
severe adverse effects and should therefore be avoided. 
Pulses of steroids can be given up to three times in a year 
but use should be restricted to those individuals with 
significant function-threatening deficits. Prophylaxis to 
prevent the occurrence of steroid-induced osteoporosis 
(p. 1120) should be considered in patients requiring mul-
tiple courses of corticosteroids.
Disease-modifying treatment
Despite its immune basis, the administration of long-
term steroids, standard chemotherapies and immuno­
globulin is not practical or helpful in established MS. 
This motivated the search for innovative immuno-active 
treatments.
In relapsing and remitting MS, an increasing number 
of beta-interferons have been used to reduce relapse 
rates and improve long-term outlook. Their pharmaco-
logical properties tend to vary, but there has been no 
good trial evidence clinically separating the licensed 
compounds. Subcutaneous or intramuscular interferon-
beta reduces the number of relapses by some 30%, with 
a small effect on long-term disability (Box 26.57). Long-
term effects are usually local and development of anti-
bodies should be sought; their development should 
preclude further long-term treatment. Other treatments 
are shown in Box 26.58.
Glatiramer acetate is a parenterally administered 
oligopeptide that may act as a competitor antigen, 
but in addition it increases numbers of regulatory 
CD4 T cells in relapsing–remitting MS, thereby helping 
to reduce relapse rates. Unlike other immunomodula-
tory treatments used for MS, glatiramer antibodies 
do not block function and actually appear to enhance 
efficacy.
Mitoxantrone was initially developed as a chemo-
therapeutic agent and has been shown to decrease the 
relapse rate in MS, as well as lowering the number of 
MRI lesions and reducing disability with long-term use. 
Its similarity to doxorubicin is reflected in its adverse 
effects, the most notable of which is cardiotoxicity.
Fig. 26.28  Multiple sclerosis: demyelinating lesion in cervical 
spinal cord, high-signal T2 images (arrow).  A Sagittal plane.
 B Axial plane. 
A
B
‘There is evidence favouring corticosteroids (methylprednisolone) 
for acute exacerbations of multiple sclerosis, but there are 
insufficient data to estimate reliably the effect of corticosteroids 
on prevention of new exacerbations and reduction of long-term 
disability.’
‘There is currently no evidence that long-term corticosteroid 
treatment delays progression of long-term disability in multiple 
sclerosis.’
•	 Filippini G, et al. Corticosteroids or ACTH for acute exacerbations in multiple 
sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2000, issue 4. Art. no.: 
CD001331.
•	 Ciccone A, et al. Corticosteroids for long term treatment in multiple sclerosis. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2008, issue 1. Art. no.: CD006264.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
26.56  Corticosteroids in multiple sclerosis
‘Beta-interferons have a modest effect on exacerbations and 
disease progression in relapsing–remitting MS but do not 
prevent the development of permanent physical disability on 
slowly progressive multiple sclerosis.’
‘Natalizumab reduces relapses and disability at 2 years in 
relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis.’
•	 Rice GP, et al. Interferon in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2001, issue 4. Art. no.: CD002002.
•	 La Mantia L, et al. Interferon beta for secondary progressive multiple sclerosis. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2011, issue 1. Art. no.: CD005181.
•	 Pucci E, et al. Natalizumab for relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2011, issue 10. Art. no.: CD007621.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
26.57  Disease-modifying therapies in 
multiple sclerosis
Neurological disease
26
1192
Natalizumab is a monoclonal antibody to an antigen 
expressed on activated T cells and monocytes, and has 
been associated with a dramatic fall in the number of 
lesions evident on MRI, with a corresponding decrease 
in the number of relapses and reduction in axonal 
damage. Rarely, neutralising antibodies block its effi-
cacy and indicate that the drug should be withdrawn. 
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy (PML) has 
been seen in some natalizumab-treated patients. Occa-
sional cases of CNS lymphoma and toxoplasmosis may 
be related to drug use.
Other newer immunomodulatory treatments have 
been developed, including fingolimod, which is derived 
from the ascomycete metabolite ISP-1 (myriocin) and 
can be given orally. Further studies are needed to predict 
which immune treatment should be tried in which 
patients.
Special diets, including a gluten-free diet or linoleic 
acid supplements, and hyperbaric oxygen therapy are 
popular with patients but their efficacy has not yet been 
proven.
Treatment of symptoms, complications  
and disability
Treatments for the complications of MS are summa-
rised in Box 26.59. It is important to provide patients 
with a careful explanation of the nature of the disease 
and its outcome. When and if disability occurs, patients 
and their relatives need appropriate support. Specialist 
nurses working in a multidisciplinary team of health-
care professionals are of great value in managing the 
chronic phase of the disease. Periods of physiotherapy 
and occupational therapy may improve functional 
capacity in those patients who become disabled, and 
guidance can be provided on the provision of aids at 
home, reducing handicap. Care of the bladder is particu-
larly important. Urgency and frequency can be treated 
pharmacologically (see Box 26.31, p. 1175), but this may 
lead to a degree of retention with an attendant risk of 
infection. Retention can be managed initially by inter-
mittent urinary catheterisation (performed by the 
patient, if possible), but an in-dwelling catheter may 
become necessary. Sexual dysfunction is a frequent 
source of distress. Sildenafil or tadalafil helps impotence 
in men, and skilled counselling and prosthetic aids are 
often beneficial.
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
This is an acute monophasic demyelinating condition in 
which there are areas of perivenous demyelination 
Treatment
Mode of action
Comment
Interferon-beta
Immune modulation
In widespread use for reducing relapse rate (RCT  
evidence)
Glatiramer acetate
Immune modulation
Similar efficacy to interferon-beta (RCT evidence)
Fingolimod
Immune modulation
Superior efficacy to interferon-beta in RCTs
Monoclonal antibody 
to alpha4-integrin 
(natalizumab)
Immune modulation (blocks 
lymphocyte entry into CNS)
Recently introduced. Possibly more effective than 
interferon-beta and glatiramer acetate (RCT evidence)
Mitoxantrone
Immune suppression  
(cytotoxic)
Trials favour early use in aggressive disease
(RCT = randomised controlled clinical trial)
26.58  Disease-modifying treatments in multiple sclerosis
•	 Counselling: provision of pre-conception counselling is best 
practice.
•	 Relapse risk: endocrine effects on the immune system 
ensure that relapse risk drops during pregnancy.
•	 Disease-modifying drugs: risk of teratogenicity means that 
all disease-modifying drugs should ideally be stopped 
6–8 wks before conception and recommenced after 
breastfeeding has stopped.
•	 Post-partum relapse rate: rebound of immune system 
activity means that the highest risk of relapse is in the first 
year after delivery.
26.60  Multiple sclerosis in pregnancy
Spasticity
•	 Physiotherapy
•	 Baclofen (usually oral)
•	 Dantrolene
•	 Gabapentin
•	 Sativex®
•	 Tizanidine
•	 Intrathecal baclofen
•	 Local (IM) injection of 
botulinum toxin
•	 Chemical neuronectomy
Ataxia
•	 Isoniazid
•	 Clonazepam
Dysaesthesia
•	 Carbamazepine
•	 Gabapentin
•	 Phenytoin
•	 Amitriptyline
Bladder symptoms
•	 See Box 26.31, p. 1175
Fatigue
•	 Amantadine
•	 Modafinil
•	 Amitriptyline
Impotence
•	 Sildenafil 50–100 mg/24 hrs
•	 Tadalafil
26.59  Treatment of complications in 
multiple sclerosis
Paraneoplastic neurological disorders
26
1193
Neuromyelitis optica
Neuromyelitis optica (also known as Devic’s disease) is 
the occurrence of transverse myelitis and bilateral optic 
neuritis. The disease has been recognised for many 
years, particularly in Asia. The majority of cases are 
associated with an antibody to a neuronal membrane 
channel, aquaporin 4. If changes are seen on brain MRI 
(this is variable), they are typically high-signal lesions 
restricted to periventricular regions. Spinal MRI scans 
show lesions that are typically longer than three spinal 
segments (unlike the shorter lesions of MS). Clinical 
deficits tend to recover less well than in MS, and the 
disease may be more aggressive with more frequent 
relapses. Treatment with older immunosuppressive 
agents, such as steroids, azathioprine or cyclophospha-
mide, and/or plasmapheresis seems to be more effective 
than in MS.
PARANEOPLASTIC NEUROLOGICAL 
DISORDERS
Neurological disease may occur with systemic malig-
nant tumours in the absence of cerebral metastases. 
It is now recognised that, in the majority of these 
cases, antigen production in the body of the tumour 
leads to development of antibodies to parts of the 
CNS. Paraneoplastic conditions are increasingly recog-
nised, and the number of antibodies identified is also 
increasing (Boxes 26.62 and 26.63). These syndromes 
are particularly associated with small-cell carcinoma 
of lung, ovarian tumours, and lymphomas. Autoanti-
bodies are found in the serum and/or CSF, and biopsy 
will show a lymphocytic infiltrate of the neural tissue 
affected.
Clinical presentations
These are summarised in Boxes 26.62 and 26.63. In most 
instances, the neurological condition progresses quite 
rapidly over a few months, preceding the malignant 
disease in around half of cases. The range of clinical pat-
terns is so wide that paraneoplastic disease should be 
considered in the diagnosis of any unusual progressive 
neurological syndrome. The paraneoplastic disorders of 
the peripheral nervous system particularly affect the 
synaptic cleft (p. 1141).
Investigations and management
The presence of characteristic autoantibodies in the 
context of a suspicious clinical picture may be diagnos-
tic. The causative tumour may be very small and there-
fore CT of the chest or abdomen or PET scanning may 
be necessary to find it. These investigations should only 
be pursued when paraneoplastic disease has been 
proven, rather than when it is suspected. The CSF often 
shows an increased protein and lymphocyte count with 
oligoclonal bands.
Treatment is directed at the primary tumour. Occa-
sionally, successful therapy of the tumour is associated 
with improvement of the paraneoplastic syndrome. 
Some improvement may occur following administration 
of intravenous immunoglobulin.
widely disseminated throughout the brain and spinal 
cord. The illness may apparently arise spontaneously 
but often occurs a week or so after a viral infection, 
especially measles and chickenpox, or following vacci-
nation, suggesting that it is immunologically mediated.
Clinical features
Headache, vomiting, pyrexia, confusion and meningism 
may be presenting features, often with focal or multi­
focal brain and spinal cord signs. Seizures or coma may 
occur. A minority of patients who recover have further 
episodes.
Investigations
MRI shows multiple high-signal areas in a pattern 
similar to that of MS, although often with large confluent 
areas of abnormality. The CSF may be normal or show 
an increase in protein and lymphocytes (occasionally 
over 100 × 106 cells/L); oligoclonal bands may be found 
in the acute episode but, unlike in MS, will not persist 
beyond clinical recovery. The clinical picture may be 
very similar to a first relapse of MS.
Management
The disease may be fatal in the acute stages but is other­
wise self-limiting. Treatment with high-dose intra­
venous methylprednisolone, using the same regimen as 
for a relapse of MS, is recommended.
Transverse myelitis
Transverse myelitis is an acute, usually monophasic, 
demyelinating disorder affecting the spinal cord. It is 
usually thought to be post-infectious in origin. It occurs 
at any age and presents with a subacute paraparesis 
with a sensory level, accompanied by severe pain in the 
neck or back at the onset. MRI should distinguish this 
from an external lesion affecting the spinal cord. CSF 
examination shows cellular pleocytosis, often with poly-
morphs at the onset. Oligoclonal bands are usually 
absent. Treatment is with high-dose intravenous methyl­
prednisolone. The outcome is variable: one-third have 
static deficit, one-third go on to develop MS and one-
third recover with no subsequent relapse. Some clinical 
features may predict the development of MS after trans-
verse myelitis (Box 26.61).
Increased risk
•	 Severe weakness
•	 Catastrophic onset
•	 Initial lancinating pain
•	 Sensory disturbance at 
cervical level
•	 Spinal shock
•	 Incontinence
•	 Presence of 14-3-3 protein 
in CSF
Decreased risk
•	 Subacute onset over days
•	 Young onset
•	 Retained posterior column 
function
•	 Retained tendon reflexes
•	 Early recovery
26.61  Prognostic features predicting 
multiple sclerosis after transverse myelitis
Neurological disease
26
1194
Movement disorders
Movement disorders present with a wide range of 
symptoms. They may be genetic or acquired, and the 
most important is Parkinson’s disease. Most movement 
disorders are categorised clinically, with few confirma-
tory investigations available other than for those with a 
known gene abnormality.
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease
Parkinsonism is a clinical syndrome characterised prima-
rily by bradykinesia (p. 1165), with associated increased 
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES
Whilst MS is the most common cause of disability 
in young people in the UK, vascular and neuro­
degenerative diseases are increasingly important in 
later life. The neurodegenerative diseases are united 
in having a pathological process that leads to specific 
neuronal 
death, 
causing 
relentlessly 
progressive 
symptoms that increase in incidence in older age. 
The precise causes are not yet known. Alzheimer’s 
disease (p. 251) and Parkinson’s disease are the most 
common.
Clinical presentation
Associated tumour
Antibodies demonstrated
Neuromyotonia
Thymoma, SCLC, others
Anti-VGKC
Myasthenia gravis
Thymoma
Anti-Achr, anti-MuSK
Sensorimotor polyneuropathy
Lymphoma, SCLC, others
Anti-HU, anti-CV2, ANNA-3, anti-Ma1, anti-amphiphysin
Lambert–Eaton syndrome
SCLC
Anti-VGCC
Motor neuropathy
Lymphoma, SCLC, others
Anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-CV2
Sensory neuropathy
Lymphoma, SCLC, others
Anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-CV2
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Lung, breast
Anti-Jo1
(MuSK = muscle-specific kinase; for other abbreviations, see Box 26.62)
26.63  Paraneoplastic disorders of the peripheral nervous system
Clinical presentation
Associated tumour
Antibodies demonstrated
Limbic encephalitis
SCLC
Anti-Hu, anti-CV2, PCA-2, anti-VGKC, anti-Ma1,  
anti-amphiphysin, anti-Ri, ANNA-3, anti-VGCC, anti-Zic4, 
anti-GluR1/2, anti-GABAR
Testicular, breast
Anti-Ma2, anti-GluR1/2
Thymoma
Anti-VGKC, anti-CV2, anti-GluR1/2
Ovarian/testicular teratoma
Anti-NMDAR
Myelopathy
SCLC, thymoma, others
Anti-CV2, anti-amphiphysin, anti-aquaporin
Motor neuron disease
SCLC, others
Anti-Hu
Stiff-person syndrome
Breast, SCLC, thymoma, others
Anti-amphiphysin, anti-Ri, anti-GAD, anti-GlyR
Cerebellar degeneration
Breast, ovarian, others
Anti-Yo, anti-Ma1, anti-Ri
SCLC, others
Anti-Hu, anti-CV2, PCA-2, ANNA-3, anti-amphiphysin, anti-VGCC, 
anti-Ri, anti-Zic4, anti-GAD
Lymphoma
Anti-Tr, anti-mGluR1
Multifocal encephalomyelitis
SCLC, thymoma
Anti-Hu, anti-CV2, anti-VGKC, anti-Ma1, anti-amphiphysin, anti-Ri, 
ANNA-3
Opsoclonus–myoclonus
Breast, ovarian
Anti-Ri, anti-Yo, anti-amphiphysin
SCLC
Anti Hu, anti-Ri, anti-CV2, anti-amphiphysin, anti-VGCC
Neuroblastoma
Anti-Hu
Testicular
Anti-Ma1/2, anti-CV2
Extrapyramidal encephalitis
SCLC, thymoma, testicular
Anti-CV2, anti-Hu, anti-VGKC, anti-Ma
Optic neuritis
SCLC
Anti-CV2, anti-aquaporin
Retinal degeneration
SCLC
Anti-recoverin
(ANNA = anti-neuronal nucleolar antibody; GABAR = GABA receptor; GAD = glutamic acid decarboxylase; GluR = glutamate receptor; PCA = Purkinje cell 
antibody; SCLC = small-cell lung cancer; VGCC = voltage-gated calcium channel; VGKC = voltage-gated potassium channel)
26.62  Paraneoplastic disorders of the central nervous system
Neurodegenerative diseases
26
1195
tone (rigidity), tremor and loss of postural reflexes. There 
are many causes (Box 26.64) but the most common is 
Parkinson’s disease (PD). PD has an annual incidence of 
about 18/100 000 in the UK and a prevalence of about 
180/100 000. Age has a critical influence on incidence and 
prevalence, the latter rising to 300–500/100 000 after 80 
years of age. Average age of onset is about 60 years, and 
fewer than 5% of patients present under the age of 40. 
Genetic factors are increasingly recognised and several 
single genes causing parkinsonism have been identified, 
although they only account for a very small proportion 
of cases overall. Having a first-degree relative with PD 
confers a 2–3 times increased risk of developing PD. It is 
a progressive and incurable condition, with a variable 
prognosis. Whilst motor symptoms are the most common 
presenting features, non-motor symptoms (particularly 
cognitive impairment, depression and anxiety) become 
increasingly common as the disease progresses, and sig-
nificantly reduce quality of life.
Pathophysiology
Although mutations in several genes have been 
identified in a few cases, in most patients the cause 
remains unknown. The discovery that methyl-phenyl-
tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) caused severe parkinsonism 
in young drug users suggested that PD might be due to 
an environmental toxin but none has been convincingly 
identified. The pathological hallmarks of PD are deple-
tion of the pigmented dopaminergic neurons in the sub-
stantia nigra and the presence of α-synuclein and other 
protein inclusions in nigral cells (Lewy bodies – Fig. 
26.29). It is thought that environmental or genetic factors 
alter the α-synuclein protein, rendering it toxic and 
leading to Lewy body formation within the nigral cells. 
Lewy bodies are also found in the basal ganglia, brain-
stem and cortex, and increase with disease progression. 
PD is recognised as a synucleinopathy alongside multi-
ple system atrophy and dementia with Lewy bodies. The 
loss of dopaminergic neurotransmission is responsible 
for many of the clinical features.
Clinical features
Non-motor symptoms, including reduction in sense 
of smell (hyposmia), constipation and REM sleep 
behavioural disturbance (RBD), may precede the devel-
opment of typical motor features by many years, but 
patients rarely present at this stage. The motor symp-
toms are almost always initially asymmetrical. The hall-
mark is bradykinesia, leading to classic symptoms such 
as increasingly small handwriting, difficulty with tying 
shoelaces or buttoning, and difficulty rolling over in bed. 
Tremor is an early feature but may not be apparent in at 
least 20% of people with PD. It is typically a unilateral 
rest tremor (p. 1165) affecting limbs, jaw and chin, but 
not the head. In some patients, tremor remains the domi-
nant symptom for many years. Rigidity causes stiffness 
and a flexed posture. Although postural righting reflexes 
are impaired early on in the disease, falls tend not to 
occur until later. As the disease advances, speech 
becomes softer and indistinct. There are a number of 
abnormalities on neurological examination (Box 26.65).
Although the features are initially unilateral, gradual 
bilateral involvement evolves with time. Cognition is 
spared in early disease; if impaired, it should trigger 
consideration of alternative diagnoses, such as dementia 
with Lewy bodies.
Non-motor symptoms
Some non-motor symptoms (NMS) precede the onset of 
more typical symptoms by many years (see above). 
Depression or anxiety may also be presenting features 
of PD. For most patients, however, NMS become increas-
ingly common and disabling as PD progresses. Cogni-
tive impairment, including dementia, is the symptom 
most likely to impair quality of life for patients and 
their carers. Estimates of dementia frequency range 
from 30 to 80%, depending on definitions and length 
of follow-up. Other distressing NMS include other 
neuropsychiatric features (anxiety, depression, apathy, 
hallucinosis/psychosis), sleep disturbance and hyper-
somnolence, fatigue, pain, sphincter disturbance and 
constipation, sexual problems (erectile failure, loss of 
libido or hypersexuality) and drooling.
Investigations
The diagnosis is clinical. Structural imaging (CT or MRI) 
is usually normal for age and thus rarely helpful, 
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (at least 80% of parkinsonism)
Cerebrovascular disease
Drugs and toxins
•	 Antipsychotic drugs (older 
and ‘atypical’)
•	 Metoclopramide, 
prochlorperazine
•	 Tetrabenazine
•	 Sodium valproate
•	 Lithium
•	 Manganese
•	 MPTP
Other degenerative diseases
•	 Dementia with Lewy bodies
•	 Progressive supranuclear 
palsy
•	 Multiple system atrophy
•	 Corticobasal degeneration
•	 Alzheimer’s disease
Genetic
•	 Huntington’s disease
•	 Fragile X tremor ataxia 
syndrome
•	 Dopa-responsive dystonia
•	 Spinocerebellar ataxias 
(particularly SCA 3)
•	 Wilson’s disease
Anoxic brain injury
(MPTP = methyl-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine)
26.64  Causes of parkinsonism
Fig. 26.29  Parkinson’s disease. High power (× 400) of substantia 
nigra of a patient with Parkinson’s disease showing classical Lewy body 
(haematoxylin and eosin). 
Neurological disease
26
1196
although it may support a suspected vascular cause. 
Functional dopaminergic imaging (SPECT or PET) is 
abnormal, even at early stages (Fig. 26.30), but does not 
differentiate between the different forms of degenerative 
parkinsonism (see Box 26.64) and so is not specific for 
PD. In younger patients, specific investigations may 
be appropriate (e.g. exclusion of Huntington’s and 
Wilson’s diseases). Some patients with family histories 
may wish to consider genetic testing, although the role 
of genetic counselling is uncertain at present.
Management
Drug therapy
Drug treatment for PD remains symptomatic rather than 
curative, and there is no evidence that any of the cur-
rently available drugs are neuroprotective. Levodopa 
(LD) remains the most effective treatment available, 
but other agents include dopamine agonists, anti­
cholinergics, inhibitors of monoamine oxidase (MAOI)-B 
and catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT), and aman-
tadine. Debate continues about when to start treatment, 
and with which drug. In general, most specialists recom-
mend initiating treatment when symptoms are impact-
ing on everyday life; whether it is best to start with LD, 
a dopamine agonist or MAOI-B remains unclear, but 
most accept that the most effective, best-tolerated and 
cheapest drug is LD. Many motor symptoms, such as 
tremor, freezing, falling, head-drop and abnormal 
flexion, are quite resistant to treatment. Some NMS, such 
as anxiety or depression, may respond to drug or non-
drug treatments. In the UK, rivastigmine is licensed for 
use in PD-associated dementia, although its effect is 
modest at best. Many other NMS are resistant to treat-
ment. Evidence-based statements regarding diagnosis 
and drug management of PD are listed in Box 26.66.
Levodopa.  LD is the precursor to dopamine. When 
administered orally, more than 90% is decarboxylated to 
dopamine peripherally in the gastrointestinal tract and 
blood vessels, and only a small proportion reaches the 
brain. This peripheral conversion is responsible for the 
high frequency of adverse effects, and to avoid this, LD 
is combined with a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (DDI); 
the inhibitor does not cross the blood–brain barrier, thus 
avoiding unwanted decarboxylation-blocking in the 
brain. Two DDIs, carbidopa and benserazide, are avail-
able as combination preparations with LD, as Sinemet® 
and Madopar®, respectively.
LD is most effective at relieving the akinesia and 
rigidity; tremor response is often less satisfactory, and it 
has no effect on many motor (posture, freezing) and 
non-motor symptoms. Failure of akinesia/rigidity to 
respond to LD 1000 mg/day should prompt reconsid-
eration of the diagnosis. Although controlled-release 
versions of LD exist, these are usually best reserved for 
use overnight, as their variable bioavailability makes 
them difficult to use throughout the day. Madopar® is 
also available as a dispersible tablet for more rapid-onset 
effect.
Adverse effects include postural hypotension, nausea 
and vomiting, which may be offset by domperidone. 
LD may exacerbate or trigger hallucinations, and abnor-
mal LD-seeking behaviour may occur uncommonly 
General
•	 Expressionless face 
(hypomimia)
•	 Soft, rapid, indistinct 
speech (dysphonia)
•	 Flexed (stooped) posture
•	 Impaired postural  
reflexes
Gait
•	 Slow to start walking 
(failure of gait ignition)
•	 Rapid, short stride length, 
tendency to shorten 
(festination)
•	 Reduction of arm  
swing
•	 Impaired balance on 
turning
Tremor
Resting (3–4 Hz, moderate amplitude): most common
•	 Asymmetric, usually first in arm/hand (‘pill rolling’)
•	 May affect legs, jaw and chin, but not head
•	 Intermittent, present at rest, often briefly abolished by 
movement of the limb, exacerbated by walking
Postural (6–8 Hz, moderate amplitude)
•	 Present immediately on stretching out arms
Re-emergent tremor (3–4 Hz, moderate amplitude)
•	 Initially no tremor on stretching arms out, rest tremor 
re-emerges after a few seconds
Rigidity
•	 Cogwheel type, mostly upper limbs (due to tremor 
superimposed upon rigidity)
•	 Lead pipe type
Akinesia (fundamental feature)
•	 Slowness of movement
•	 Fatiguing and decrease in size of repetitive movements
Normal findings (if abnormal, consider other causes)
•	 Power, deep tendon reflexes, plantar responses
•	 Eye movements
•	 Sensory and cerebellar examination
26.65  Physical signs in Parkinson’s disease
Fig. 26.30  Imaging in Parkinson’s disease.  A SPECT scan in 
Parkinson’s disease showing reduced dopamine activity in the basal 
ganglia.  B Normal. 
A
B
Neurodegenerative diseases
26
1197
Early treatment
‘Patients with early PD may be considered for treatment with:
•	 levodopa plus dopa decarboxylase inhibitor or
•	 oral or transdermal dopamine agonists or
•	 monoamine oxidase B inhibitors.’
‘Ergot-derived dopamine agonists should not be used as 
first-line treatment.’
‘Anticholinergic drugs should not be used as first-line 
treatment.’
Motor fluctuations
‘Motor fluctuations may be treated with either monoamine 
oxidase B inhibitors or dopamine agonists.’
‘Dopamine agonists may be used to manage motor 
complications in patients with advanced PD. The non-ergot 
agonists are preferable to the ergot agonists.’
‘Intermittent or infusions of subcutaneous apomorphine may 
be used to manage advanced PD.’
‘Catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT) inhibitors may be 
used to reduce off-time in patients with advanced PD.’
•	 SIGN 113. Diagnosis and pharmacological management of Parkinson’s disease, 
2010.
For further information: 
 www.sign.ac.uk
26.66  Management of Parkinson’s disease
(dopamine dysregulation syndrome) in which the 
patient takes excessive doses of LD.
As PD progresses, the response to LD becomes less 
predictable in many patients, leading to motor fluctua-
tions. This end-of-dose deterioration is due to progres-
sive loss of dopamine storage capacity by dwindling 
numbers of striatonigral neurons. LD-induced involun-
tary movements (dyskinesia) may occur as a peak-dose 
phenomenon or as a biphasic phenomenon (occurring 
during both the build-up and wearing-off phases). More 
complex fluctuations present as sudden, unpredictable 
changes in response, in which periods of parkinsonism 
(‘off’ phases) alternate with improved mobility but with 
dyskinesias (‘on’ phases). Motor complication manage-
ment is difficult; wearing-off effects may respond to 
increased dose or frequency of LD or the addition of a 
COMT inhibitor (see below). More complex fluctuations 
may be improved by the addition of dopamine agonists 
(including continuous infusion of apomorphine), use of 
intrajejunal LD via a percutaneous endoscopic jejunos-
tomy, or deep brain stimulator implantation.
Dopamine receptor agonists.  Originally introduced in 
the hope of delaying the initiation of LD, and thus delay-
ing motor complications, several dopamine agonists are 
available, and may be delivered orally, transdermally or 
subcutaneously (Box 26.67).
The ergot-derived agonists are no longer recom-
mended because of rare but serious fibrotic effects. With 
the exception of apomorphine, all the agonists are con-
siderably less powerful than LD in relieving parkinson-
ism, have more adverse effects (nausea, vomiting, 
confusion and hallucinations, impulse control disorders) 
and are more expensive. Their role in the management 
of PD (monotherapy or adjunctive) remains uncertain, 
and evidence is accruing to suggest that their usefulness 
as initial monotherapy is short-lasting.
MAOI-B inhibitors.  Monoamine oxidase type B facili-
tates breakdown of excess dopamine in the synapse. 
Two inhibitors are used in PD: selegiline and rasagiline. 
The effects of both are modest, although usually well 
tolerated. Neither is neuroprotective, despite initial 
hopes.
COMT inhibitors.  Catechol-O-methyl-transferase (along 
with dopa decarboxylase) is involved in peripheral 
breakdown of LD. Two inhibitors are available: enta­
capone and tolcapone (which also inhibits central 
COMT). Entacapone has a modest effect and is most 
useful for early wearing-off. It is available either as a 
single tablet taken with each LD/DDI dose, or as a 
combination tablet with LD and DDI. The more potent 
tolcapone is less used because of rare but serious 
hepatotoxicity.
Amantadine.  This has a mild, usually short-lived effect 
on bradykinesia and is rarely used unless patients are 
unable to tolerate other drugs. It is more commonly 
employed as a treatment for LD-induced dyskinesias, 
although again benefit is modest and short-lived. 
Adverse effects include livedo reticularis, peripheral 
oedema, confusion and other anticholinergic effects.
Anticholinergic drugs.  These were the main treatment 
for PD prior to the introduction of LD. Their role now 
is limited by lack of efficacy (apart from an effect on 
tremor sometimes) and adverse effects, including dry 
mouth, blurred vision, constipation, urinary retention, 
confusion and hallucinosis. Several anticholinergics 
are available, including trihexyphenidyl (benzhexol) 
and orphenadrine.
Surgery
Destructive neurosurgery was commonly used before 
the introduction of LD. In the last 20 years, stereotactic 
surgery has emerged and most commonly involves 
deep brain stimulation (DBS), rather than the destruc-
tive approach of previous eras. Various targets have 
been identified, including the thalamus (though this is 
only effective for tremor), globus pallidus and subtha-
lamic nucleus. DBS is usually reserved for patients with 
medically refractory tremor or motor fluctuations, and 
careful patient selection is vital to success. Intracranial 
delivery of fetal grafts or specific growth factors remains 
experimental.
Ergot-derived
•	 Bromocriptine
•	 Lisuride
•	 Pergolide
•	 Cabergoline
Non-ergot-derived
•	 Ropinirole
•	 Pramipexole
•	 Rotigotine (transdermal patch)
•	 Apomorphine (subcutaneous)
26.67  Dopamine agonists*
*Oral unless otherwise stated.
Neurological disease
26
1198
Physiotherapy, occupational therapy  
and speech therapy
Patients at all stages of PD benefit from physiotherapy, 
which helps reduce rigidity and corrects abnormal 
posture. Occupational therapists can provide equipment 
to help overcome functional limitations, such as rails 
for stairs and the toilet, and bathing equipment. Speech 
therapy can help where dysarthria and dysphonia 
interfere with communication, and advice may also 
be provided to those with dysphagia on the use of 
altered-texture diets. As with many complex neuro­
logical disorders, patients with PD should ideally be 
managed by a multidisciplinary team, including PD 
specialist nurses.
Other parkinsonian syndromes
Cerebrovascular disease and drug-induced parkinson-
ism are the most common alternative causes of parkin-
sonism (see Box 26.64). There are several degenerative 
conditions that cause parkinsonism, including multiple 
system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy and 
corticobasal degeneration. They typically have a more 
rapid progression than PD and tend to be resistant to 
treatment with LD. They are defined pathologically and 
identification during life is difficult. There are other 
conditions that may rarely manifest as parkinsonism, 
including Huntington’s and Wilson’s diseases.
Multiple system atrophy
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is characterised by par-
kinsonism, autonomic failure and cerebellar symptoms, 
with either parkinsonism (MSA-P) or cerebellar features 
(MSA-C) predominating. It is much less common than 
PD, with a prevalence of about 4/100 000. Although 
early distinction between PD and MSA-P may be diffi-
cult, early falls, postural instability and lack of response 
to LD are clues. The pathological hallmark is α-synuclein-
containing glial cytoplasmic inclusions found in the 
basal ganglia, cerebellum and motor cortex. Manage-
ment is symptomatic and the prognosis is less good than 
for PD, with mean survival from symptom onset of 
fewer than 10 years, and early disability. Cognition is 
preserved.
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) presents with 
symmetrical parkinsonism, cognitive impairment, early 
falls and bulbar symptoms. The characteristic eye move-
ment disorder, with slowed vertical saccades leading to 
impairment of up and down gaze, may take years to 
emerge. PSP has different pathological features, being 
associated with abnormal accumulation of tau (τ) pro-
teins and degeneration of the substantia nigra, subtha-
lamic nucleus and mid-brain. It is therefore a tauopathy 
rather than synucleinopathy. The prevalence is about 
5/100 000, with average survival similar to that in MSA. 
There is no treatment, and the parkinsonism usually 
does not respond to LD.
Corticobasal degeneration
Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is less common than 
MSA or PSP, and the clinical manifestations are variable, 
including parkinsonism, dystonia, myoclonus and ‘alien 
limb’ phenomenon, whereby a limb (usually upper) 
moves about or interferes with the other limb without 
apparent conscious control. Cortical symptoms, espe-
cially apraxia, are common and may be the only features 
in some cases, including dementia. A number of other 
diseases may present with a corticobasal syndrome, 
including other dementias. CBD is a tauopathy with 
widespread deposition throughout the brain, and has 
similar survival rates to MSA and PSP.
Wilson’s disease
This is an autosomal recessive disorder causing a defect 
of copper metabolism (p. 973). It is a treatable cause of 
various movement disorders, including tremor, dysto-
nia, parkinsonism and ataxia; psychiatric symptoms 
may also occur. Wilson’s should always be excluded 
in younger patients presenting with any movement 
disorder.
Huntington’s disease
Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant 
disorder, usually presenting in adults but occasionally 
children. It is due to expansion of a trinucleotide CAG 
repeat in the Huntingtin gene on chromosome 4 (p. 65). 
The disease frequently demonstrates the phenomenon 
of anticipation, in which there is a younger age at onset 
as the disease is passed through generations, due to 
progressive expansion of the repeat. The prevalence is 
about 4–8/100 000.
Clinical features
HD typically presents with a progressive behavioural 
disturbance, abnormal movements (usually chorea), and 
cognitive impairment leading to dementia. Onset under 
18 years is rare, but patients may then present with 
parkinsonism rather than chorea (the ‘Westphal variant’). 
There is always a family history, although this may be 
concealed.
Investigations and management
The diagnosis is confirmed by genetic testing; pre-
symptomatic testing for other family members is avail-
able but must be preceded by appropriate counselling 
(p. 67). Brain imaging may show caudate atrophy but is 
not a reliable test. There are a number of HD mimics.
Management is symptomatic. The chorea may 
respond to neuroleptics such as risperidone or sulpi­
ride, or other drugs such as tetrabenazine. Depression 
and anxiety are common, and may be helped by 
medication.
Ataxias
The ataxias are a heterogeneous group of inherited and 
acquired disorders, presenting either with pure ataxia 
or in association with other neurological and non-
neurological features. The differential is wide (Boxes 
26.68 and 26.69), and diagnosis is guided by age of onset, 
evolution and clinical features. A significant proportion 
of cases remain idiopathic despite investigation.
The hereditary ataxias are a group of inherited disor-
ders in which degenerative changes occur to varying 
Neurodegenerative diseases
26
1199
extents in the cerebellum, brainstem, pyramidal tracts, 
spinocerebellar tracts, and optic and peripheral nerves, 
and which influence the clinical manifestations. Onset 
ranges from infancy to adulthood, with recessive, sex-
linked or dominant inheritance (see Box 26.69). Whilst 
the genetic abnormality has been identified for some, 
allowing diagnostic testing, this is not currently the case 
for many of the hereditary ataxias.
Tremor disorders
Tremor (p. 1165) is a feature of many disorders, but the 
most important clinical syndromes are PD, essential 
tremor, drug-induced tremors (Box 26.70) and func-
tional (psychogenic) tremors.
Essential tremor
This has a prevalence of about 300/100 000 and may 
display a dominant pattern of inheritance, although no 
genes have thus far been identified. It may present at 
any age with a bilateral arm tremor (8–10 Hz), rarely 
at rest but typical with movement. The head and voice 
may be involved. The tremor improves in about 50% of 
patients with small amounts of alcohol. There are no 
specific tests, and it should be distinguished from other 
tremor syndromes, including dystonic tremor. Beta-
blockers and primidone are sometimes helpful, and 
DBS of the thalamus is an effective treatment for 
severe cases.
Inheritance pattern
Age of onset
Clinical features
Autosomal dominant
Episodic ataxias
Childhood and early 
adulthood
Brief episodes of ataxia, sometimes induced by stress or startle. May develop 
progressive ataxia
Spinocerebellar ataxias 
(SCA)
Childhood to middle age
Over 30 subtypes identified thus far. Progressive ataxia, sometimes associated 
with other features, including retinitis pigmentosa, pyramidal tract 
abnormalities, peripheral neuropathy and cognitive deficits
Dentato-rubro-pallidoluysian 
atrophy (DRPLA)
Childhood to middle age
Children present with myoclonic epilepsy and progressive ataxia. Adults have 
progressive ataxia with psychiatric features, dementia and choreoathetosis
Autosomal recessive
Friedreich’s ataxia
Childhood/adolescence 
(late onset possible)
Ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria, spasticity, areflexia, proprioceptive impairment, 
diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, cardiac abnormalities. Usually chair-bound
Ataxia telangiectasia
Childhood
Progressive ataxia, athetosis, telangiectasia on conjunctivae, impaired DNA 
repair, immune deficiency, tendency to malignancies
Abetalipoproteinaemia
Childhood
Steatorrhoea, sensorimotor neuropathy, retinitis pigmentosa, malabsorption of 
vitamins A, D, E, K
Hereditary ataxia with 
vitamin E deficiency
< 20 yrs
Similar to Friedreich’s ataxia, visual loss or retinitis pigmentosa, chorea
Others
Usually young onset
Numerous, with genes only identified in some
X-linked
Fragile X tremor ataxia 
syndrome
> 50 yrs
Tremor, ataxia, parkinsonism, autonomic failure, cognitive impairment and 
dementia
Adrenoleucodystrophy
Childhood to adult
Impaired adrenal and cognitive function, sometimes spastic paraparesis
Mitochondrial disease
Various
Ataxia features in several mitochondrial diseases, including Kearns–Sayre 
syndrome, MELAS, MERRF, Leigh’s syndrome (p. 46)
(MELAS = mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; MERRF = myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibres)
26.69  Inherited ataxias
Structural lesions
•	 Brain tumour
•	 Brain abscess
Toxic
•	 Drugs: lithium, phenytoin, amiodarone, toluene, 
5-fluorouracil, cytosine arabinoside
•	 Alcohol
•	 Heavy metals/chemicals: mercury, lead, thallium
Infection/post-infectious
•	 HIV
•	 Varicella zoster
•	 Whipple’s disease
•	 Miller Fisher syndrome  
(p. 1224)
Degenerative
•	 Multiple system atrophy
•	 Sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob 
disease
•	 Idiopathic (or sporadic) 
late-onset cerebellar ataxia
Inflammatory/immune-mediated
•	 Multiple sclerosis
•	 Gluten ataxia (coeliac 
disease)
•	 Paraneoplastic ataxia
•	 Hashimoto encephalopathy
Metabolic
•	 Vitamin B1 or E deficiency
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Hypoparathyroidism
Vascular
•	 Stroke (ischaemic or 
haemorrhagic)
•	 Vascular malformations
•	 Superficial siderosis
26.68  Causes of acquired ataxia
Neurological disease
26
1200
Dystonia
Dystonia is characterised by a focal increase in tone 
affecting muscles in the limbs or trunk. It may be a 
feature of a number of neurological conditions (PD, 
Wilson’s disease), or occur secondary to brain damage 
(trauma, stroke) or drugs (tardive syndromes). Dystonia 
also occurs as a primary disorder. In childhood onset, 
the cause is usually genetic and dystonia is generalised 
but adult onset is usually focal; examples include a 
twisted neck (torticollis), repetitive blinking (blepharo­
spasm) or tremor. Task-specific symptoms (e.g. writer’s 
cramp, musician’s dystonia) are often dystonic. Treat-
ment is difficult but botulinum toxin injections or DBS 
may be useful.
Hemifacial spasm
This usually presents after middle age with intermittent 
twitching around one eye, spreading ipsilaterally to 
other facial muscles. The spasms are exacerbated by 
talking, eating and stress. Hemifacial spasm is usually 
idiopathic (similarly to trigeminal neuralgia, it has been 
suggested that it is due to an aberrant arterial loop irri-
tating the 7th nerve just outside the pons), but may be 
symptomatic and secondary to structural lesions or MS. 
Drug treatment is not effective but injections of botuli-
num toxin into affected muscles help, although these 
usually have to be repeated every 3 months or so. In 
refractory cases, microvascular decompression may be 
considered.
Motor neuron disease
Motor neuron disease (MND) is a neurodegenerative 
condition caused by loss of upper and lower motor 
neurons in the spinal cord, cranial nerve nuclei and 
motor cortex. Annual incidence is about 2/100 000, with 
a prevalence of about 7/100 000. Most cases are sporadic 
but between 5 and 10% of cases are familial. Abnormali-
ties in the superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene account 
for about 20% of such cases, and recently an expanded 
repeat sequence in the C9ORF72 gene on chromosome 9 
has been associated with MND and frontotemporal 
dementia. The most common form of MND is amyo-
trophic sclerosis (ALS), and many use the terms MND 
and ALS interchangeably. ALS is characterised by a 
combination of upper and lower motor neuron signs; 
there are rarer, pure lower (progressive muscular 
atrophy) or upper (progressive lateral sclerosis) motor 
neuron variants of MND. The average age of onset is 65, 
with 10% presenting before 45 years.
Clinical features
MND typically presents focally, either with limb onset 
(e.g. foot drop) or with bulbar symptoms; respiratory 
onset is rare but respiratory failure is a common terminal 
event. Sensory, autonomic and visual symptoms do not 
occur, although cramp is common (Box 26.71). Examina-
tion reveals a combination of lower and upper motor 
neuron signs (e.g. brisk reflexes in wasted, fasciculating 
muscles) without sensory involvement (Box 26.72). Cog-
nitive impairment is under-recognised in MND: up to 
50% will have a mainly executive impairment on formal 
testing, and around 10% develop a frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD). About 10% of patients presenting with 
FTD will develop ALS within a few years of dementia 
onset. MND is relentlessly progressive and up to 50% 
die within 2 years of diagnosis.
•	 β-agonists (e.g. salbutamol)
•	 Theophylline
•	 Sodium valproate
•	 Thyroxine
•	 Lithium
•	 Tricyclic antidepressants
•	 Recreational drugs (e.g. 
amphetamines)
•	 Alcohol
•	 Caffeine
26.70  Drug-induced tremor (usually postural)*
*Drugs causing parkinsonism and associated tremor are listed in  
Box 26.64.
Onset
•	 Usually after the age of 50 yrs
•	 Very uncommon before the age of 30 yrs
•	 Affects males more commonly than females
Symptoms
•	 Limb muscle weakness, cramps, occasionally  
fasciculation
•	 Disturbance of speech/swallowing (dysarthria/dysphagia)
Signs
•	 Wasting and fasciculation of muscles
•	 Weakness of muscles of limbs, tongue, face and palate
•	 Pyramidal tract involvement, causing spasticity, exaggerated 
tendon reflexes, extensor plantar responses
•	 External ocular muscles and sphincters usually remain intact
•	 No objective sensory deficit
Course
•	 Symptoms often begin focally in one part and spread 
gradually but relentlessly to become widespread
26.71  Clinical features of motor neuron disease
Progressive muscular atrophy
•	 Predominantly spinal motor neurons affected
•	 Weakness and wasting of distal limb muscles at first
•	 Fasciculation in muscles
•	 Tendon reflexes may be absent
Progressive bulbar palsy
•	 Early involvement of tongue, palate and pharyngeal muscles
•	 Dysarthria/dysphagia
•	 Wasting and fasciculation of tongue
•	 Pyramidal signs may also be present
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
•	 Combination of distal and proximal muscle-wasting and 
weakness, fasciculation
•	 Spasticity, exaggerated reflexes, extensor plantars
•	 Bulbar and pseudobulbar palsy follow eventually
•	 Pyramidal tract features may predominate
26.72  Patterns of involvement in 
motor neuron disease
Infections of the nervous system
26
1201
Investigations
Clinical features are often typical but alternative diag-
noses should be excluded. Exclusion of treatable causes, 
such as immune-mediated multifocal motor neuropathy 
with conduction block (p. 1224) and cervical myelo­
radiculopathy, is essential. Blood tests are usually 
normal, other than a mildly raised creatine kinase. 
Sensory and motor nerve conduction studies are normal 
but there may be reduction in amplitude of motor action 
potentials due to axonal loss. Electromyo­graphy will 
usually confirm the typical features of widespread 
denervation and re-innervation. Spinal fluid analysis is 
not usually necessary. DNA testing may become more 
important as genetic factors become clearer.
Management
Patients should be managed within a multidisciplinary 
service, including physiotherapists, speech and occu­
pational therapists, dietitians, ventilatory and feeding 
support, and palliative care teams, with neurological 
and respiratory input. Riluzole is licensed for ALS but 
has only a modest effect (Box 26.73). Non-invasive ven-
tilatory support and/or feeding by percutaneous gas-
trostomy may improve quality of life in selected patients. 
Rapid access to palliative care teams is essential for 
patients as they enter the terminal stages of MND.
‘Riluzole 100 mg daily is reasonably safe and may prolong 
median survival by about 2–3 months in patients with ALS.’
‘Non-invasive ventilation significantly prolongs survival and 
improves or maintains quality of life in people with ALS. Survival 
and some measures of quality of life were significantly improved 
in the subgroup of people with better bulbar function, but not in 
those with severe bulbar impairment.’
•	 Radunovic A, et al. Mechanical ventilation for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor 
neuron disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2009, issue 4. Art. 
no.: CD004427.
•	 Miller RG, et al. Riluzole for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/motor neuron 
disease (MND). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2012, issue 3. Art. 
no.: CD001447.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
26.73  Effective treatments for amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease
Bacterial infections
•	 Meningitis
•	 Suppurative encephalitis
•	 Brain abscess
•	 Paravertebral (epidural) 
abscess
•	 Tuberculosis (Ch. 19)
•	 Neurosyphilis
•	 Leprosy (peripheral 
nerves)*
•	 Diphtheria (peripheral 
nerves)*
•	 Tetanus (motor cells)
Viral infections
•	 Meningitis
•	 Encephalitis
•	 Transverse myelitis
•	 Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy
•	 Poliomyelitis
•	 Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis (late 
sequel)
•	 Rabies
•	 HIV infection (Ch. 14)
Prion diseases
•	 Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
•	 Kuru
Protozoal infections
•	 Malaria*
•	 Toxoplasmosis (in 
immune-suppressed)*
•	 Trypanosomiasis*
•	 Amoebic abscess*
Helminthic infections
•	 Schistosomiasis (spinal 
cord)*
•	 Cysticercosis*
•	 Hydatid disease*
•	 Strongyloidiasis*
Fungal infections
•	 Candida meningitis or brain 
abscess
•	 Cryptococcal meningitis
*These infections are discussed in Chapter 13.
26.74  Infections of the nervous system
The major infections of the nervous system are listed in 
Box 26.74. The frequency of these varies geographically. 
Helminthic infections, such as cysticercosis and hydatid 
disease, and protozoal infections are described in 
Chapter 13.
Meningitis
Acute infection of the meninges presents with a charac-
teristic combination of pyrexia, headache and menin­
gism. Meningism consists of headache, photophobia and 
stiffness of the neck, often accompanied by other signs 
of meningeal irritation, including Kernig’s sign (exten-
sion at the knee with the hip joint flexed causes spasm 
in the hamstring muscles) and Brudzinski’s sign (passive 
flexion of the neck causes flexion of the hips and knees). 
Meningism is not specific to meningitis and can occur in 
patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage. The severity 
of clinical features varies with the causative organism, 
as does the presence of other features such as a rash. 
Abnormalities in the CSF (see Box 26.5, p. 1154) are 
important in distinguishing the cause of meningitis. 
Causes of meningitis are listed in Box 26.75.
Viral meningitis
Viruses are the most common cause of meningitis, 
usually resulting in a benign and self-limiting illness 
requiring no specific therapy. It is much less serious 
Spinal muscular atrophy
This is a group of genetically determined disorders 
affecting spinal and cranial lower motor neurons, char-
acterised by proximal and distal wasting, fasciculation 
and weakness of muscles. Involvement is usually sym-
metrical but occasional localised forms occur. With the 
exception of the infantile form, progression is slow and 
the prognosis better than for MND.
INFECTIONS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The clinical features of nervous system infections 
depend on the location of the infection (the meninges 
or the parenchyma of the brain and spinal cord), the 
causative organism (virus, bacterium, fungus or para-
site), and whether the infection is acute or chronic. 
Neurological disease
26
1202
than bacterial meningitis unless there is associated 
encephalitis (which is rare). A number of viruses can 
cause meningitis (see Box 26.75), the most common 
being enteroviruses. Where specific immunisation is 
not employed, the mumps virus is a common cause.
Clinical features
Viral meningitis occurs mainly in children or young 
adults, with acute onset of headache and irritability and 
the rapid development of meningism. The headache is 
usually the most severe feature. There may be a high 
pyrexia but focal neurological signs are rare.
Investigations
The diagnosis is made by lumbar puncture. The CSF 
usually contains an excess of lymphocytes but glucose 
and protein levels are commonly normal; the protein 
level may be raised. It is extremely important to verify 
that the patient has not received antibiotics (for what-
ever cause) prior to the lumbar puncture, as this picture 
can also be found in partially treated bacterial 
meningitis.
Management
There is no specific treatment and the condition is 
usually benign and self-limiting. The patient should be 
treated symptomatically in a quiet environment. Recov-
ery usually occurs within days, although a lymphocytic 
pleocytosis may persist in the CSF. Meningitis may also 
occur as a complication of a systemic viral infection such 
as mumps, measles, infectious mononucleosis, herpes 
zoster and hepatitis. Whatever the virus, complete 
recovery without specific therapy is the rule.
Bacterial meningitis
Many bacteria can cause meningitis but geographical 
patterns vary, as does age-related sensitivity (Box 26.76). 
Bacterial meningitis is usually part of a bacteraemic 
illness, although direct spread from an adjacent focus 
of infection in the ear, skull fracture or sinus can be 
causative. Antibiotics have rendered this less common 
but mortality and morbidity remain significant. An 
important factor in determining prognosis is early diag-
nosis and the prompt initiation of appropriate therapy. 
The meningococcus and other common causes of men-
ingitis are normal commensals of the upper respiratory 
tract. New and potentially pathogenic strains are 
acquired by the air-borne route but close contact is nec-
essary. Epidemics of meningococcal meningitis occur 
particularly in cramped living conditions or where the 
climate is hot and dry. The organism invades through 
the nasopharynx, producing septicaemia and leading to 
meningitis.
Pathophysiology
The meningococcus (Neisseria meningitidis) is now the 
most common cause of bacterial meningitis in Western 
Europe after Streptococcus pneumoniae, whilst in the 
USA Haemophilus influenzae remains common. In India, 
H. influenzae B and Strep. pneumoniae are probably the 
most common causes of bacterial meningitis, especially 
in children. Strep. suis is a rare zoonotic cause of menin-
gitis associated with contact with pigs. The infection 
stimulates an immune response, causing the pia–
arachnoid membrane to become congested and infil-
trated with inflammatory cells. Pus then forms in layers, 
which may later organise to form adhesions. These may 
obstruct the free flow of CSF, leading to hydrocephalus, 
or they may damage the cranial nerves at the base of the 
brain. Hearing loss is a frequent complication. The CSF 
pressure rises rapidly, the protein content increases, and 
there is a cellular reaction that varies in type and severity 
according to the nature of the inflammation and the 
causative organism. An obliterative endarteritis of the 
leptomeningeal arteries passing through the meningeal 
exudate may produce secondary cerebral infarction. 
Pneumococcal meningitis is often associated with a very 
purulent CSF and a high mortality, especially in older 
adults.
Age of onset
Common
Less common
Neonate
Gram-negative bacilli 
(Escherichia coli, 
Proteus)
Group B streptococci
Listeria monocytogenes
Pre-school 
child
Haemophilus 
influenzae
Neisseria meningitidis
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Older child 
and adult
Neisseria meningitidis
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Staphylococcus aureus 
(skull fracture)
Haemophilus 
influenzae
26.76  Bacterial causes of meningitis
Infective
Bacteria (see Box 26.76)
Viruses
•	 Enteroviruses (echo, 
Coxsackie, polio)
•	 Mumps
•	 Influenza
•	 Herpes simplex
•	 Varicella zoster
•	 Epstein–Barr
•	 HIV
•	 Lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis
•	 Mollaret’s meningitis (herpes 
simplex virus type 2)
Protozoa and parasites
•	 Cysticerci
•	 Amoeba
Fungi
•	 Cryptococcus neoformans
•	 Candida
•	 Histoplasma
•	 Blastomyces
•	 Coccidioides
•	 Sporothrix
Non-infective (‘sterile’)
Malignant disease
•	 Breast cancer
•	 Bronchial cancer
•	 Leukaemia
•	 Lymphoma
Inflammatory disease (may be recurrent)
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 SLE
•	 Behçet’s disease
26.75  Causes of meningitis
Infections of the nervous system
26
1203
Recommended empirical therapy before the cause of 
meningitis is known is given in Box 26.78, and the pre-
ferred anti­biotic when the organism is known after 
CSF examination is stipulated in Box 26.79. Adjunctive 
corticosteroid therapy is useful in both children and 
adults (Box 26.80) in developed countries where the inci-
dence of penicillin resistance is low, but its role in set-
tings where there are high rates of resistance or in 
under-developed countries where there are high rates of 
untreated HIV is unclear.
In meningococcal disease, mortality is doubled if the 
patient presents with features of septicaemia rather than 
meningitis. Individuals likely to require intensive care 
facilities and expertise include those with cardiac, 
respiratory or renal involvement, and those with CNS 
depression prejudicing the airway. Early endotracheal 
intubation and mechanical ventilation protect the airway 
and may prevent the development of the acute respira-
tory distress syndrome (ARDS, p. 192). Adverse prog-
nostic features include hypotensive shock, a rapidly 
developing rash, a haemorrhagic diathesis, multisystem 
failure and age over 60 years.
Prevention of meningococcal infection
Close contacts of patients with meningococcal infection 
(Box 26.81) should be given 2 days of oral rifampicin. In 
Clinical features
Headache, drowsiness, fever and neck stiffness are the 
usual presenting features. In severe bacterial meningitis 
the patient may be comatose and later there may be focal 
neurological signs. Ninety percent of patients with 
meningococcal meningitis will have two of the follow-
ing: fever, neck stiffness, altered consciousness and rash. 
When accompanied by septicaemia, it may present very 
rapidly, with abrupt onset of obtundation due to cere-
bral oedema. Complications of meningococcal septicae-
mia are listed in Box 26.77. Chronic meningococcaemia 
is a rare condition in which the patient can be unwell for 
weeks or even months with recurrent fever, sweating, 
joint pains and transient rash. It usually occurs in the 
middle-aged and elderly, and in those who have previ-
ously had a splenectomy. In pneumococcal and Haemo-
philus infections there may be an associated otitis media. 
Pneumococcal meningitis may be associated with pneu-
monia and occurs especially in older patients and alco-
holics, as well as those without functioning spleens. 
Listeria monocytogenes is an increasing cause of meningi-
tis and rhombencephalitis (brainstem encephalitis) in 
the immunosuppressed, people with diabetes, alcoholics 
and pregnant women (p. 339). It can also cause menin-
gitis in neonates.
Investigations
Lumbar puncture is mandatory unless there are contra­
indications (p. 1154). If the patient is drowsy and has 
focal neurological signs or seizures, is immunosup-
pressed, has undergone recent neurosurgery or has suf-
fered a head injury, it is wise to obtain a CT to exclude 
a mass lesion (such as a cerebral abscess) before lumbar 
puncture because of the risk of coning. This should not, 
however, delay treatment of a presumptive meningitis. 
If lumbar puncture is deferred or omitted, it is essential 
to take blood cultures and to start empirical treatment 
(Fig. 26.31). Lumbar puncture will help differentiate the 
causative organism: in bacterial meningitis the CSF is 
cloudy (turbid) due to the presence of many neutrophils 
(often > 1000 × 106 cells/L), the protein content is signifi-
cantly elevated and the glucose reduced. Gram film and 
culture may allow identification of the organism. Blood 
cultures may be positive. PCR techniques can be used 
on both blood and CSF to identify bacterial DNA. These 
methods are useful in detecting meningococcal infection 
and in typing the organism.
Management
There is an untreated mortality rate of around 80%, so 
action must be swift. If bacterial meningitis is suspected, 
the patient should be given parenteral benzylpenicillin 
immediately (intravenous is preferable) and prompt 
hospital admission should be arranged. The only contra­
indication is a history of penicillin anaphylaxis. 
•	 Meningitis
•	 Rash (morbilliform, 
petechial or purpuric)
•	 Shock
•	 Intravascular coagulation
•	 Renal failure
•	 Peripheral gangrene
•	 Arthritis (septic or reactive)
•	 Pericarditis (septic or 
reactive)
26.77  Complications of meningococcal 
septicaemia
Fig. 26.31  The investigation of meningitis. 
Resuscitate and stabilise patient
Initial tests
(blood culture and polymerase
chain reaction, throat swab)
Empirical antibiotics (Box 26.78)
Transfer to critical care facility
Drowsy, focal signs?
(possible mass lesion, hydrocephalus
or cerebral oedema)
No
Yes
Lumbar
puncture
No other
contraindication
to lumbar puncture
CT
brain
No mass lesion,
hydrocephalus
or other
contraindication
to lumbar
puncture seen
Neurological disease
26
1204
adults, a single dose of ciprofloxacin is an alternative. 
If not treated with ceftriaxone, the index case should 
be given similar treatment to clear infection from the 
nasopharynx before hospital discharge. Vaccines are 
available for most meningococcal subgroups but not 
group B, which is among the most common serogroup 
isolated in many countries.
Tuberculous meningitis
Tuberculous meningitis is now uncommon in developed 
countries in previously healthy individuals, although it 
is still seen in those born in endemic areas and in the 
immunocompromised. It remains common in develop-
ing countries and is seen more frequently as a secondary 
infection in patients with the acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS).
Pathophysiology
Tuberculous meningitis most commonly occurs shortly 
after a primary infection in childhood or as part of 
miliary tuberculosis (p. 689). The usual local source of 
infection is a caseous focus in the meninges or brain 
substance adjacent to the CSF pathway. The brain is 
covered by a greenish, gelatinous exudate, especially 
around the base, and numerous scattered tubercles are 
found on the meninges.
1.	 Adults aged 18–50 yrs with or without a typical 
meningococcal rash
•	 Cefotaxime 2 g IV 4 times daily or
•	 Ceftriaxone 2 g IV twice daily
2.	 Patients in whom penicillin-resistant pneumococcal 
infection is suspected, or in areas with a significant 
incidence of penicillin resistance in the community
As for (1) but add:
•	 Vancomycin 1 g IV twice daily or
•	 Rifampicin 600 mg IV twice daily
3.	 Adults aged > 50 yrs and those in whom Listeria 
monocytogenes infection is suspected (brainstem signs, 
immunosuppression, diabetic, alcoholic)
As for (1) but add:
•	 Ampicillin 2 g IV 6 times daily or
•	 Co-trimoxazole 50 mg/kg IV daily in two divided doses
4.	 Patients with a clear history of anaphylaxis to β-lactams
•	 Chloramphenicol 25 mg/kg IV 4 times daily plus
•	 Vancomycin 1 g IV twice daily
5.	 Adjunctive treatment (see text)
•	 Dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg 4 times daily for 2–4 days
26.78  Treatment of pyogenic meningitis of 
unknown cause
Corticosteroids significantly reduce hearing loss and neurological 
sequelae, but do not reduce overall mortality.
•	 Brouwer MC, et al. Corticosteroids for acute bacterial meningitis. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010, issue 9. Art. no.: CD004405.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
26.80  Adjunctive dexamethasone for 
bacterial meningitis
Pathogen
Regimen of choice
Alternative 
agents
N. meningitidis
Benzylpenicillin 
2.4 g IV 6 times 
daily for 5–7 days
Cefuroxime, 
ampicillin
Chloramphenicol*
Strep. pneumoniae
(sensitive to 
β-lactams, MIC 
< 1 mg/L)
Cefotaxime 2 g IV 
4 times daily or
ceftriaxone 2 g IV 
twice daily for 
10–14 days
Chloramphenicol*
Strep. pneumoniae
(resistant to 
β-lactams)
As for sensitive 
strains but add 
vancomycin 1 g IV 
twice daily or
rifampicin 600 mg 
IV twice daily
Vancomycin plus 
rifampicin*
Moxifloxacin
Gatifloxacin
H. influenzae
Cefotaxime 2 g IV 
4 times daily or
ceftriaxone 2 g IV 
twice daily for 
10–14 days
Chloramphenicol*
L. monocytogenes
Ampicillin 2 g IV  
6 times daily plus
gentamicin 5 mg/
kg IV daily
Ampicillin 2 g IV 
4-hourly plus
co-trimoxazole 
50 mg/kg daily in 
two divided doses
Strep. suis
Cefotaxime 2 g IV 
4 times daily or
ceftriaxone 2 g IV 
twice daily for 
10–14 days
Chloramphenicol*
*For patients with a history of anaphylaxis to β-lactam antibiotics.
26.79  Chemotherapy of bacterial meningitis 
when the cause is known
(MIC = minimum inhibitory concentration)
Close contacts warranting chemoprophylaxis
•	 Household contacts (including persons who ate or slept in 
the same dwelling as the patient during the 7 days prior to 
disease onset)
•	 Child-care and nursery-school contacts
•	 Persons having contact with patient’s oral secretions during 
the 7 days prior to disease onset
Kissing
Sharing of toothbrushes
Sharing of eating utensils
Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
Unprotected contact during endotracheal intubation
•	 Aircraft contacts for persons seated next to the patient  
for > 8 hrs
Persons at low risk in whom chemoprophylaxis is  
not recommended
•	 Casual contact (e.g. at school or work) without direct 
exposure to patient’s oral secretions
•	 Indirect contact only (contact with a high-risk contact and not 
a case)
•	 Health-care worker without direct exposure to patient’s oral 
secretions
26.81  Chemoprophylaxis following 
meningococcal exposure
Infections of the nervous system
26
1205
(p. 401). The CSF findings are similar to those of tuber-
culous meningitis, but the diagnosis can be confirmed 
by microscopy or specific serological tests.
In some areas, meningitis may be caused by spiro­
chaetes (leptospirosis, Lyme disease and syphilis –  
pp. 336, 334 and 419), rickettsiae (typhus fever – p. 350) 
or protozoa (amoebiasis – p. 367).
Meningitis can also be due to non-infective patholo-
gies. This is seen in recurrent aseptic meningitis due to 
SLE, Behçet’s disease or sarcoidosis, as well as a condi-
tion of previously unknown origin known as Mollaret’s 
syndrome, in which the recurrent meningitis is associ-
ated with epithelioid cells in the spinal fluid (‘Mollaret’ 
cells). Recent evidence suggests that this condition may 
be due to human herpes virus type 2, and is therefore 
infective after all. Meningitis can also be seen due to 
direct invasion of the meninges by neoplastic cells 
(‘malignant meningitis’ – see Box 26.75, p. 1202).
Parenchymal viral infections
Infection of the substance of the nervous system 
will produce symptoms of focal dysfunction (deficits 
and/or seizures) with general signs of infection, depend-
ing on the acuteness of the infection and the type of 
organism.
Viral encephalitis
A range of viruses can cause encephalitis but only a 
minority of patients have a history of recent viral infec-
tion. In Europe, the most serious cause of viral encepha-
litis is herpes simplex (p. 325), which probably reaches 
the brain via the olfactory nerves. Varicella zoster is 
also an important cause. The development of effective 
therapy for some forms of encephalitis has increased the 
importance of clinical diagnosis and virological exami-
nation of the CSF. In some parts of the world, viruses 
transmitted by mosquitoes and ticks (arboviruses) are an 
important cause of encephalitis. The epidemiology of 
some of these infections is changing. Japanese encepha-
litis (p. 328) has spread relentlessly across Asia to 
Australia, and there have been outbreaks of West 
Nile encephalitis in Romania, Israel and New York. HIV 
may cause encephalitis with a subacute or chronic pres-
entation, but occasionally has an acute presentation with 
seroconversion.
Pathophysiology
The infection provokes an inflammatory response that 
involves the cortex, white matter, basal ganglia and 
brainstem. The distribution of lesions varies with the 
type of virus. For example, in herpes simplex encepha-
litis, the temporal lobes are usually primarily affected, 
whereas cytomegalovirus can involve the areas adjacent 
to the ventricles (ventriculitis). Inclusion bodies may 
be present in the neurons and glial cells and there is 
an infiltration of polymorphonuclear cells in the 
perivascular space. There is neuronal degeneration and 
diffuse glial proliferation, often associated with cerebral 
oedema.
Clinical features
Viral encephalitis presents with acute onset of head­
ache, fever, focal neurological signs (aphasia and/or 
Clinical features
The clinical features and staging criteria are listed in Box 
26.82. Onset is much slower than in other bacterial men-
ingitis – over 2–8 weeks. If untreated, it is fatal in a few 
weeks but complete recovery is usual if treatment is 
started at stage I (see Box 26.82). When treatment is initi-
ated later, the rate of death or serious neurological 
deficit may be as high as 30%.
Investigations
Lumbar puncture should be performed if the diagnosis 
is suspected. The CSF is under increased pressure. It 
is usually clear but, when allowed to stand, a fine 
clot (‘spider web’) may form. The fluid contains up to 
500 × 106 cells/L, predominantly lymphocytes, but can 
contain neutrophils. There is a rise in protein and a 
marked fall in glucose. The tubercle bacillus may be 
detected in a smear of the centrifuged deposit from 
the CSF but a negative result does not exclude the diag-
nosis. The CSF should be cultured but, as this result will 
not be known for up to 6 weeks, treatment must be 
started without waiting for confirmation. Brain imaging 
may show hydrocephalus, brisk meningeal enhance-
ment on enhanced CT or MRI, and/or an intracranial 
tuberculoma.
Management
As soon as the diagnosis is made or strongly suspected, 
chemotherapy should be started using one of the regi-
mens that include pyrazinamide, described on page 693. 
The use of corticosteroids in addition to anti-tuberculous 
therapy has been controversial. Recent evidence sug-
gests that it improves mortality, especially if given early, 
but not focal neurological damage. Surgical ventricular 
drainage may be needed if obstructive hydrocephalus 
develops. Skilled nursing is essential during the acute 
phase of the illness, and adequate hydration and nutri-
tion must be maintained.
Other forms of meningitis
Fungal meningitis (especially cryptococcosis – p. 384) 
usually occurs in patients who are immunosuppressed 
and is a recognised complication of HIV infection 
Symptoms
•	 Headache
•	 Vomiting
•	 Low-grade fever
•	 Lassitude
•	 Depression
•	 Confusion
•	 Behaviour changes
Signs
•	 Meningism (may be absent)
•	 Oculomotor palsies
•	 Papilloedema
•	 Depression of conscious 
level
•	 Focal hemisphere signs
Staging of severity
•	 Stage I (early): non-specific symptoms and signs without 
alteration of consciousness
•	 Stage II (intermediate): altered consciousness without coma 
or delirium + minor focal neurological signs
•	 Stage III (advanced): stupor or coma, severe neurological 
deficits, seizures or abnormal movements
26.82  Clinical features and staging of 
tuberculous meningitis
Neurological disease
26
1206
hemi­plegia, visual field defects) and seizures. Distur-
bance of consciousness ranging from drowsiness to deep 
coma supervenes early and may advance dramatically. 
Meningism occurs in many patients. Rabies presents a 
distinct clinical picture and is described below.
Investigations
Imaging by CT scan may show low-density lesions in 
the temporal lobes but MRI is more sensitive in detecting 
early abnormalities. Lumbar puncture should be per-
formed once imaging has excluded a mass lesion. The 
CSF usually contains excess lymphocytes but poly­
morphonuclear cells may predominate in the early 
stages. The CSF may be normal in up to 10% of cases. 
Some viruses, including the West Nile virus, may cause 
a sustained neutrophilic CSF. The protein content may 
be elevated but the glucose is normal. The EEG is usually 
abnormal in the early stages, especially in herpes simplex 
encephalitis, with characteristic periodic slow-wave 
activity in the temporal lobes. Virological investigations 
of the CSF, including PCR for viral DNA, may reveal the 
causative organism but treatment initiation should not 
await this.
Management
Optimum treatment for herpes simplex encephalitis (aci-
clovir 10 mg/kg IV 3 times daily for 2–3 weeks) has 
reduced mortality from 70% to around 10%. This should 
be given early to all patients suspected of suffering from 
viral encephalitis.
Some survivors will have residual epilepsy or cogni-
tive impairment. For details of post-infectious encephalo­
myelitis, see page 1192. Anticonvulsant treatment may 
be needed (p. 1183) and raised intracranial pressure may 
indicate the need for dexamethasone.
Brainstem encephalitis
This presents with ataxia, dysarthria, diplopia or other 
cranial nerve palsies. The CSF is lymphocytic, with a 
normal glucose. The causative agent is presumed to be 
viral. However, Listeria monocytogenes may cause a 
similar syndrome with meningitis (and often a poly­
morphonuclear CSF pleocytosis) and requires specific 
treatment with ampicillin 500 mg 4 times daily (see 
Box 26.79).
Rabies
Rabies is caused by a rhabdovirus that infects the central 
nervous tissue and salivary glands of a wide range of 
mammals, and is usually conveyed by saliva through 
bites or licks on abrasions or on intact mucous mem-
branes. Humans are most frequently infected from dogs 
and bats. In Europe, the maintenance host is the fox. The 
incubation period varies in humans from a minimum of 
9 days to many months but is usually between 4 and 
8 weeks. Severe bites, especially if on the head or neck, 
are associated with shorter incubation periods. Human 
rabies is a rare disease, even in endemic areas. However, 
because it is usually fatal, major efforts are directed at 
limiting its spread and preventing its importation into 
uninfected countries, such as the UK.
Clinical features
At the onset there may be fever, and paraesthesia at the 
site of the bite. A prodromal period of 1–10 days, during 
which the patient becomes increasingly anxious, leads 
to the characteristic ‘hydrophobia’. Although the patient 
is thirsty, attempts at drinking provoke violent contrac-
tions of the diaphragm and other inspiratory muscles. 
Delusions and hallucinations may develop, accompa-
nied by spitting, biting and mania, with lucid intervals 
in which the patient is markedly anxious. Cranial nerve 
lesions develop and terminal hyperpyrexia is common. 
Death ensues, usually within a week of the onset of 
symptoms.
Investigations
During life, the diagnosis is usually made on clinical 
grounds but rapid immunofluorescent techniques can 
detect antigen in corneal impression smears or skin 
biopsies.
Management
Established disease
Only a few patients with established rabies have sur-
vived. All received some post-exposure prophylaxis (see 
below) and needed intensive care facilities to control 
cardiac and respiratory failure. Otherwise, only pallia-
tive treatment is possible once symptoms have appeared. 
The patient should be heavily sedated with diazepam, 
supplemented by chlorpromazine if needed. Nutrition 
and fluids should be given intravenously or through a 
gastrostomy.
Pre-exposure prophylaxis
Pre-exposure prophylaxis is required by those who 
handle potentially infected animals professionally, 
those who work with rabies virus in laboratories and 
those who live at special risk in rabies-endemic areas. 
Protection is afforded by intradermal injections of 
human diploid cell strain vaccine, or two intramuscular 
injections given 4 weeks apart, followed by yearly 
boosters.
Post-exposure prophylaxis
The wounds should be thoroughly cleaned, preferably 
with a quaternary ammonium detergent or soap; 
damaged tissues should be excised and the wound left 
unsutured. Rabies can usually be prevented if treatment 
is started within a day or two of biting. Delayed treat-
ment may still be of value. For maximum protection, 
hyperimmune serum and vaccine are required.
The safest antirabies antiserum is human rabies 
immunoglobulin. The dose is 20 U/kg body weight; half 
is infiltrated around the bite and half is given intramus-
cularly at a different site from the vaccine. Hyper­
immune animal serum may be used but hypersensitivity 
reactions, including anaphylaxis, are common.
The safest vaccine, free of complications, is human 
diploid cell strain vaccine; 1.0 mL is given intramuscu-
larly on days 0, 3, 7, 14, 30 and 90. In developing 
countries, where human rabies globulin may not be 
obtainable, 0.1 mL of vaccine may be given intrader-
mally into eight sites on day 1, with single boosters on 
days 7 and 28. Where human products are not available 
and when risk of rabies is slight (licks on the skin, or 
minor bites of covered arms or legs), it may be justifiable 
to delay starting treatment while observing the biting 
animal or awaiting examination of its brain, rather than 
use the older vaccine.
Infections of the nervous system
26
1207
Poliomyelitis
Pathophysiology
Disease is caused by one of three polioviruses, which 
constitutes a subgroup of the enteroviruses. Poliomyeli-
tis has become much less common in developed coun-
tries following the widespread use of oral vaccines but 
is still a problem in the developing world, especially 
parts of Africa. Infection usually occurs through the 
nasopharynx.
The virus causes a lymphocytic meningitis and infects 
the grey matter of the spinal cord, brainstem and cortex. 
There is a particular propensity to damage anterior horn 
cells, especially in the lumbar segments.
Clinical features
The incubation period is 7–14 days. Figure 26.32 illus-
trates the various features of the infection. Many patients 
recover fully after the initial phase of a few days of mild 
fever and headache. In other individuals, after a week 
of well-being, there is a recurrence of pyrexia, headache 
and meningism. Weakness may start later in one muscle 
group and can progress to widespread paresis. Respira-
tory failure may supervene if intercostal muscles are 
paralysed or the medullary motor nuclei are involved. 
Epidemics vary widely in terms of the incidence of non-
paralytic cases and in mortality rate. Death occurs from 
respiratory paralysis. Muscle weakness is maximal at 
the end of the first week and gradual recovery may then 
take place over several months. Muscles showing no 
signs of recovery after a month will probably not regain 
useful function. Second attacks are very rare but occa-
sionally patients show late deterioration in muscle bulk 
and power many years after the initial infection (this is 
termed the ‘post-polio syndrome’).
Investigations
The CSF shows a lymphocytic pleocytosis, a rise in 
protein and a normal sugar content. Poliomyelitis virus 
may be cultured from CSF and stool.
Management
Established disease
In the early stages, bed rest is imperative because exer-
cise appears to worsen the paralysis or precipitate it. At 
the onset of respiratory difficulties, a tracheostomy and 
ventilation are required. Subsequent treatment is by 
physiotherapy and orthopaedic measures.
Prophylaxis
Prevention of poliomyelitis is by immunisation with 
live (Sabin) vaccine. In developed countries where 
polio is now very rare, the live vaccine has been replaced 
by the killed vaccine in childhood immunisation 
schedules.
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Herpes zoster is the result of reactivation of the varicella 
zoster virus that has lain dormant in a nerve root gan-
glion following chickenpox earlier in life. Reactivation 
may be spontaneous (as usually occurs in the middle-
aged or elderly) or due to immunosuppression (as in 
patients with diabetes, malignant disease or AIDS). Full 
details are given on page 318.
Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis
This is a rare, chronic, progressive and eventually 
fatal complication of measles, presumably a result of 
an inability of the nervous system to eradicate the 
virus. It occurs in children and adolescents, usually 
many years after the primary virus infection. There 
is generalised neurological deterioration and onset is 
insidious, with intellectual deterioration, apathy and 
clumsiness, followed by myoclonic jerks, rigidity and 
dementia.
The CSF may show a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis 
and the EEG demonstrates characteristic periodic bursts 
of triphasic waves. Although there is persistent measles-
specific IgG in serum and CSF, antiviral therapy is inef-
fective and death ensues within a few years.
Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy
This was originally described as a rare complication 
of lymphoma, leukaemia or carcinomatosis, but has 
become more frequent as a feature of AIDS (p. 402). It is 
an infection of oligodendrocytes by human polyoma­
virus JC, which causes widespread demyelination of 
the white matter of the cerebral hemispheres. Clinical 
signs include dementia, hemiparesis and aphasia, which 
progress rapidly, usually leading to death within weeks 
or months. Areas of low density in the white matter are 
seen on CT but MRI is more sensitive, showing diffuse 
high signal in the cerebral white matter on T2-weighted 
images. The only treatment available is to restore the 
immune response (by treating AIDS or any other cause 
of immunosuppression).
Fig. 26.32  Poliomyelitis. Possible consequences of infection. 
Infection
Asymptomatic
seroconversion
Aseptic meningitis
(encephalitis)
Febrile
illness
1
2
3
Anterior horn
cell infection
Recovery
Lower motor
neuron paralysis
Recovery
Death
Residual
disability
Complete
Late
deterioration
Neurological disease
26
1208
Parenchymal bacterial infections
Cerebral abscess
Bacteria may enter the cerebral substance through pen-
etrating injury, by direct spread from paranasal sinuses 
or the middle ear, or secondary to septicaemia. The site 
of abscess formation and the likely causative organism 
are both related to the source of infection (Box 26.83). 
Initial infection leads to local suppuration followed by 
loculation of pus within a surrounding wall of gliosis, 
which in a chronic abscess may form a tough capsule. 
Haematogenous spread may lead to multiple abscesses.
Clinical features
A cerebral abscess may present acutely with fever, head-
ache, meningism and drowsiness, but more commonly 
presents over days or weeks as a cerebral mass lesion 
with little or no evidence of infection. Seizures, raised 
intracranial pressure and focal hemisphere signs occur 
alone or in combination. Distinction from a cerebral 
tumour may be impossible on clinical grounds.
Investigations
Lumbar puncture is potentially hazardous in the pres-
ence of raised intracranial pressure and CT should 
always precede it. CT reveals single or multiple low-
density areas, which show ring enhancement with 
contrast and surrounding cerebral oedema (Fig. 26.33). 
There may be an elevated white blood cell count and 
ESR in patients with active local infection. The possibil-
ity of cerebral toxoplasmosis or tuberculous disease 
secondary to HIV infection (p. 402) should always be 
considered.
Management and prognosis
Antimicrobial therapy is indicated once the diagnosis is 
made. The likely source of infection should guide the 
choice of antibiotic (see Box 26.83). In neurosurgical 
patients, the addition of vancomycin should be consid-
ered. Surgical drainage by burr-hole aspiration or exci-
sion may be necessary, especially where the presence of 
a capsule may lead to a persistent focus of infection. 
Site of abscess
Source of infection
Likely organisms
Recommended treatment
Frontal lobe
Paranasal sinuses
Teeth
Streptococci
Anaerobes
Cefotaxime 2–3 g IV 4 times daily plus 
Metronidazole 500 mg IV 3 times daily
Temporal lobe
Cerebellum
Middle ear
Sphenoid sinus 
Mastoid/middle ear
Streptococci
Enterobacteriaceae
Pseudomonas spp.
Anaerobes
Ampicillin 2–3 g IV 3 times daily plus 
Metronidazole 500 mg IV 3 times daily plus either Ceftazidime 
2 g IV 3 times daily or 
Gentamicin* 5 mg/kg IV daily
Any site
Penetrating trauma
Staphylococci
Flucloxacillin 2–3 g IV 4 times daily or 
Cefuroxime 1.5 g IV 3 times daily
Multiple
Metastatic and 
cryptogenic
Streptococci
Anaerobes
Benzylpenicillin 1.8–2.4 g IV 4 times daily if endocarditis or 
cyanotic heart disease
Otherwise cefotaxime 2–3 g IV 4 times daily plus
Metronidazole 500 mg IV 3 times daily
*Monitor gentamicin levels.
26.83  Aetiology and treatment of bacterial cerebral abscess
Fig. 26.33  Right temporal cerebral abscess (arrows), with 
surrounding oedema and midline shift to the left.  A Unenhanced 
CT image.  B Contrast-enhanced CT image. 
A
B
Infections of the nervous system
26
1209
and irregular pupils that react to convergence but not 
light, as described by Argyll Robertson (see Box 26.28, 
p. 1172), may accompany any neurosyphilitic syndrome, 
but most commonly tabes dorsalis.
Investigations
Routine screening for syphilis is warranted in many 
neurological patients. Serological tests (p. 420) are posi-
tive in the serum in most patients, but CSF examination 
is essential if neurological involvement is suspected. 
Active disease is suggested by an elevated cell count, 
usually lymphocytic, and the protein content may be 
elevated to 0.5–1.0 g/L with an increased gamma globu-
lin fraction. Serological tests in the CSF are usually posi-
tive, but progressive disease can occur with negative 
CSF serology.
Management
The injection of procaine benzylpenicillin (procaine pen-
icillin) and probenecid for 17 days is essential in the 
treatment of neurosyphilis of all types (p. 421). Further 
courses of penicillin must be given if symptoms are not 
relieved, if the condition continues to advance or if the 
CSF continues to show signs of active disease. The cell 
count returns to normal within 3 months of completion 
of treatment, but the elevated protein takes longer to 
subside and some serological tests may never revert to 
normal. Evidence of clinical progression at any time is 
an indication for renewed treatment.
Diseases caused by bacterial toxins
Tetanus
This disease results from infection with Clostridium 
tetani, a commensal in the gut of humans and domestic 
animals that is found in soil. Infection enters the body 
through wounds, which may be trivial. It is rare in the 
Epilepsy frequently develops and is often resistant to 
treatment.
Despite advances in therapy, the mortality rate 
remains at 10–20% and this may partly relate to delay in 
diagnosis and initiation of treatment.
Subdural empyema
This is a rare complication of frontal sinusitis, osteo­
myelitis of the skull vault or middle ear disease. A col-
lection of pus in the subdural space spreads over the 
surface of the hemisphere, causing underlying cortical 
oedema or thrombophlebitis. Patients present with 
severe pain in the face or head and pyrexia, often with 
a history of preceding paranasal sinus or ear infection. 
The patient then becomes drowsy, with seizures and 
focal signs such as a progressive hemiparesis.
The diagnosis rests on a strong clinical suspicion in 
patients with a local focus of infection. Careful assess-
ment with contrast-enhanced CT or MRI may show a 
subdural collection with underlying cerebral oedema. 
Management requires aspiration of pus via a burr-hole 
and appropriate parenteral antibiotics. Any local source 
of infection must be treated to prevent re-infection.
Spinal epidural abscess
The characteristic clinical features are pain in a root 
distribution and progressive transverse spinal cord 
syndrome with paraparesis, sensory impairment and 
sphincter dysfunction. Features of the primary focus of 
infection may be less obvious and thus can be over-
looked. The resurgence of resistant staphylococcal infec-
tion and intravenous drug misuse has contributed to a 
recent marked rise in incidence.
X-ray changes occur late if present, so MRI or mye-
lography should precede urgent neurosurgical interven-
tion. Decompressive laminectomy with draining of the 
abscess relieves the pressure on the dura. Organisms 
may be grown from the pus or blood. Surgery, together 
with appropriate antibiotics, may prevent complete and 
irreversible paraplegia.
Lyme disease
This can cause numerous neurological problems, includ-
ing polyradiculopathy, meningitis, encephalitis and 
mononeuritis multiplex (p. 334).
Neurosyphilis
Neurosyphilis may present as an acute or chronic 
process and may involve the meninges, blood vessels 
and/or parenchyma of the brain and spinal cord. The 
decade to 2008 saw a ten-fold increase in the incidence 
of syphilis, mostly as a result of misguided relaxation 
of safe sex measures with the advent of effective anti­
retroviral treatments for AIDS. Parallel increases in 
neurosyphilis are inevitable. The clinical manifestations 
are diverse and early diagnosis and treatment remain 
important.
Clinical features
The clinical and pathological features of the three most 
common presentations are summarised in Box 26.84. 
Neurological examination reveals signs indicative of 
the anatomical localisation of lesions. Delusions of gran-
deur suggest general paresis of the insane, but more 
commonly there is simply progressive dementia. Small 
Type
Pathology
Clinical features
Meningovascular 
(5 yrs)*
Endarteritis 
obliterans
Meningeal exudate
Granuloma 
(gumma)
Stroke
Cranial nerve 
palsies
Seizures/mass 
lesion
General 
paralysis of  
the insane
(5–15 yrs)*
Degeneration in 
cerebral cortex/
cerebral atrophy
Thickened 
meninges
Dementia
Tremor
Bilateral upper 
motor signs
Tabes dorsalis
(5–20 yrs)*
Degeneration of 
sensory neurons
Wasting of dorsal 
columns
Optic atrophy
Lightning pains
Sensory ataxia
Visual failure
Abdominal crises
Incontinence
Trophic changes
Any of the above
Argyll Robertson 
pupils (p. 1172)
*Interval from primary infection.
26.84  Clinical and pathological features of 
neurosyphilis
Neurological disease
26
1210
Management
Established disease
Management of established disease should begin as 
soon as possible, as shown in Box 26.85.
Prevention
Tetanus can be prevented by immunisation and prompt 
treatment of contaminated wounds by débridement and 
antibiotics. In patients with a contaminated wound, the 
immediate danger of tetanus can be greatly reduced by 
the injection of 1200 mg of penicillin followed by a 7-day 
course of oral penicillin. For those allergic to penicillin, 
erythromycin should be used. When the risk of tetanus 
is judged to be present, an intramuscular injection of 
250 U of human tetanus antitoxin should be given, along 
with toxoid which should be repeated 1 month and 
6 months later. For those already immunised, only a 
booster dose of toxoid is required.
Botulism
Botulism is caused by the neurotoxins of Clostridium 
botulinum, which are extremely potent and cause disease 
after ingestion of even picogram amounts. Its classical 
form is an acute onset of bilateral cranial neuropathies 
associated with symmetric descending weakness.
Anaerobic conditions are necessary for the organ-
ism’s growth. It may contaminate and thrive in many 
foodstuffs, where sealing and preserving provide the 
requisite conditions. Contaminated honey has been 
implicated in infant botulism, in which the organism 
colonises the gastrointestinal tract. Wound botulism is a 
growing problem in injection drug-users.
The toxin causes predominantly bulbar and ocular 
palsies (difficulty in swallowing, blurred or double 
vision, ptosis), progressing to limb weakness and respi-
ratory paralysis. Criteria for the clinical diagnosis are 
shown in Box 26.86.
Management includes assisted ventilation and 
general supportive measures until the toxin eventually 
dissociates from nerve endings 6–8 weeks following 
ingestion. A polyvalent antitoxin is available for post-
exposure prophylaxis and for the treatment of suspected 
botulism. It specifically neutralises toxin types A, B and 
E and is not effective against infantile botulism (in which 
UK, occurring mostly in gardeners and farmers, but a 
recent increase has been seen in intravenous drug mis­
users. By contrast, the disease is common in many devel-
oping countries, where dust contains spores derived 
from animal and human excreta. Unhygienic practices 
soon after birth may lead to infection of the umbilical 
stump or site of circumcision, causing tetanus neonato-
rum. Tetanus is still one of the major killers of adults, 
children and neonates in developing countries, where 
the mortality rate can be nearly 100% in the newborn 
and around 40% in others.
In circumstances unfavourable to the growth of the 
organism, spores are formed and these may remain 
dormant for years in the soil. Spores germinate and 
bacilli multiply only in the anaerobic conditions that 
occur in areas of tissue necrosis or if the oxygen tension 
is lowered by the presence of other organisms, particu-
larly if aerobic. The bacilli remain localised but produce 
an exotoxin with an affinity for motor nerve endings and 
motor nerve cells.
The anterior horn cells are affected after the exotoxin 
has passed into the blood stream and their involvement 
results in rigidity and convulsions. Symptoms first 
appear from 2 days to several weeks after injury – the 
shorter the incubation period, the more severe the attack 
and the worse the prognosis.
Clinical features
By far the most important early symptom is trismus – 
spasm of the masseter muscles, which causes difficulty 
in opening the mouth and in masticating; hence the 
name ‘lockjaw’. Lockjaw in tetanus is painless, unlike 
the spasm of the masseters due to dental abscess, septic 
throat or other causes. Conditions that can mimic tetanus 
include hysteria and phenothiazine overdosage, or over-
dose in intravenous drug misusers.
In tetanus, the tonic rigidity spreads to involve the 
muscles of the face, neck and trunk. Contraction of the 
frontalis and the muscles at the angles of the mouth 
leads to the so-called ‘risus sardonicus’. There is rigidity 
of the muscles at the neck and trunk of varying degree. 
The back is usually slightly arched (‘opisthotonus’) and 
there is a board-like abdominal wall.
In the more severe cases, violent spasms lasting for a 
few seconds to 3–4 minutes occur spontaneously, or may 
be induced by stimuli such as movement or noise. These 
convulsions are painful, exhausting and of very serious 
significance, especially if they appear soon after the 
onset of symptoms. They gradually increase in fre-
quency and severity for about 1 week and the patient 
may die from exhaustion, asphyxia or aspiration pneu-
monia. In less severe illness, convulsions may not com-
mence until a week or so after the first sign of rigidity, 
and in very mild infections they may never appear. 
Autonomic involvement may cause cardiovascular com-
plications, such as hypertension. Rarely, the only mani-
festation of the disease may be ‘local tetanus’ – stiffness 
or spasm of the muscles near the infected wound – and 
the prognosis is good if treatment is commenced at 
this stage.
Investigations
The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds. It is rarely 
possible to isolate the infecting organism from the origi-
nal locus of entry.
Neutralise absorbed toxin
•	 IV injection of 3000 U of human tetanus antitoxin
Prevent further toxin production
•	 Débridement of wound
•	 Benzylpenicillin 600 mg IV 4 times daily (metronidazole if 
patient is allergic to penicillin)
Control spasms
•	 Nurse in a quiet room
•	 Avoid unnecessary stimuli
•	 IV diazepam
•	 If spasms continue, paralyse patient and ventilate
General measures
•	 Maintain hydration and nutrition
•	 Treat secondary infections
26.85  Treatment of tetanus
Intracranial mass lesions and raised intracranial pressure
26
1211
in patients with sporadic CJD (mean time to death is 
over a year). Characteristic EEG changes are not present, 
but MRI brain scans show characteristic high-signal 
changes in the pulvinar in a high proportion of cases 
(Fig. 26.34). Brain histology is distinct, with very florid 
plaques containing the prion proteins. Abnormal prion 
protein has been identified in tonsil specimens from suf-
ferers of vCJD, leading to the suggestion that the disease 
could be transmitted by reticulo-endothelial tissue (like 
TSEs in animals but unlike sporadic CJD in humans). 
This has caused great concern in the UK, leading to 
precautionary measures such as leucodepletion of all 
blood used for transfusion, and the mandatory use of 
disposable surgical instruments wherever possible for 
tonsillectomy, appendicectomy and ophthalmological 
procedures. The incidence of vCJD has now declined 
dramatically but surveillance and research continue.
Other TSE syndromes
Other extremely rare, inherited human TSEs include 
Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker disease, fatal familial 
insomnia and kuru. Kuru occurred only in members of 
a cannibalistic New Guinea tribe and was probably 
transmitted by people eating the brains of dead tribal 
members. Clinical features include progressive ataxia 
and dementia.
INTRACRANIAL MASS LESIONS AND 
RAISED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
Many different types of mass lesion may arise within the 
intracranial cavity (Box 26.87). In developing countries, 
tuberculoma and other infections are frequent causes, 
but in the West, intracranial haemorrhage and brain 
active growth of the organism allows continued toxin 
production).
Transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) 
include a number of veterinary and medical conditions 
that are characterised by the histopathological triad of 
cortical spongiform change, neuronal cell loss and 
gliosis. Associated with these changes, there is deposi-
tion of amyloid made up of an altered form of a nor-
mally occurring protein, the prion protein.
The precise nature of the infective agent is not yet 
clear but almost certainly involves the cascade formation 
of an abnormal prion protein. TSEs may also occur spon-
taneously or as an inherited disorder. Diseases affecting 
animals include bovine and feline spongiform encepha-
lopathies (BSE and FSE). These diseases achieved media 
prominence in the 1990s, when a form of Creutzfeldt–
Jakob disease emerged that was associated with prion 
protein ingestion.
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) is the best-characterised 
human TSE. Some 10% of cases arise due to a mutation 
in the gene coding for the prion protein. The sporadic 
form is the most common, occurring in middle-aged 
to elderly patients. Clinical features usually involve 
a rapidly progressive dementia, with myoclonus and 
a characteristic EEG pattern (repetitive slow-wave 
complexes), although a number of other features, such 
as visual disturbance or ataxia, may also be seen. These 
are particularly common in CJD transmitted by inocula-
tion (e.g. by infected dura mater grafts). Death occurs 
after a mean of 4–6 months. There is no effective 
treatment.
Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
A variant of CJD (vCJD) emerged in the late 1990s, 
affecting a small number of patients in the UK. The 
causative agent appears to be identical to that causing 
BSE in cows, and the disease may have been a result of 
the epidemic of BSE in the UK a decade earlier. Patients 
affected by vCJD are typically younger than those with 
sporadic CJD and present with neuropsychiatric changes 
and sensory symptoms in the limbs, followed by ataxia, 
dementia and death. Progression is slightly slower than 
Fig. 26.34  MRI in variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease. Arrows 
indicate bilateral pulvinar hyperintensity. 
Three main syndromes
1.	 Infantile
2.	 Food-borne
3.	 Wound infection
Clinical features
•	 Absence of fever
•	 Symmetrical neurological deficits
•	 Patient remains responsive
•	 Normal or slow heart rate and normal blood pressure
•	 No sensory deficits with the exception of blurred vision
26.86  The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) 
definition of botulism
Neurological disease
26
1212
tumours are more common. The clinical features depend 
on the site of the mass, its nature and its rate of expan-
sion. Symptoms and signs (see Box 26.88) are produced 
by a number of mechanisms.
Raised intracranial pressure
Raised intracranial pressure (RIP) may be caused by mass 
lesions, cerebral oedema, obstruction to CSF circulation 
causing hydrocephalus, impaired CSF absorption and 
cerebral venous obstruction (see Box 26.87).
Clinical features
In adults, intracranial pressure is less than 10–15 mmHg. 
The features of RIP are listed in Box 26.88. The speed of 
pressure increase influences presentation. If slow, com-
pensatory mechanisms may occur, including alteration 
in the volume of fluid in CSF spaces and venous sinuses, 
which minimise symptoms. Rapid pressure increase (as 
in aggressive tumours) does not permit these compensa-
tory mechanisms to occur, leading to early symptoms, 
including sudden death. Papilloedema is not always 
present, either because the pressure rise has been too 
rapid or because of anatomical anomalies of the menin-
geal sheath of the optic nerve.
A false localising sign is one in which the pathology 
is remote from the site of the expected lesion; in RIP, the 
6th cranial nerve (unilateral or bilateral) is most com-
monly affected, but the 3rd, 5th and 7th nerves may also 
be involved. Sixth nerve palsies are thought to be due 
either to stretching of the long slender nerve or to 
compression against the petrous temporal bone ridge. 
Presentation
Features
Seizures
Focal onset ± generalised spread
Focal symptoms
Progressive loss of function
Weakness
Numbness
Dysphasia
Cranial neuropathy
False localising signs
Unilateral/bilateral 6th nerve 
palsies
Contralateral 3rd nerve (usually 
pupil first)
Raised intracranial 
pressure
(usually aggressive 
tumours causing 
vasogenic oedema or 
obstructive hydrocephalus)
Headache worse on lying/straining
Vomiting
Diplopia (6th nerve involvement)
Papilloedema
Bradycardia, raised blood pressure
Impaired conscious level
Stroke/TIA-like 
symptoms
Acute haemorrhage into tumour
Paroxysmal ‘tumour attacks’
Cognitive/behavioural 
change
Usually frontal mass lesions
Endocrine abnormalities
Pituitary tumours
Incidental finding
Asymptomatic but identified on 
imaging (meningiomas commonly)
(TIA = transient ischaemic attack)
26.88  Clinical features of intracranial 
mass lesions
Mass lesions
•	 Intracranial haemorrhage (traumatic or spontaneous)
Extradural haematoma
Subdural haematoma
Intracerebral haemorrhage
•	 Cerebral tumour (particularly posterior fossa lesions or 
high-grade gliomas: see Box 26.89)
•	 Infective
Cerebral abscess
Tuberculoma
Cysticercosis (p. 380)
Hydatid cyst (p. 380)
•	 Colloid cyst (in ventricles)
Disturbance of CSF circulation
•	 Obstructive (non-communicating) hydrocephalus: obstruction 
within ventricular system
•	 Communicating hydrocephalus: site of obstruction outside 
ventricular system
Obstruction to venous sinuses
•	 Cerebral venous thrombosis
•	 Trauma (depressed fractures overlying sinuses)
Diffuse brain oedema or swelling
•	 Meningo-encephalitis
•	 Trauma (diffuse head injury, near-drowning)
•	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
•	 Metabolic (e.g. water intoxication)
•	 Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
26.87  Common causes of raised 
intracranial pressure
Trans-tentorial herniation of the uncus may compress 
the ipsilateral 3rd nerve and usually involves the pupil-
lary fibres first, causing a dilated pupil; however, a false 
localising contralateral 3rd nerve palsy may also occur, 
perhaps due to extrinsic compression by the tentorial 
margin. Vomiting, coma, bradycardia and arterial 
hypertension are later features of RIP.
The rise in intracranial pressure from a mass lesion 
may cause displacement of the brain. Downward dis-
placement of the medial temporal lobe (uncus) through 
the tentorium due to a large hemisphere mass may cause 
‘temporal coning’ (Fig. 26.35). This may stretch the 3rd 
and/or 6th cranial nerves, or cause pressure on the 
contralateral cerebral peduncle (causing ipsilateral 
upper motor neuron signs), and is usually accompanied 
by progressive coma. Downward movement of the 
Fig. 26.35  Cerebral tumour displacing medial temporal lobe and 
causing pressure on the mid-brain and 3rd cranial nerve. 
3rd nerve
deformed
Cerebral
tumour
Mid-brain
distorted
Tentorial
margin
Intracranial mass lesions and raised intracranial pressure
26
1213
primaries in the bronchus, breast and gastrointestinal 
tract (Fig. 26.37). Metastases usually occur in the white 
matter of the cerebral or cerebellar hemispheres, but 
there are diffuse leptomeningeal types.
Clinical features
The presentation is variable and usually influenced by 
the rate of growth. High-grade disease (WHO grade III 
and IV) tends to present with a short 4–6-week history of 
mass effect (headache, nausea secondary to RIP), while 
more indolent tumours can present with slowly progres-
sive focal neurological deficits, depending on their loca-
tion (see Box 26.88); generalised or focal seizures are 
common. Headache, if present, is usually accompanied 
by focal deficits or seizures, and isolated stable headache 
is almost never due to intracranial tumour.
The size of the primary tumour is of far less prognos-
tic significance than its location within the brain. 
Tumours within the brainstem will result in early neu-
rological deficits, while those in the frontal region may 
be quite large before symptoms occur.
Investigations
Diagnosis is by neuroimaging (Figs 26.38 and 26.39) 
and pathological grading following biopsy or resection 
where this is possible. The more malignant tumours are 
more likely to demonstrate contrast enhancement on 
imaging. If the tumour appears to be metastatic, further 
investigation to find the primary will be required.
cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum may 
compress the medulla – ‘tonsillar coning’ (Fig. 26.36). 
This may result in brainstem haemorrhage and/or acute 
obstruction of  the CSF pathways. As coning progresses, 
coma and death occur unless the condition is rapidly 
treated.
Management
Primary management of RIP should be targeted at 
relieving the cause (e.g. surgical decompression of mass 
lesion, steroids to reduce vasogenic oedema or shunt 
procedure to relieve hydrocephalus). Supportive treat-
ment includes maintenance of fluid balance, blood pres-
sure control, head elevation, and use of diuretics such as 
mannitol. Intensive care support may be needed (p. 199).
Brain tumours
Primary brain tumours are a heterogeneous collection of 
neoplasms arising from the brain tissue or meninges, 
and vary from benign to highly malignant. Primary 
malignant brain tumours (Box 26.89) are rare, account-
ing for 1% of all adult tumours but a higher proportion 
in children. The most common benign brain tumour is a 
meningioma. Primary brain tumours do not metastasise 
due to the absence of lymphatic drainage in the brain. 
There are rare pathological subtypes, however, such as 
medulloblastoma, which do have a propensity to metas-
tasise; the reasons for this are not clear. Most cerebral 
tumours are sporadic but may be associated with genetic 
syndromes such as neurofibromatosis or tuberous scle-
rosis. Brain tumours are not classified by the usual TNM 
system but by the WHO grading I–IV; this is based 
on histology (e.g. nuclear pleomorphism, presence of 
mitoses and presence of necrosis), with grade I being the 
most benign and grade IV the most malignant. Gliomas 
account for 60% of brain tumours, with the aggressive 
glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV) being the 
most common glioma, followed by meningiomas (20%) 
and pituitary tumours (10%). Although the lower-grade 
gliomas (I and II) may be very indolent, with prognosis 
measured in terms of many years, these tumours may 
transform to higher-grade disease at any time, with a 
resultant sharp decline in life expectancy.
Most malignant brain tumours are due to metastases, 
with intracranial metastases complicating about 20% 
of extracranial malignancies. The rate is higher with 
Histological type
Common site
Age
Malignant
Glioma 
(astrocytoma)
Cerebral 
hemisphere
Cerebellum
Brainstem
Adulthood
Childhood/adulthood 
Childhood/young 
adulthood
Oligodendroglioma
Cerebral 
hemisphere
Adulthood
Medulloblastoma
Posterior fossa
Childhood
Ependymoma
Posterior fossa
Childhood/
adolescence
Cerebral 
lymphoma
Cerebral 
hemisphere
Adulthood
Benign
Meningioma
Cortical dura
Parasagittal
Sphenoid ridge
Suprasellar
Olfactory groove
Adulthood (often 
incidental finding)
Neurofibroma
Acoustic 
neuroma
Adulthood
Craniopharyngioma
Suprasellar
Childhood/
adolescence
Pituitary adenoma
Pituitary fossa
Adulthood
Colloid cyst
Third ventricle
Any age
Pineal tumours
Quadrigeminal 
cistern
Childhood (teratomas)
Young adulthood 
(germ cell)
26.89  Primary brain tumours
Cerebellar
tonsil
Level of foramen
magnum
Fourth
ventricle
Atlas
Axis
Fig. 26.36  Tonsillar cone. Downward displacement of the cerebellar 
tonsils below the level of the foramen magnum. 
Neurological disease
26
1214
high-grade disease. Treatment may not always be indi-
cated in indolent (low-grade, WHO I or II) disease, and 
watchful waiting after surgery is often appropriate in 
such situations.
Dexamethasone given orally (or intravenously where 
RIP is acutely or severely raised) may reduce the 
vasogenic oedema typically associated with metastases 
and high-grade gliomas.
Prolactin- or growth hormone-secreting pituitary 
adenomas (p. 789) may respond well to treatment with 
dopamine agonists (such as bromocriptine, cabergoline 
or quinagolide); in this situation, imaging and hormone 
levels may be all that is required to establish a formal 
diagnosis, precluding the need for surgery.
Surgical
The mainstay of primary treatment is surgery, either 
resective (full or partial debulking) or biopsy, depend-
ing on the site and likely radiological diagnosis. Clearly, 
if a tumour occurs in an area of brain that is highly 
Management
Brain tumours are treated with a combination of surgery, 
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, depending on the type 
of tumour and the patient. Advancing age is the most 
powerful negative prognostic factor in CNS tumours, so 
best supportive care (including steroid therapy) may be 
most appropriate in older patients with metastases or 
Fig. 26.37  Contrast-enhanced CT head showing a large 
metastasis within the left hemisphere (large arrow). There is 
surrounding cerebral oedema, and a smaller metastasis (small arrow) 
within the wall of the right lateral ventricle. The primary lesion was a lung 
carcinoma. 
Fig. 26.38  MRI showing a meningioma in the frontal lobe 
(arrow A) with associated oedema (arrow B). 
A
B
Fig. 26.39  MRI of an acoustic neuroma (arrows) in the posterior 
fossa compressing the brainstem.  A Axial image.  B Coronal image. 
A
B
Intracranial mass lesions and raised intracranial pressure
26
1215
There is a small group of highly malignant grade IV 
tumours that can be cured with aggressive therapy. 
Patients with medulloblastomas have a good chance of 
long-term survival with maximal surgery followed by 
irradiation of the whole brain and spine; younger 
patients may also benefit from concomitant and adju-
vant chemotherapy. Older patients do not tolerate this, 
however.
Once tumours relapse, chemotherapy response rates 
are low and survival is short in high-grade disease. In 
the more uncommon low-grade tumours, repeated 
courses of chemotherapy can result in much more pro-
longed survival.
In metastatic disease, radiotherapy offers a modest 
improvement in survival but with costs in terms of 
quality of life; treatment therefore needs careful discus-
sion with the patient. Benefits may be superior in breast 
cancer but there is little to separate other pathologies. 
Occasional chemosensitive cancers, such as small-cell 
lung cancer, may benefit from systemic chemotherapy, 
but intracerebral metastases represent a late stage of 
disease and have a short prognosis.
Prognosis
The WHO histological grading system is a powerful pre-
dictor of prognosis in primary CNS tumours, though it 
does not yet take account of individual biomarkers. For 
each tumour type and grade, advancing age and deterio-
rating functional status are the next most important 
negative prognostic features. The overall 5-year survival 
rate of about 14% in adults masks a wide variation that 
depends on tumour type.
Acoustic neuroma
This is a benign tumour of Schwann cells of the 8th 
cranial nerve, which may arise in isolation or as part of 
neurofibromatosis type 2 (see below). When sporadic, 
acoustic neuroma occurs after the third decade and is 
more frequent in females. The tumour commonly arises 
near the nerve’s entry point into the medulla or in the 
internal auditory meatus, usually on the vestibular divi-
sion. Acoustic neuromas account for 80–90% of tumours 
at the cerebellopontine angle.
Clinical features
Acoustic neuroma typically presents with unilateral pro-
gressive hearing loss, sometimes with tinnitus. Vertigo 
is an unusual symptom, as slow growth allows com­
pensatory brainstem mechanisms to develop. In some 
cases, progressive enlargement leads to distortion of 
the brainstem and/or cerebellar peduncle, causing 
ataxia and/or cerebellar signs in the limbs. Distortion 
of the fourth ventricle and cerebral aqueduct may 
cause hydrocephalus (see below), which may be the 
presenting feature. Facial weakness is unusual at pres-
entation but facial palsy may follow surgical removal of 
the tumour. The tumour may be identified incidentally 
on cranial imaging.
Investigations
MRI is the investigation of choice (see Fig. 26.39).
Management
Surgery is the treatment of choice. If the tumour can be 
completely removed, the prognosis is excellent, although 
important for normal function (e.g. motor strip), then 
biopsy may be the only safe surgical intervention but, in 
general, maximal safe resection is the optimal surgical 
management. Meningiomas and acoustic neuromas 
offer 
the 
best 
prospects 
for 
complete 
removal 
and thus cure. Some meningiomas can recur, however, 
particularly those of the sphenoid ridge when partial 
excision is often all that is possible. Thereafter, post-
operative surveillance may be required, as radiotherapy 
is effective at preventing further growth of residual 
tumour. Pituitary adenomas may be removed by a trans-
sphenoidal route, avoiding the need for a craniotomy. 
Unfortunately, gliomas, which account for the majority 
of brain tumours, cannot be completely excised, since 
infiltration spreads well beyond the apparent radiologi-
cal boundaries of the intracranial mass. Recurrence 
is therefore the rule, even if the mass of the tumour 
is apparently removed completely; partial excision 
(‘debulking’) may be useful in alleviating symptoms 
caused by RIP, but although there is increasing evidence 
that the degree of surgical excision may have a positive 
influence on survival, this has not yet been demon-
strated in a randomised study.
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy
In the majority of primary CNS tumours, radiation 
and chemotherapy are used to control disease and 
extend survival rather than for cure. Meningioma and 
pituitary adenoma offer the best chance of life-long 
remission. The gliomas are incurable; high-grade, WHO 
IV disease still carries a median survival of just over a 
year. In this situation, patient and family should always 
be involved in decisions regarding treatment. The diag-
nosis, and often the symptoms, are devastating, and 
support from palliative care and social work is crucial at 
an early stage. In WHO grade III disease, prognosis is 
a little better (2–4 years) and in rarer, more indolent 
tumours, very prolonged survival is possible.
Advances have been made recently in terms of thera-
peutic outcome. Standard care for WHO grade IV glio­
blastoma multiforme is now combination radiotherapy 
with oral temozolomide chemotherapy; although this 
improves median survival of the population from only 
12 to 14.5 months, up to 25% of patients survive for 
more than 2 years (compared to approximately 10% with 
radiotherapy alone). Ten percent will survive more than 
5 years with temozolomide (virtually unheard of with 
radiotherapy alone). Benefits are more likely in well-
debulked patients who are younger and fitter. Implanta-
tion of chemotherapy gives a small survival benefit.
Understanding of the molecular biology of brain 
tumours has allowed the use of biomarkers to guide 
therapy and prognostic discussions. In patients with 
methylation of the promoter region of the MGMT 
(methyl guanine methyl transferase) gene (about 30% of 
the population), 2-year survival is almost 50%. MGMT 
reduces the cytotoxicity of temozolomide, and this 
mutation also reduces the enzyme’s activity, rendering 
the tumour more sensitive to chemotherapy. In grade II 
and III gliomas, the presence of the loss of heterozygo­
city (LOH) 1p19q chromosomal abnormality confers 
chemosensitivity and thus improves prognosis. The 
presence of a rare mutation in the IDH-1 (isocitrate 
dehydrogenase) gene confers a very favourable progno-
sis in patients with glioblastoma.
Neurological disease
26
1216
Paraneoplastic neurological disease
Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes often present 
before the underlying tumour declares itself and cause 
considerable disability. They are discussed in full on 
page 1193.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus is the excessive accumulation of CSF 
within the brain, and may be caused either by increased 
CSF production, by reduced CSF absorption, or by 
obstruction of the circulation (Fig. 26.41). Symptoms 
range from none to sudden death, depending upon the 
speed at which and degree to which hydrocephalus 
develops. The causes are listed in Box 26.91. The terms 
deafness is a common complication of surgery. Stereo-
tactic radiosurgery (radiotherapy) may be appropriate 
for some lesions.
Neurofibromatosis
Neurofibromatosis encompasses two clinically and 
genetically separate conditions, with an autosomal dom-
inant pattern of inheritance. The more common neuro­
fibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is caused by mutations in 
the NF1 gene on chromosome 17, half of which are 
new mutations. NF1 is characterised by neurofibromas 
(benign peripheral nerve sheath tumours) and skin 
involvement (Fig. 26.40), and may affect numerous 
systems (Box 26.90). Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is 
caused by mutations of the NF2 gene on chromosome 
22, and is characterised by schwannomas (benign 
peripheral nerve sheath tumours comprising Schwann 
cells only), with little skin involvement; the clinical 
mani­festations are more restricted to the eye and nervous 
system (see Box 26.90). Malignant change may occur in 
NF1 neurofibromas but is rare in NF2 schwannomas. 
The prevalence of NF1 and NF 2 is about 20–50 per 
100 000 and 1.5 per 100 000 respectively.
Fig. 26.40  A café au lait spot (arrow A) and subcutaneous 
nodules (arrows B) on the forearm of a patient with 
neurofibromatosis type 1. 
B
B
A
Neurofibromatosis 1
Neurofibromatosis 2
Skin
Cutaneous/subcutaneous 
neurofibromas
Angiomas
Café au lait patches (> 6)
Axillary/groin freckling
Hypopigmented patches
Much less commonly affected 
than NF1
Café au lait patches (usually  
< 6)
Cutaneous schwannomas: 
plaque lesions
Subcutaneous schwannomas
Eyes
Lisch nodules (iris fibromas)
Glaucoma
Congenital ptosis
Cataracts
Retinal hamartoma
Optic nerve meningioma
Nervous system
Plexiform neurofibromas
Malignant peripheral nerve 
sheath tumours
Aqueduct stenosis
Slight tonsillar descent
Cognitive impairment
Epilepsy
Vestibular schwannomas
Cranial nerve schwannomas 
(not 1 and 2)
Spinal schwannomas
Peripheral nerve 
schwannomas
Cranial meningiomas
Spinal meningiomas
Spinal/brainstem 
ependymomas
Spinal/cranial astrocytoma
Bone
Scoliosis
Osteoporosis
Pseudoarthrosis
Cardiorespiratory systems
Pulmonary stenosis
Hypertension
Renal artery stenosis
Compression from 
neurofibroma causing 
restrictive lung defect
Gastrointestinal system
Gastrointestinal stromal 
tumour
Dysplasia
Duodenal carcinoid tumour
26.90  Neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2: 
clinical features
Von Hippel–Lindau disease
This rare autosomal dominant disease is caused by 
mutations of the VHL tumour suppressor gene on chro-
mosome 3. It promotes development of tumours affect-
ing the kidney, adrenal gland, CNS, eye, inner ear, 
epididymis and pancreas, which may undergo malig-
nant change. Benign haemangiomas and haemangio­
blastomas affect about 80% of patients, mostly in the 
cerebellum and retina.
Intracranial mass lesions and raised intracranial pressure
26
1217
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
This usually occurs in obese young women. The 
annual incidence is about 3 per 100 000. RIP occurs in 
the absence of a structural lesion, hydrocephalus or 
other identifiable cause. The aetiology is uncertain 
but there may be a defect of CSF reabsorption by the 
arachnoid villi. It may be associated with a number of 
drugs, including tetracycline, and with vitamin A and 
its derivatives.
Clinical features
The usual presentation is with headache, sometimes 
accompanied by diplopia and visual disturbance (most 
commonly transient obscurations of vision associated 
with changes in posture). Clinical examination reveals 
papilloedema but little else. False localising cranial 
nerve palsies (usually of the 6th nerve) may be present. 
‘communicating’ and ‘non-communicating’ (also known 
as obstructive) hydrocephalus refer to blockage either 
outside or within the ventricular system respectively 
(Fig. 26.42).
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a controver-
sial entity, said to involve intermittent rises in CSF pres-
sure, particularly at night. It is described in old age as 
being associated with a triad of gait apraxia, dementia 
and urinary incontinence.
Management
Diversion of the CSF by means of a shunt placed between 
the ventricular system and the peritoneal cavity or right 
atrium may result in rapid relief of symptoms in obstruc-
tive hydrocephalus. The outcome of shunting in NPH is 
much less predictable and, until a good response can be 
predicted, the management of individual cases will 
remain uncertain.
Congenital malformations
•	 Aqueduct stenosis
•	 Chiari malformations
•	 Dandy–Walker syndrome
•	 Benign intracranial cysts
•	 Vein of Galen aneurysms
•	 Congenital CNS infections
•	 Craniofacial anomalies
Acquired causes
•	 Mass lesions (especially 
those in the posterior 
fossa)
Tumour
Colloid cyst of third 
ventricle
Abscess
Haematoma
•	 Absorption blockages  
due to:
Inflammation (e.g. 
meningitis, sarcoidosis)
Intracranial haemorrhage
26.91  Causes of hydrocephalus
Fig. 26.41  The circulation of cerebrospinal fluid. (1) CSF is 
synthesised in the choroid plexus of the ventricles, and flows from the 
lateral and third ventricles through the aqueduct to the fourth ventricle.  
(2) At the foramina of Luschka and Magendie it exits the brain, flowing 
over the hemispheres (3) and down around the spinal cord and roots in the 
subarachnoid space. (4) It is then absorbed into the dural venous sinuses 
via the arachnoid villi. 
3
1
2
4
Choroid plexus
Fig. 26.42  MRI of hydrocephalus due to aqueduct stenosis.
 A Axial T2-weighted image (CSF appears white): note the dilated lateral 
ventricles.  B Sagittal T2-weighted image (CSF appears black): note the 
dilated ventricles (top arrow) and narrowed aqueduct (bottom arrow). 
A
B
Neurological disease
26
1218
It is important to record visual fields accurately for 
future monitoring.
Investigations
Brain imaging is required to exclude a structural or other 
(e.g. cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, p. 1247) cause. 
The ventricles are typically normal in size or small (‘slit’ 
ventricles). The diagnosis may be confirmed by lumbar 
puncture, which shows raised CSF pressure (usually 
> 30 cm CSF) but normal CSF constituents.
Management
Management can be difficult and there is no evidence to 
support any specific treatment. Weight loss in over-
weight patients may be helpful but is difficult to achieve. 
Acetazolamide or topiramate may help to lower intra­
cranial pressure, the latter perhaps aiding weight loss in 
some patients. Repeated lumbar puncture is an effective 
treatment for headache, but may be technically difficult 
in obese patients and is often poorly tolerated. Patients 
failing to respond, in whom chronic papilloedema 
threatens vision, may require optic nerve sheath fenes-
tration or a lumbo-peritoneal shunt.
Head injury
Diagnosis of head trauma is usually clear – either from 
the history or from signs of external trauma to the head. 
Brain injury is more likely with skull fracture but can 
occur without. Individual cranial nerves may be 
damaged in fractures of the facial bones or skull base. 
Intracranial effects can be substantial and take several 
forms: extradural haematoma (collection of blood 
between the skull and dura); subdural haematoma (col-
lection of blood between the dura and the surface of the 
brain); and intracerebral haematoma or diffuse axonal 
injury.
Whatever pathology occurs, the resultant RIP may 
lead to coning (see Figs 26.35 and 26.36). Haematomas 
are identified by CT and management is by surgical 
drainage, usually via a burr-hole. Penetrating skull frac-
tures lead to increased infection risk. Long-term seque-
lae include headache, cognitive decline and depression, 
all contributing to significant social, work, personality 
and family difficulties.
Subdural haematoma may occur spontaneously, 
particularly in patients on anticoagulants, in old age, 
and with alcohol misuse. There may or may not be 
a history of trauma. Patients present with subacute 
impairment of brain function, both globally (obtunda-
tion and coma) and focally (hemiparesis, seizures). 
Headache may not be present. The diagnosis should 
always be considered in those who present with reduced 
conscious level.
DISORDERS OF CEREBELLAR FUNCTION
Cerebellar dysfunction can manifest as incoordination 
of limb function, gait ataxia (p. 1168), speech or eye 
movements. Acute dysfunction may be caused by 
alcohol or prescription drugs (especially the sodium 
channel-blocking anti-epileptic drugs, phenytoin and 
carbamazepine).
Inflammatory changes in the cerebellum may cause 
symptoms in the aftermath of some infections (espe-
cially herpes zoster) or as a paraneoplastic phenomenon. 
The hereditary spinocerebellar ataxias are described on 
page 1198; they manifest as progressive ataxias in middle 
and old age, often with other neurological features that 
aid specific diagnosis.
DISORDERS OF THE SPINE AND  
SPINAL CORD
The spinal cord and spinal roots may be affected by 
intrinsic disease or by disorders of the surrounding 
meninges and bones. The clinical presentation of 
these conditions depends on the anatomical level at 
which the cord or roots are affected, as well as the 
nature of the pathological process involved. It is impor-
tant to recognise when the spinal cord is at risk of com-
pression (p. 1220) so that urgent action can be taken.
Cervical spondylosis
Cervical spondylosis is the result of osteo­arthritis in the 
cervical spine. It is characterised by degeneration of the 
intervertebral discs and osteophyte formation. Such 
‘wear and tear’ is extremely common and radiological 
changes are frequently found in asymptomatic individu-
als over the age of 50. Spondylosis may be associated 
with neurological dysfunction. In order of frequency, 
the C5/6, C6/7 and C4/5 vertebral levels affect C6, C7 
and C5 roots, respectively (Fig. 26.43).
Cervical radiculopathy
Acute onset of compression of a nerve root occurs when 
a disc prolapses laterally. More gradual onset may be 
due to osteophytic encroachment of the intervertebral 
foramina.
Fig. 26.43  MRI showing cervical cord compression (arrow) in 
cervical spondylosis. 
Disorders of the spine and spinal cord 
26
1219
Management
Surgical procedures, including laminectomy and ante-
rior discectomy, may arrest progression of disability but 
neurological improvement is not the rule. The decision 
as to whether surgery should be undertaken may be 
difficult. Manual manipulation of the cervical spine is of 
no proven benefit and may precipitate acute neurologi-
cal deterioration.
Prognosis
The prognosis of cervical myelopathy is variable. In 
many patients, the condition stabilises or even improves 
without intervention. If progression results in sphincter 
dysfunction or pyramidal signs, surgical decompression 
should be considered.
Lumbar spondylosis
This term covers degenerative disc disease and osteo­
arthritic change in the lumbar spine. Pain in the distribu-
tion of the lumbar or sacral roots (‘sciatica’) is almost 
always due to disc protrusion but can be a feature of 
other rare but important disorders, including spinal 
tumour, malignant disease in the pelvis and tuberculosis 
of the vertebral bodies.
Lumbar disc herniation
While acute lumbar disc herniation is often precipitated 
by trauma (usually lifting heavy weights while the 
spine is flexed), genetic factors may also be important. 
The nucleus pulposus may bulge or rupture through the 
annulus fibrosus, giving rise to pressure on nerve 
endings in the spinal ligaments, changes in the vertebral 
joints or pressure on nerve roots.
Pathophysiology
The altered mechanics of the lumbar spine result in loss 
of lumbar lordosis and there may be spasm of the para­
spinal musculature. Root pressure is suggested by limi-
tation of flexion of the hip on the affected side if the 
straight leg is raised (Lasègue’s sign). If the third or 
fourth lumbar root is involved, Lasègue’s sign may be 
negative, but pain in the back may be induced by hyper-
extension of the hip (femoral nerve stretch test). The 
roots most frequently affected are S1, L5 and L4; the 
signs of root pressure at these levels are summarised in 
Box 26.93.
Clinical features
The patient complains of pain in the neck that may 
radiate in the distribution of the affected nerve root. The 
neck is held rigidly and neck movements may exacer-
bate pain. Paraesthesia and sensory loss may be found 
in the affected segment and there may be lower motor 
neuron signs, including weakness, wasting and reflex 
impairment (Box 26.92).
Investigations
Where there is no trauma, imaging should not be 
carried out for isolated cervical pain. X-rays offer limited 
benefit, except in excluding destructive lesions. MRI is 
the investigation of choice in those with radicular symp-
toms. Electrophysiological studies rarely add to clinical 
examination and have become less important with the 
emergence of MRI.
Management
Conservative treatment with analgesics and physio­
therapy results in resolution of symptoms in the great 
majority of patients, but a few require surgery in the 
form of discectomy or radicular decompression.
Cervical myelopathy
Dorsomedial herniation of a disc and the development 
of transverse bony bars or posterior osteophytes may 
result in pressure on the spinal cord or the anterior 
spinal artery, which supplies the anterior two-thirds of 
the cord (see Fig. 26.43).
Clinical features
The onset is usually insidious and painless, but acute 
deterioration may occur after trauma, especially hyper-
extension injury. Upper motor neuron signs develop 
in the limbs, with spasticity of the legs usually appearing 
before the arms are involved. Sensory loss in the 
upper limbs is common, producing tingling, numbness 
and proprioception loss in the hands, with progressive 
clumsiness. Sensory manifestations in the legs are much 
less common. Neurological deficit usually progresses 
gradually and disturbance of micturition is a very late 
feature.
Investigations
MRI (see Fig. 26.43) (or rarely myelography) will direct 
surgical intervention. MRI also provides information on 
the state of the spinal cord at the level of compression.
Disc 
level
Root
Sensory loss
Weakness
Reflex loss
L3/L4
L4
Inner calf
Inversion of 
foot
Knee
L4/L5
L5
Outer calf 
and dorsum 
of foot
Dorsiflexion 
of hallux/
toes
L5/S1
S1
Sole and 
lateral  
foot
Plantar 
flexion
Ankle
26.93  Physical signs in lumbar root compression
Root
Muscle 
weakness
Sensory loss
Reflex loss
C5
Biceps, deltoid, 
spinati
Upper lateral 
arm
Biceps
C6
Brachioradialis
Lower lateral 
arm, thumb, 
index finger
Supinator
C7
Triceps, finger 
and wrist 
extensors
Middle finger
Triceps
26.92  Physical signs in cervical root compression
Neurological disease
26
1220
Clinical features
The onset may be sudden or gradual. Alternatively, 
repeated episodes of low back pain may precede sciatica 
by months or years. Constant aching pain is felt in the 
lumbar region and may radiate to the buttock, thigh, calf 
and foot. Pain is exacerbated by coughing or straining 
but may be relieved by lying flat.
Investigations
Plain X-rays of the lumbar spine are of little value in the 
diagnosis of lumbar disc disease, although they may 
show other conditions such as malignant infiltration of 
a vertebral body. While CT can provide helpful images 
of the disc protrusion and/or narrowing of the exit 
foramina, MRI is the investigation of choice if available, 
since soft tissues are well imaged.
Management
Some 90% of patients with sciatica recover following 
conservative treatment with analgesia and early mobi-
lisation; bed rest does not help recovery. The patient 
should be instructed in back-strengthening exercises 
and advised to avoid physical manœuvres likely to 
strain the lumbar spine. Injections of local anaesthetic 
or corticosteroids may be useful adjunctive treatment 
if symptoms are due to ligamentous injury or joint 
dysfunction. Surgery may have to be considered if 
there is no response to conservative treatment or if 
progressive neurological deficits develop. Central disc 
prolapse with bilateral symptoms and signs and distur-
bance of sphincter function requires urgent surgical 
decompression.
Lumbar canal stenosis
This occurs with a congenitally narrowed lumbar spinal 
canal, exacerbated by the degenerative changes that 
commonly occur with age.
Pathophysiology
The symptoms of spinal stenosis are thought to be due 
to local vascular compromise secondary to the canal ste-
nosis, rendering the nerve roots ischaemic and intolerant 
of the increased demand that occurs on exercise.
Clinical features
Patients, who are usually elderly, develop exercise-
induced weakness and paraesthesia in the legs (‘spinal 
claudication’). These symptoms progress with contin-
ued exertion, often to the point that the patient can no 
longer walk, but are quickly relieved by a short period 
of rest. Physical examination at rest shows preservation 
of peripheral pulses with absent ankle reflexes. Weak-
ness or sensory loss may only be apparent if the patient 
is examined immediately after exercise.
Investigations
The investigation of first choice is MRI, but contraindica-
tions (body habitus, metallic implants) may make CT or 
myelography necessary.
Management
Lumbar laminectomy may provide relief of symptoms 
and recovery of normal exercise tolerance.
Spinal cord compression
Spinal cord compression is one of the more common 
neurological emergencies encountered in clinical prac-
tice and the usual causes are listed in Box 26.94. A 
space-occupying lesion within the spinal canal may 
damage nerve tissue either directly by pressure or 
indirectly by interfering with blood supply. Oedema 
from venous obstruction impairs neuronal function, and 
ischaemia from arterial obstruction may lead to necrosis 
of the spinal cord. The early stages of damage are revers-
ible but severely damaged neurons do not recover; 
hence the importance of early diagnosis and treatment.
Clinical features
The onset of symptoms of spinal cord compression 
is usually slow (over weeks) but can be acute as a 
result of trauma or metastases, especially if there is asso-
ciated arterial occlusion. The symptoms are shown in 
Box 26.95.
Pain and sensory symptoms occur early, while weak-
ness and sphincter dysfunction are usually late manifes-
tations. The signs vary according to the level of the cord 
compression and the structures involved. There may be 
Pain
•	 Localised over the spine or in a root distribution, which may 
be aggravated by coughing, sneezing or straining
Sensory
•	 Paraesthesia, numbness or cold sensations, especially in the 
lower limbs, which spread proximally, often to a level on the 
trunk
Motor
•	 Weakness, heaviness or stiffness of the limbs, most 
commonly the legs
Sphincters
•	 Urgency or hesitancy of micturition, leading eventually to 
urinary retention
26.95  Symptoms of spinal cord compression
Site
Frequency
Causes
Vertebral
80%
Trauma (extradural)
Intervertebral disc prolapse
Metastatic carcinoma (e.g. 
breast, prostate, bronchus)
Myeloma
Tuberculosis
Meninges 
(intradural, 
extramedullary)
15%
Tumours (e.g. meningioma, 
neurofibroma, ependymoma, 
metastasis, lymphoma, 
leukaemia)
Epidural abscess
Spinal cord 
(intradural, 
intramedullary)
5%
Tumours (e.g. glioma, 
ependymoma, metastasis)
26.94  Causes of spinal cord compression
Disorders of the spine and spinal cord 
26
1221
before it is undertaken. Where a secondary tumour is 
causing the compression, needle biopsy may be required 
to establish a tissue diagnosis.
Management
Treatment and prognosis depend on the nature of 
the underlying lesion. Benign tumours should be surgi-
cally excised, and a good functional recovery can be 
expected unless a marked neurological deficit has devel-
oped before diagnosis. Extradural compression due to 
malignancy is the most common cause of spinal cord 
compression in developed countries and has a poor 
prognosis. Useful function can be regained if treatment, 
such as radiotherapy, is initiated within 24 hours of the 
onset of severe weakness or sphincter dysfunction; man-
agement should involve close cooperation with both 
oncologists and neurosurgeons.
Spinal cord compression due to tuberculosis is 
common in some areas of the world, and may require 
surgical treatment. This should be followed by appro­
priate antituberculous chemotherapy (p. 693) for an 
tenderness to percussion over the spine if there is verte-
bral disease and this may be associated with a local 
kyphosis. Involvement of the roots at the level of the 
compression may cause dermatomal sensory impair-
ment and corresponding lower motor signs. Interrup-
tion of fibres in the spinal cord causes sensory loss 
(p. 1164) and upper motor neuron signs below the level 
of the lesion, and there is often disturbance of sphincter 
function. The distribution of these signs varies with the 
level of the lesion (Box 26.96).
The Brown–Séquard syndrome (see Fig. 26.19E, 
p. 1164) results if damage is confined to one side of the 
cord; the findings are explained by the anatomy of the 
sensory tracts (see Fig. 26.10, p. 1147). With compressive 
lesions, there is usually a band of pain at the level of the 
lesion in the distribution of the nerve roots subject to 
compression.
Investigations
Patients with a history of acute or subacute spinal cord 
syndrome should be investigated urgently, as listed in 
Box 26.97. The investigation of choice is MRI (Fig. 26.44), 
as it can define the extent of compression and associated 
soft-tissue abnormality (Fig. 26.45). Plain X-rays may 
show bony destruction and soft-tissue abnormalities. 
Routine investigations, including chest X-ray, may 
provide evidence of systemic disease. If myelography is 
performed, CSF should be taken for analysis; in cases of 
complete spinal block, this shows a normal cell count 
with a very elevated protein causing yellow discolora-
tion of the fluid (Froin’s syndrome). The risk of acute 
deterioration after myelography in spinal cord compres-
sion means that the neurosurgeons should be alerted 
Fig. 26.44  Axial MRI of thoracic spine. A neurofibroma (N) is 
compressing the spinal cord (SC) and emerging in a ‘dumbbell’ fashion 
through the vertebral foramen into the paraspinal space. 
SC
N
•	 MRI of spine or 
myelography
•	 Plain X-rays of spine
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 CSF
•	 Serum B12
26.97  Investigation of acute spinal cord 
syndrome
Cervical, above C5
•	 Upper motor neuron signs and sensory loss in all four limbs
•	 Diaphragm weakness (phrenic nerve)
Cervical, C5–T1
•	 Lower motor neuron signs and segmental sensory loss in the 
arms; upper motor neuron signs in the legs
•	 Respiratory (intercostal) muscle weakness
Thoracic cord
•	 Spastic paraplegia with a sensory level on the trunk
•	 Weakness of legs, sacral loss of sensation and extensor 
plantar responses
Cauda equina
•	 Spinal cord ends approximately at the T12/L1 spinal  
level and spinal lesions below this level can only cause  
lower motor neuron signs by affecting the cauda  
equina
26.96  Signs of spinal cord compression
Fig. 26.45  CT myelogram of cervical spine at the level of C2 
showing bony erosion of vertebra by a metastasis (arrow). 
Neurological disease
26
1222
extended period. Traumatic lesions of the vertebral 
column require specialised neurosurgical treatment.
Intrinsic diseases of the spinal cord
There are many disorders that interfere with spinal 
cord function due to non-compressive involvement of 
the spinal cord itself. A list of these disorders is given in 
Box 26.98. The symptoms and signs are generally similar 
to those that would occur with extrinsic compression 
(see Boxes 26.95 and 26.96), although a suspended 
sensory loss (see Fig. 26.19F, p. 1164) can only occur with 
intrinsic disease such as syringomyelia. Urinary symp-
toms usually occur earlier in the course of an intrinsic 
cord disorder than with compressive disorders.
Investigation of intrinsic disease starts with imaging 
to exclude a compressive lesion. MRI provides most 
information about structural lesions such as diastemato-
myelia, syringomyelia (Fig. 26.46) or intrinsic tumours. 
Non-specific signal change may be seen in the spinal 
cord in inflammatory (see Fig. 26.28, p. 1191) or infective 
conditions and other disorders such as vitamin B12 defi-
ciency. Lumbar puncture or blood tests may be required 
to make a specific diagnosis.
Fig. 26.46  MRI scan showing syrinx (arrows A), with herniation 
of cerebellar tonsils (arrow B). 
A
A
B
Type of disorder
Condition
Clinical features
Congenital
Diastematomyelia (spina 
bifida)
Features variably present at birth and deteriorate thereafter
LMN features, deformity and sensory loss of legs
Impaired sphincter function
Hairy patch or pit over low back
Incidence reduced by increased maternal intake of folic acid during pregnancy
Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Onset usually in adult life
Autosomal dominant inheritance usual
Slowly progressive UMN features affecting legs > arms
Little or no sensory loss
Infective/
inflammatory
Transverse myelitis due to 
viruses (HZV), schistosomiasis, 
HIV, MS, sarcoidosis
Weakness and sensory loss, often with pain, developing over hours to days
UMN features below lesion
Impaired sphincter function
Vascular
Anterior spinal artery infarct
Abrupt onset
Intervertebral disc embolus
Anterior horn cell loss (LMN) at level of lesion
UMN features below it
Spinothalamic sensory loss below lesion but dorsal column sensation spared
Spinal AVM/dural fistula
Onset variable (acute to slowly progressive)
Variable LMN, UMN, sensory and sphincter disturbance
Symptoms and signs often not well localised to site of AVM
Neoplastic
Glioma, ependymoma
Weakness and sensory loss often with pain, developing over months to years
UMN features below lesion in cord; additional LMN features in conus
Impaired sphincter function
Metabolic
Vitamin B12 deficiency 
(subacute combined 
degeneration)
Progressive spastic paraparesis with proprioception loss
Absent reflexes due to peripheral neuropathy
± Optic nerve and cerebral involvement (p. 129)
Degenerative
Motor neuron disease
Relentlessly progressive LMN and UMN features, associated bulbar weakness
No sensory involvement (p. 1200)
Syringomyelia
Gradual onset over months or years, pain in cervical segments
Anterior horn cell loss (LMN) at level of lesion, UMN features below it
Suspended spinothalamic sensory loss at level of lesion, dorsal columns 
preserved. See Figures 26.19F (p. 1164) and 26.46
(AVM = arteriovenous malformation; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; HZV = herpes zoster virus; LMN = lower motor neuron; MS = multiple sclerosis; 
UMN = upper motor neuron)
26.98  Intrinsic diseases of the spinal cord
Diseases of peripheral nerves
26
1223
DISEASES OF PERIPHERAL NERVES
Disorders of the peripheral nervous system are common 
and may affect the motor, sensory or autonomic compo-
nents, either in isolation or combination. The site of 
pathology may be nerve root (radiculopathy), nerve 
plexus (plexopathy) or nerve (neuropathy). Neuro­
pathies may present as mononeuropathy (single nerve 
affected), multiple mononeuropathies (‘mononeuritis 
multiplex’) or a symmetrical polyneuropathy (Box 
26.99). Cranial nerves 3–12 share the same tissue charac-
teristics as peripheral nerves elsewhere and are subject 
to the same range of diseases.
Pathophysiology
Damage may occur to the nerve cell body (axon) or 
the myelin sheath (Schwann cell), leading to axonal 
or demyelinating neuropathies. The distinction is 
important, as only demyelinating neuropathies are 
usually susceptible to treatment; making the distinction 
requires neurophysiology (nerve conduction studies 
and electromyography, pp. 1151 and 1152). Neuropa-
thies can occur in association with many systemic dis-
eases, toxins and drugs (Box 26.100).
Clinical features
Motor nerve involvement produces features of a lower 
motor neuron lesion (p. 1162). Symptoms and signs of 
sensory nerve involvement depend on the type of 
sensory nerve involved (p. 1164); small-fibre neuropa-
thies are often painful. Autonomic involvement may 
cause postural hypotension, disturbance of sweating, 
cardiac rhythm, and gastrointestinal, bladder and sexual 
functions; isolated autonomic neuropathies are rare, and 
more commonly complicate other neuropathies.
Investigations
The investigations required reflect the wide spectrum of 
causes (Box 26.101). Neurophysiological tests are key in 
discriminating between demyelinating and axonal neu-
ropathies, and in identifying entrapment neuropathies. 
Most neuropathies are of the chronic axonal type.
Genetic
•	 Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease (CMT)
•	 Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP)
•	 Hereditary sensory ± autonomic neuropathies (HSN, HSAN)
•	 Familial amyloid polyneuropathy
•	 Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy
Drugs
•	 Amiodarone
•	 Antibiotics (dapsone, isoniazid, metronidazole, ethambutol)
•	 Antiretrovirals
•	 Chemotherapy (cisplatin, vincristine, thalidomide)
•	 Phenytoin
Toxins
•	 Alcohol
•	 Nitrous oxide (recreational use)
•	 Rarely: lead, arsenic, mercury, organophosphates, solvents
Vitamin deficiencies
•	 Thiamin
•	 Pyridoxine
•	 Vitamin B12
•	 Vitamin E
Infections
•	 HIV
•	 Leprosy
•	 Brucellosis
Inflammatory
•	 Guillain–Barré syndrome
•	 Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
•	 Vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (also known as Wegener’s granulomatosis), 
rheumatoid arthritis, SLE)
•	 Paraneoplastic (antibody-mediated)
Systemic medical conditions
•	 Diabetes
•	 Renal failure
•	 Sarcoidosis
Malignant disease
•	 Infiltration
Others
•	 Paraproteinaemias
•	 Amyloidosis
•	 Critical illness 
polyneuropathy/myopathy
26.99  Causes of polyneuropathy
Axonal
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Alcohol
•	 Uraemia
•	 Cirrhosis
•	 Amyloid
•	 Myxoedema
•	 Acromegaly
•	 Paraneoplastic
•	 Drugs and toxins  
(see Box 26.99)
•	 Deficiency states  
(see Box 26.99)
•	 Hereditary
•	 Infection (see Box 26.99)
•	 Idiopathic
Demyelinating
•	 Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
•	 Multifocal motor neuropathy
•	 Paraprotein-associated demyelinating neuropathy
•	 Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type I and type X
26.100  Common causes of axonal and 
demyelinating chronic polyneuropathies
Initial tests
•	 Glucose (fasting)
•	 Erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate, C-reactive protein
•	 Full blood count
•	 Urea and electrolytes
•	 Liver function tests
•	 Serum protein 
electrophoresis
•	 Vitamin B12, folate
•	 ANA, ANCA
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 HIV testing
If initial tests are negative
•	 Nerve conduction studies
•	 Vitamins E and A
•	 Genetic testing (see  
Box 26.99)
•	 Lyme serology (p. 335)
•	 Serum ACE
•	 Serum amyloid
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody; ANA = antineutrophil antibody)
26.101  Investigation of peripheral neuropathy
Neurological disease
26
1224
Entrapment neuropathy
Focal compression or entrapment is the usual cause of a 
mononeuropathy. Symptoms and signs of entrapment 
neuropathy are listed in Box 26.102. Entrapment neu-
ropathies may affect anyone, but diabetes, excess alcohol 
or toxins, or genetic syndromes may be predisposing 
causes. Unless axonal loss has occurred, entrapment 
neuropathies will recover, provided the primary cause 
is removed, either by avoiding the precipitation of activ-
ity or by surgical decompression.
Multifocal neuropathy
Multifocal neuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex) is char-
acterised by lesions of multiple nerve roots, peripheral 
nerves or cranial nerves (Box 26.103). Vasculitis is a 
common cause, either as part of a systemic disease or 
isolated to the nerves, or it may arise on a background 
of a polyneuropathy (e.g. diabetes). Multifocal motor 
neuropathy (MMN) with conduc­tion block is a rare 
pure motor neuropathy, typically affecting the arms; it 
is associated with anti-GM1 antibodies in about 50%, 
and responds to intravenous immunoglobulin.
Polyneuropathy
A polyneuropathy is typically associated with a ‘length-
dependent’ pattern, occurring in the longest peripheral 
nerves first and affecting the distal lower limbs before 
the upper limbs. Sensory symptoms and signs develop 
in an ascending ‘glove and stocking’ distribution 
(p. 1164). In inflammatory demyelinating neuropathies, 
the pathology may be more patchy, affecting the 
upper rather than lower limbs.
Guillain–Barré syndrome
Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) is a heterogeneous 
group of immune-mediated conditions with an inci-
dence of 1–2/100 000/year. In Europe and North 
America, the most common variant is an acute inflam-
matory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP). Axonal 
variants, either motor (acute motor axonal neuropathy, 
AMAN) or sensorimotor (acute motor and sensory 
axonal neuropathy, AMSAN), are more common in 
China and Japan, and account for 10% of GBS in Western 
countries (often associated with Campylobacter jejuni). 
The hallmark is an acute paralysis evolving over days or 
weeks with loss of tendon reflexes. About two-thirds of 
those with AIDP have a prior history of infection, and 
an autoimmune response triggered by the preceding 
infection causes demyelination. A number of GBS vari-
ants have been described, associated with specific 
anti-ganglioside antibodies; the best-recognised is 
Miller Fisher syndrome, which involves anti-GQ1b 
antibodies.
Clinical features
Distal paraesthesia and pain precede muscle weakness 
that ascends rapidly from lower to upper limbs, and 
is more marked proximally than distally. Facial and 
bulbar weakness commonly develops, and respiratory 
weakness requiring ventilatory support occurs in 20% of 
cases. Weakness progresses over a maximum of 4 weeks 
Axonal (defined on nerve conduction studies)
•	 Vasculitis (systemic or non-systemic)
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Infection (HIV, hepatitis C, Lyme disease, leprosy,  
diphtheria)
Focal demyelination with/without conduction block
•	 Multifocal motor neuropathy
•	 Multiple compression neuropathies (usually in association 
with underlying disease, such as diabetes or alcoholism)
•	 Multifocal acquired demyelinating sensory and motor 
neuropathy (MADSAM)
•	 Hereditary neuropathy with a predisposition to pressure  
palsy (autosomal dominant, peripheral myelin protein  
22 gene)
•	 Lymphoma
26.103  Causes of multifocal mononeuropathy
Nerve
Symptoms
Muscle weakness/ 
muscle-wasting
Area of sensory loss
Median (at wrist) 
(carpal tunnel 
syndrome)
Pain and paraesthesia on palmar aspect of 
hands and fingers, waking the patient from 
sleep. Pain may extend to arm and shoulder
Abductor pollicis brevis
Lateral palm and thumb, 
index, middle and lateral 
half 4th finger
Ulnar (at elbow)
Paraesthesia on medial border of hand, 
wasting and weakness of hand muscles
All small hand muscles, 
excluding abductor pollicis 
brevis
Medial palm and little 
finger, and medial half 
4th finger
Radial
Weakness of extension of wrist and fingers, 
often precipitated by sleeping in abnormal 
posture, e.g. arm over back of chair
Wrist and finger extensors, 
supinator
Dorsum of thumb
Common peroneal
Foot drop, trauma to head of fibula
Dorsiflexion and eversion of foot
Nil or dorsum of foot
Lateral cutaneous 
nerve of the thigh
(meralgia paraesthetica)
Tingling and dysaesthesia on lateral border 
of thigh
Nil
Lateral border of thigh
26.102  Symptoms and signs in common entrapment neuropathies
Diseases of peripheral nerves
26
1225
(usually less). Rapid deterioration to respiratory failure 
can develop within hours. Examination shows diffuse 
weakness with loss of reflexes. Miller Fisher syndrome 
presents with internal and external ophthalmoplegia, 
ataxia and areflexia.
Investigations
The CSF protein is raised, but may be normal in the first 
10 days. There is usually no increase in CSF white cell 
count (> 10 × 106 cells/L suggests an alternative diagno-
sis). Electrophysiological changes may emerge after a 
week or so, with conduction block and multifocal motor 
slowing, sometimes most evident proximally as delayed 
F waves (p. 1152). Antibodies to the ganglioside GM1 
are found in about 25%, usually the motor axonal form. 
Other causes of an acute neuromuscular paralysis 
should be excluded (e.g. poliomyelitis, botulism, diph-
theria, spinal cord syndromes or myasthenia), via the 
history and examination rather than investigations.
Management
Supportive measures to prevent pressure sores and deep 
venous thrombosis are essential. Regular monitoring of 
respiratory function (vital capacity) is needed in the 
acute phase, as respiratory failure may develop with 
little warning. Active treatment with plasma exchange 
or intravenous immunoglobulin therapy shortens the 
duration of ventilation and improves prognosis (Box 
26.104). Overall, 80% of patients recover completely 
within 3–6 months, 4% die and the remainder suffer 
residual neurological disability, which can be severe. 
Adverse prognostic features include older age, rapid 
‘In severe Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIg) started within 2 weeks of onset hastens 
recovery as much as plasma exchange (PE). Adverse events are 
not significantly more frequent with either treatment, but IVIg is 
significantly much more likely to be completed than PE.’
‘In mild GBS, 2 sessions of PE are significantly superior to none; 
in moderate disease, 4 sessions are significantly superior to 2; 
and in severe disease, 6 sessions are not significantly better 
than 4. PE is more beneficial when started within 7 days of 
disease onset rather than later, but is still beneficial in patients 
treated up to 30 days after disease onset.’
•	 Hughes RAC, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin for Guillain–Barré syndrome. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2012, issue 7. Art. no.: CD002063.
•	 Raphaël JC, et al. Plasma exchange for Guillain–Barré syndrome. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2012, issue 7. Art. no.: CD001798.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
26.104  Intravenous immunoglobulin and 
plasma exchange in Guillain–Barré syndrome
deterioration to ventilation and evidence of axonal loss 
on EMG.
Chronic polyneuropathy
The most common axonal and demyelinating causes of 
polyneuropathy are shown in Box 26.100. A chronic 
symmetrical axonal polyneuropathy, evolving over 
months or years, is the most common form of chronic 
neuropathy. Diabetes mellitus is the most common 
cause but in about 25–50% no cause can be found.
Hereditary neuropathy
Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease (CMT) is an umbrella 
term for the inherited neuropathies. This group of syn-
dromes has different clinical and genetic features. The 
most common CMT is the autosomal dominantly inher-
ited CMT type 1, usually caused by duplication of the 
PMP-22 gene on chromosome 17. Common signs are 
distal wasting (‘inverted champagne bottle’ legs), often 
with pes cavus, and predominantly motor involvement. 
X-linked and recessively inherited forms of CMT, 
causing demyelinating or axonal neuropathies, also 
occur.
Chronic demyelinating 
polyneuropathy
The acquired chronic demyelinating neuropathies 
include chronic inflammatory demyelinating peripheral 
neuropathy (CIDP), multifocal motor neuropathy (see 
above) and paraprotein-associated demyelinating neu-
ropathy. CIDP typically presents with relapsing or 
progressive motor and sensory changes, evolving over 
more than 8 weeks (in distinction to the more acute 
GBS). It is important to recognise, as it usually responds 
to corticosteroids, plasma exchange or intravenous 
immunoglobulin.
Some 10% of patients with acquired demyelinating 
polyneuropathy have an abnormal serum paraprotein, 
sometimes associated with a lymphoproliferative malig-
nancy. They may also demonstrate positive antibodies to 
myelin-associated glycoprotein (anti-MAG antibodies).
Brachial plexopathy
Trauma usually damages either the upper or the lower 
parts of the brachial plexus, according to the mechanics 
of the injury. The clinical features depend on the ana-
tomical site of the damage (Box 26.105). Lower parts of 
the brachial plexus are vulnerable to infiltration from 
breast or apical lung tumours (Pancoast tumour, p. 701) 
Site
Affected muscles
Sensory loss
Upper plexus
(Erb–Duchenne)
Biceps, deltoid, spinati, rhomboids, brachioradialis 
(triceps, serratus anterior)
Patch over deltoid
Lower plexus
(Déjerine–Klumpke)
All small hand muscles, claw hand (ulnar wrist flexors)
Ulnar border of hand/forearm
Thoracic outlet syndrome
Small hand muscles, ulnar forearm
Ulnar border of hand/forearm/upper arm
26.105  Physical signs in brachial plexus lesions
Neurological disease
26
1226
or damage by therapeutic irradiation; they may also be 
compressed by a cervical rib or fibrous band between C7 
and the first rib at the thoracic outlet.
An acute brachial plexopathy of probable inflamma-
tory origin may present with ‘neuralgic amyotrophy’. 
Severe shoulder pain precedes the appearance of a 
patchy upper brachial plexus lesion, with motor and/or 
sensory involvement. There is no specific treatment and 
recovery is often incomplete; it may recur in about 25%, 
and there is a rare autosomal dominant hereditary form. 
The appearance of vesicles should indicate the alterna-
tive diagnosis of motor zoster.
Lumbosacral plexopathy
Lumbosacral plexus lesions may be caused by neoplastic 
infiltration or compression by retroperitoneal haemato-
mas. A small-vessel vasculopathy can produce a unilat-
eral or bilateral lumbar plexopathy in association with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (‘diabetic amyotrophy’) or an 
idiopathic form in non-diabetic patients. This presents 
with painful wasting of the quadriceps with weakness 
of knee extension and an absent knee reflex.
Spinal root lesions
Spinal root lesions (radiculopathy) are described above. 
Clinical features include muscle weakness and wasting 
and dermatomal sensory and reflex loss, which reflect 
the pattern of the roots involved. Pain in the muscles 
innervated by the affected roots may be prominent.
DISEASES OF THE NEUROMUSCULAR 
JUNCTION
Myasthenia gravis
This is the most common cause of acutely evolving, fati-
gable weakness and preferentially affects ocular, facial 
and bulbar muscles.
Pathophysiology
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease, most com-
monly caused by antibodies to acetylcholine receptors 
in the post-junctional membrane of the neuromuscular 
junction, which are found in around 80% of affected 
patients. The resultant blockage of neuromuscular 
transmission and complement-mediated inflammatory 
response reduces the number of acetylcholine receptors 
and damages the end plate (Fig. 26.47). Other antibodies 
can produce a similar clinical picture, most notably 
autoantibodies to muscle-specific kinase (MuSK), which 
is involved in the regulation and maintenance of acetyl-
choline receptors.
About 15% of patients (mainly those with late onset) 
have a thymoma, most of the remainder displaying 
thymic follicular hyperplasia. Myasthenic patients are at 
greater risk of associated organ-specific autoimmune 
diseases. As with other autoimmune processes, triggers 
are not always evident, but some drugs (e.g. penicilla-
mine) can trigger an antibody-mediated myasthenic 
syndrome that may persist after drug withdrawal. Other 
drugs, especially aminoglycosides and quinolones, may 
exacerbate the neuromuscular blockade and should be 
avoided in patients with myasthenia.
Clinical features
Myasthenia gravis usually presents between the ages of 
15 and 50 years and there is a female preponderance in 
younger patients. In older patients, males are more com-
monly affected. It tends to run a relapsing and remitting 
course.
The most evident symptom is fatigable muscle weak-
ness; movement is initially strong but rapidly weakens 
as muscle use continues. Worsening of symptoms 
towards the end of the day or following exercise is char-
acteristic. There are no sensory signs or signs of involve-
ment of the CNS, although weakness of the oculomotor 
muscles may mimic a central eye movement disorder. 
The first symptoms are usually intermittent ptosis or 
diplopia, but weakness of chewing, swallowing, speak-
ing or limb movement also occurs. Any limb muscle 
may be affected, most commonly those of the shoulder 
girdle; the patient is unable to undertake tasks above 
shoulder level, such as combing the hair, without fre-
quent rests. Respiratory muscles may be involved and 
respiratory failure is an avoidable cause of death. Aspi-
ration may occur if the cough is ineffectual. Ventilatory 
support is required where weakness is severe or of 
abrupt onset.
Investigations
Intravenous injection of the short-acting anticholin­
esterase, edrophonium bromide (the Tensilon® test), is 
less widely used than before. Improvement in muscle 
function occurs within 30 seconds and usually persists 
for 2–3 minutes, but the test is not universally specific 
or sensitive. Cover with intravenous atropine is neces-
sary to avoid bradycardia. Planning the assessment 
beforehand (e.g. speech or limb movements) allows 
some objectivity in gauging the effect.
Repetitive stimulation during nerve conduction 
studies may show a characteristic decremental response 
(p. 1151) if the muscle has been clinically affected. Anti-
MuSK antibodies are more common in acetylcholine 
receptor antibody-negative patients with prominent 
bulbar involvement. All patients should have a thoracic 
CT to exclude thymoma, especially those without anti-
acetylcholine receptor antibodies. Screening for associ-
ated autoimmune disorders, particularly thyroid disease, 
is important.
Management
The goals of treatment are to maximise the activity of 
acetylcholine at remaining receptors in the neuromuscu-
lar junctions and to limit or abolish the immunological 
attack on motor end plates.
The duration of action of acetylcholine is prolonged 
by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase. The most commonly 
used anticholinesterase drug is pyridostigmine. Mus-
carinic side-effects, including diarrhoea and colic, may 
be controlled by propantheline. Overdosage of anti-
cholinesterase drugs may cause a ‘cholinergic crisis’  
due to depolarisation block of motor end plates, with 
muscle fasciculation, paralysis, pallor, sweating, exces-
sive salivation and small pupils. This may be 
Diseases of the neuromuscular junction
26
1227
distinguished from severe weakness due to exacerbation 
of myasthenia (‘myasthenic crisis’) by the clinical fea-
tures and, if necessary, by the injection of a small dose 
of edrophonium.
The immunological treatment of myasthenia is out-
lined in Box 26.106. Thymectomy may improve overall 
prognosis but awaits clinical trial confirmation. Progno-
sis is variable and remissions may occur spontaneously. 
When myasthenia is entirely ocular, prognosis is excel-
lent and disability slight. Young female patients with 
generalised disease may benefit from thymectomy, 
whilst older patients are less likely to have a remission 
despite treatment. Rapid progression of the disease 
more than 5 years after onset is uncommon.
Other myasthenic syndromes
Other rarer conditions can present with muscle weak-
ness due to impaired transmission across the neuro­
muscular junction. The most common of these is the 
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), which 
can occur as an inflammatory or paraneoplastic phe-
nomenon. Antibodies to pre-synaptic voltage-gated 
calcium channels (see Fig. 26.47) impair transmitter 
release. Patients may have autonomic dysfunction (e.g. 
dry mouth) in addition to muscle weakness, but the 
cardinal clinical sign is absence of tendon reflexes, 
which return after sustained contraction of the relevant 
Fig. 26.47  Myasthenia gravis and Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS). In myasthenia there are antibodies to the acetylcholine 
receptors on the post-synaptic membrane, which block conduction across the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Myasthenic symptoms can be transiently 
improved by inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (e.g. with Tensilon® – edrophonium bromide), which normally removes the acetylcholine. A cell-mediated 
immune response produces simplification of the post-synaptic membrane, further impairing the ‘safety factor’ of neuromuscular conduction. In LEMS, 
antibodies to the pre-synaptic voltage calcium channels impair release of acetylcholine from the motor nerve ending; calcium is required for the 
acetylcholine-containing vesicle to fuse with the pre-synaptic membrane for release into the NMJ. 
Motor
neuron
Lambert–Eaton syndrome
Antibodies to pre-synaptic
calcium channels
Acetylcholine
packets released
by calcium influx
Acetylcholine
Ca++
Voltage-gated
  calcium channel
Acetylcholine
receptor
Acetylcholinesterase
removes acetylcholine
from neuromuscular
junction
Sodium channels
in clefts amplify
potential change
Depolarisation
of muscle
membrane
In myasthenia
end plate is subject
to cell-mediated
immune assault
(end plate simplified)
Myasthenia gravis
Antibodies to
acetylcholine
receptors
Acute treatments
Intravenous immunoglobulin
•	 Reduces production of antibodies and rapidly reduces 
weakness
Plasma exchange
•	 Removing antibody from the blood may produce marked 
improvement; this is usually brief, so is normally reserved for 
myasthenic crisis or for pre-operative preparation
Long-term treatments
Corticosteroid treatment
•	 Improvement is commonly preceded by marked exacerbation 
of myasthenic symptoms, so treatment should be initiated in 
hospital
•	 Usually necessary to continue treatment for months or years, 
risking adverse effects
Pharmacological immunosuppression treatment
•	 Azathioprine 2.5 mg/kg daily reduces the necessary dosage 
of steroids and may allow their withdrawal. Effect on clinical 
features may be delayed for months
•	 Mycophenolate: less commonly used
Thymectomy
•	 Should be considered in any antibody-positive patient under 
45 yrs with symptoms not confined to extraocular muscles, 
unless the disease has been established for more than 7 yrs
•	 May be required for thymoma
26.106  Immunological treatment of myasthenia
Neurological disease
26
1228
Clinical features
The pattern of the clinical features is defined by the 
specific syndromes. Onset is often in childhood, although 
some patients, especially those with myotonic dystro-
phy, may present as adults. Wasting and weakness are 
usually symmetrical, without fasciculation or sensory 
loss, and tendon reflexes are usually preserved until a 
late stage. Weakness is usually proximal, except in myo-
tonic dystrophy type 1, when it is distal.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be confirmed by specific molecular 
genetic testing, supplemented with EMG and muscle 
biopsy if necessary. Creatine kinase is markedly ele-
vated in the dystrophinopathies (Duchenne and Becker) 
but is normal or moderately elevated in the other dys-
trophies. Screening for an associated cardiac abnormal-
ity (cardiomyopathy or dysrhythmia) is important.
Management
There is no specific therapy for most of these conditions 
but physiotherapy and occupational therapy help 
patients cope with their disability. Steroids are used 
in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Treatment of associ-
ated cardiac failure or arrhythmia (with pacemaker 
insertion if necessary) may be required; similarly, man-
agement of respiratory complications (including noc­
turnal hypoventilation) can improve quality of life. 
Improvements in non-invasive ventilation have led to 
significant improvements in survival for patients with 
muscle. The condition is associated with underlying 
malignancy in a high percentage of cases and investiga-
tion must be directed towards identifying any neoplasm. 
The condition is diagnosed electrophysiologically by the 
presence of post-tetanic potentiation of motor response 
to nerve stimulation at a frequency of 20–50/s. Treat-
ment is with 3,4-diaminopyridine, or pyridostigmine 
and immunosuppression.
DISEASES OF MUSCLE
Muscle disease, either hereditary or acquired, is rare. 
Most typically, it presents with a proximal symmetrical 
weakness. Diagnosis is dependent on recognition of 
clinical clues, such as cardiorespiratory involvement, 
evolution, family history, exposure to drugs, the pres-
ence of contractures, myotonia and other systemic fea-
tures, and on investigation findings, most importantly 
EMG and muscle biopsy. Hereditary syndromes include 
the muscular dystrophies, muscle channelopathies, met-
abolic myopathies (including mitochondrial diseases) 
and congenital myopathies.
Muscular dystrophies
These are inherited disorders with progressive muscle 
destruction, and may be associated with cardiac and/or 
respiratory involvement and sometimes non-myopathic 
features (Box 26.107). Myotonic dystrophy is the most 
common, with a prevalence of about 12/100 000.
Type
Genetics
Age of onset
Muscles affected
Other features
Myotonic dystrophy 
(DM1)
Autosomal dominant; 
expanded triplet repeat 
chromosome 19q
Any
Face (including ptosis), 
sternomastoids, distal 
limb, generalised later
Myotonia, cognitive 
impairment, cardiac conduction 
abnormalities, lens opacities, 
frontal balding, hypogonadism
Proximal myotonic 
myopathy (PROMM; 
DM2)
Autosomal dominant; 
quadruplet repeat 
expansion in Zn finger 
protein 9 gene 
chromosome 3q
8–50
Proximal, especially thigh, 
sometimes muscle 
hypertrophy
As for DM1 but cognition not 
affected
Muscle pain
Duchenne
X-linked; deletions in 
dystrophin gene Xp21
< 5 yrs
Proximal and limb girdle
Cardiomyopathy and respiratory 
failure
Becker
X-linked; deletions in 
dystrophin gene Xp21
Childhood/
early adult
Proximal and limb girdle
Cardiomyopathy, respiratory 
failure uncommon
Limb girdle
Many mutations on 
different chromosomes
Childhood/
early adult
Limb girdle
Very variable depending on 
genetic subtype, some involve 
cardiac and respiratory 
systems
Facioscapulohumeral 
(FSH)
Autosomal dominant; 
tandem repeat deletion 
chromosome 4q35
7–30 yrs
Face and upper limb 
girdle, distal lower limb 
weakness
Pain in shoulder girdle 
common, deafness
Cardiorespiratory involvement 
rare
Oculopharyngeal
Autosomal dominant and 
recessive; triplet repeat 
expansion in PABP2 gene 
chromosome 14q
30–60 yrs
Ptosis, external 
ophthalmoplegia, 
dysphagia, tongue 
weakness
Mild lower limb weakness
Emery–Dreifuss
X-linked recessive; 
mutations in emerin gene
4–5 yrs
Humero-peroneal, proximal 
limb girdle later
Contractures develop early
Cardiac involvement leads to 
sudden death
26.107  The muscular dystrophies
Diseases of muscle
26
1229
with exercise intolerance, myalgia and sometimes recur-
rent myoglobinuria may have isolated pathogenic muta-
tions in genes encoding for oxidation pathways.
Inherited disorders of the oxidative pathways of the 
respiratory chain in mitochondria cause a group of dis-
orders, either restricted to the muscle or associated with 
non-myopathic features (Box 26.109). Many of these 
mitochondrial disorders are inherited via the mitochon-
drial genome, down the maternal line (p. 53). Diagnosis 
is based on clinical appearances, supported by muscle 
biopsy appearance (usually with ‘ragged red’ and/or 
cytochrome oxidase negative fibres), and specific muta-
tions either on blood or, more reliably, muscle testing. 
Mutations may be due either to point mutations or to 
deletions of mitochondrial DNA.
A disorder called Leber hereditary optic neuropathy 
(LHON) is characterised by acute or subacute loss of 
vision, most frequently in males, due to bilateral optic 
atrophy. Three point mutations account for more than 
90% of LHON cases.
Channelopathies
Inherited abnormalities of the sodium, calcium and chlo-
ride ion channels in striated muscle produce various 
syndromes of familial periodic paralysis, myotonia and 
malignant hyperthermia, which may be recognised by 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Genetic counselling is 
important.
Inherited metabolic myopathies
There are a large number of rare inherited disorders that 
interfere with the biochemical pathways that maintain 
the energy supply (adenosine triphosphate, ATP) to 
muscles. These are mostly recessively inherited deficien-
cies in the enzymes necessary for glycogen or fatty acid 
(β-oxidation) metabolism (Box 26.108). They typically 
present with muscle weakness and pain.
Mitochondrial disorders
Mitochondrial diseases are discussed on page 65. Mito-
chondria are present in all tissues and dysfunction 
causes widespread effects, on vision (optic atrophy, 
retinitis pigmentosa, cataracts), hearing (sensorineural 
deafness), and the endocrine, cardiovascular, gastro­
intestinal and renal systems. Any combination of these 
should raise the suspicion of a mitochondrial disorder, 
especially if there is evidence of maternal transmission.
Mitochondrial dysfunction can be caused by altera-
tions in either mitochondrial DNA or genes encoding for 
oxidative processes. Genetic abnormalities or mutations 
in mitochondrial DNA may affect single individuals and 
single tissues (most commonly muscle). Thus, patients 
Disease
Clinical features
Diagnosis
Carbohydrate 
(glycogen) metabolism
Myophosphorylase deficiency 
(McArdle’s disease): 
autosomal recessive
Exercise-induced myalgia, 
stiffness, weakness (with ‘second 
wind’ phenomenon), myoglobinuria
Creatine kinase (CK) elevated
Muscle biopsy
Enzyme assay
Acid maltase deficiency 
(Pompe’s disease): autosomal 
recessive
Infantile form: death within 2 yrs
Childhood: death in 20–30s
Adult: progressive proximal 
myopathy with respiratory failure
CK elevated
Blood lymphocyte analysis for 
glycogen granules
Muscle biopsy
Enzyme assay
Lipid metabolism
(β-oxidation)
Carnitine-palmitoyl 
transferase (CPT) deficiency
Myalgia after exercise, 
myoglobinuria, weakness
CK normal between attacks
Urinary organic acids
Enzyme assays
Muscle biopsy
26.108  Inherited disorders of muscle metabolism
Syndrome
Clinical features
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibres (MERRF)
Myoclonic epilepsy, cerebellar ataxia, dementia, sensorineural 
deafness ± peripheral neuropathy, optic atrophy and multiple lipomas
Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis 
and stroke-like episodes (MELAS)
Episodic encephalopathy, stroke-like episodes often preceded by 
migraine-like headache, nausea and vomiting
Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO)
Progressive ptosis and external oculomotor palsy, proximal myopathy 
± deafness, ataxia and cardiac conduction defects
Kearns–Sayre syndrome
Like CPEO but early age of onset (< 20 yrs), heart block, pigmentary 
retinopathy
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy 
(MNGIE)
Progressive ptosis, external oculomotor palsy, gastrointestinal 
dysmotility (often pseudo-obstruction), diffuse leucoencephalopathy, 
thin body habitus, peripheral neuropathy and myopathy
Neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP)
Weakness, ataxia and progressive loss of vision, along with dementia, 
seizures and proximal weakness
26.109  Mitochondrial syndromes
Neurological disease
26
1230
Channel
Muscle disease
Gene and inheritance
Clinical features
Sodium
Paramyotonia congenita
SCN4A (17q35)
Autosomal dominant
Cold-evoked myotonia with episodic weakness 
provoked by exercise and cold
Potassium-aggravated 
myotonia
SCN4A
Pure myotonia without weakness provoked by 
potassium
Hyperkalaemic periodic 
paralysis
SCN4A
Autosomal dominant
Brief (mins to hrs), frequent episodes of weakness 
provoked by rest, cold, potassium, fasting, pregnancy, 
stress
Less common than hypokalaemic periodic paralysis
Hypokalaemic periodic 
paralysis
SCN4A
Autosomal dominant 
(one-third new mutations)
Longer (hrs to days) episodic weakness triggered by 
rest, carbohydrate loading, cold
Chloride
Myotonia congenita
  Thomsen’s disease
CLCN1
Autosomal dominant
Myotonia usually mild, little weakness
  Becker’s disease
CLCN1
Autosomal recessive
Myotonia often severe, transient weakness
Calcium
Hypokalaemic periodic 
paralysis
CACNA1S
Autosomal dominant
Episodic weakness triggered by carbohydrate meal
Malignant hyperthermia
CACNA1S, CACNL2A
Autosomal dominant
Hyperpyrexia due to excess muscle activity, precipitated 
by drugs, usually anaesthetic agents; most common 
cause of death during general anaesthetic
Potassium
Andersen–Tawil syndrome
KCNJ2
Autosomal dominant
Similar to hypokalaemic periodic paralysis, associated 
with cardiac and non-myopathic features (skeletal and 
facial)
Ryanodine 
receptor
Malignant hyperthermia
Central core and multicore 
disease
RYR1 (19q13)
RYR1
Mostly autosomal dominant
As malignant hyperthermia above
Present in infancy with mild progressive weakness
26.110  Muscle channelopathies
Inflammatory (p. 1114)
•	 Polymyositis
•	 Dermatomyositis
•	 Inclusion body myositis 
(additional distal effects)
Endocrine and metabolic
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Hyperthyroidism
•	 Acromegaly
•	 Cushing’s syndrome 
(including iatrogenic)
•	 Addison’s disease
•	 Conn’s syndrome
•	 Osteomalacia
•	 Hypokalaemia (liquorice, 
diuretic and purgative 
abuse)
•	 Hypercalcaemia 
(disseminated bony 
metastases)
Toxic
•	 Alcohol (chronic and acute 
syndromes)
•	 Amphetamines/cocaine/
heroin
•	 Vitamin E
•	 Organophosphates
•	 Snake venoms
Drugs
•	 Corticosteroids
•	 Statins
•	 Amiodarone
•	 Beta-blockers
•	 Opiates
•	 Chloroquine
•	 Ciclosporin
•	 Vincristine
•	 Clofibrate
•	 Zidovudine
Paraneoplastic
•	 Carcinomatous 
neuromyopathy
•	 Dermatomyositis
26.111  Causes of acquired proximal myopathy
their clinical characteristics and potassium abnormali-
ties (Box 26.110). Genetic testing is available.
Acquired myopathies
These include the inflammatory myopathies, or myopa-
thy associated with a range of metabolic and endocrine 
disorders, or drug and toxin exposure (Box 26.111).
Further information
Websites
www.aneuroa.org/ American Neurological Association.
www.dizziness-and-balance.com/disorders/bppv/
bppv.html and www.brainandspine.org.uk/about_us/
index.html Diagnosing benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo.
www.ihs-classification.org/en/ International Headache 
Society; full access to 2nd edition of International Classification 
of Headache Disorders.
www.ninds.nih.gov National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke.
www.sign.ac.uk Relevant SIGN guidelines – all available for 
free download:
SIGN 70 Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in adults
SIGN 107 Diagnosis and management of headache
SIGN 113 Diagnosis and management of Parkinson’s 
disease.
www.wfneurology.org World Federation of Neurology.
1231
27 
Clinical examination in stroke disease 1232
Functional anatomy and physiology 1234
Investigations 1235
Presenting problems 1236
Weakness 1236
Speech disturbance 1236
Visual deficit 1237
Visuo-spatial dysfunction 1237
Ataxia 1237
Headache 1237
Seizure 1237
Coma 1237
Stroke disease
P. Langhorne
Stroke 1237
Pathophysiology 1237
Clinical features 1239
Investigations 1240
Management 1242
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 1246
Clinical features 1246
Investigations 1246
Management 1246
Cerebral venous disease 1247
Clinical features 1247
Investigations and management 1247
Stroke disease
1232
CLINICAL EXAMINATION IN STROKE DISEASE
Blood pressure
Higher cerebral function
Speech and language
Attention and neglect
Abbreviated mental test
Cranial nerve function
Neck stiffness/pain
Visual fields
Nerve palsy, e.g. 3rd, 6th,
7th or 12th
General appearance
Conscious level
Posture: leaning to one side?
Facial symmetry
1
Gait
Able to weight-bear?
Ataxic
Hemiparetic gait pattern
Sensory system
Touch sensation
Cortical sensory function: sensory
inattention or neglect
Joint position sense
3
4
7
Motor system
Muscle bulk
Abnormal posture or movements
Tone
Strength, including pronator drift
Co-ordination
Tendon reflexes
Plantar reflexes
6
5
8
2
Hemiparetic posture
Left pronator drift
Left facial (7th nerve) palsy
Pulse
Rate and rhythm
Clinical examination in stroke disease
1233
Clock drawing test A Image drawn by doctor.
 B Image drawn by patient with left-sided neglect. 
A
B
Skin
• Xanthelasma
• Rash (arteritis, splinter haemorrhages)
• Colour change (limb ischaemia, deep 
vein thrombosis)
• Pressure injury
Eyes
• Arcus senilis
• Diabetic retinopathy
• Hypertensive retinopathy
• Retinal emboli
Cardiovascular system
• Heart rhythm (?atrial fibrillation)
• Blood pressure (high or low)
• Carotid bruit
• Jugular venous pulse (raised if  
heart failure, low in  
hypovolaemia)
• Murmurs (source of embolism)
• Peripheral pulses and bruits 
(?generalised arteriopathy)
Respiratory system
• Signs of pulmonary oedema or 
infection
• Oxygen saturation
Abdomen
• Palpable bladder (urinary  
retention)
Locomotor
• Injuries sustained during collapse
• Comorbidities that influence recovery 
e.g. osteoarthritis
General examination
Rosier scale
Can be used by emergency staff to indicate probability of a stroke in acute presentations:
Unilateral facial weakness
+1
Loss of consciousness
−1
Unilateral grip weakness
+1
Seizure
−1
Unilateral arm weakness
+1
Unilateral leg weakness
+1
Speech loss
+1
Visual field defect
+1
Total (−2 to +6); score of > 0 indicates stroke is possible cause
Exclude hypoglycaemia
• Bedside blood glucose testing with BMstix
Language deficit
• The history and examination may indicate a language deficit
• Check comprehension (‘lift your arms, close your eyes’) to identify a receptive 
dysphasia
• Ask patient to name people/objects (e.g. nurse, watch, pen) to identify a nominal 
dysphasia
• Check articulation (ask patient to repeat phrases after you) for dysarthria
Motor deficit
Subtle pyramidal signs
• Check for pronator drift: ask patient to hold out arms and maintain their position with 
eyes closed (see opposite)
• Check for clumsiness of fine finger movements
Sensory and visual inattention
• Establish that sensation/visual field is intact on testing one side at a time
• Retest sensation/visual fields on simultaneous testing of both sides; the affected side 
will no longer be felt/seen
• Perform clock drawing test (see below)
Truncal ataxia
• Check if patient can sit up or stand without support
Rapid assessment of suspected stroke
Stroke disease
27
1234
management are distinct from those of stroke. Vascular 
dementia is described in Chapters 10 and 26.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
The main arterial supply of the brain comes from the 
internal carotid arteries, which supply the anterior brain, 
and the vertebral and basilar arteries (vertebrobasilar 
Cerebrovascular disease is the third most common cause 
of death in high-income countries after cancers and 
ischaemic heart disease, and the most common cause of 
severe physical disability. It includes a range of dis­
orders of the central nervous system (Fig. 27.1). Stroke 
is the most common clinical manifestation of cere­
brovascular disease, and results in episodes of brain 
dysfunction due to focal ischaemia or haemorrhage. 
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) and cerebral venous 
thrombosis (CVT) will be discussed separately, since 
their pathophysiology, clinical manifestations and 
Fig. 27.1  A classification of stroke disease. 
Stroke
(acute, focal brain dysfunction due to vascular disease)
Total anterior
circulation
stroke (TACS)
(15%)
Partial anterior
circulation
stroke (PACS)
(30%)
Lacunar stroke
(LACS)
(20%)
Posterior
circulation
stroke (POCS)
(20%)
Intracerebral
haemorrhage
(10%)
Subarachnoid
haemorrhage
(5%)
Central venous
thrombosis
(<1%)
Anterior (carotid) circulation
(65%)
Posterior
(vertebrobasilar
circulation)
(20%)
Brain
parenchyma
(10%)
Subarachnoid
space
(5%)
Venous
system
Infarct
(85%)
Arterial
(>99%)
Haemorrhage
(15%)
Infarct
(often develops
secondary
haemorrhage)
Venous
(<1%)
• Embolism
   (cardiac, major vessels)
• Thrombosis in situ
Clinical
classification
Site of lesion
Pathology
Vascular system
Common
pathophysiology
• Thrombosis
   in situ
• Thrombosis
• Embolism
   (cardiac)
• Vascular
   degeneration
• Aneurysm
• Arteriovenous
   malformation
• Aneurysm
• Arteriovenous
   malformation
• Vascular
   degeneration
• Thrombosis
   in situ
Fig. 27.2  Arterial circulation of the brain. A Horizontal view.  B Lateral view. 
Anterior (carotid)
circulation
Posterior
(vertebrobasilar)
circulation
Anterior cerebral
artery (ACA)
Posterior
communicating
artery (PCoA)
Posterior cerebral
artery (PCA)
Small perforating
vessels
Anterior
communicating
artery (ACoA)
Basilar artery (BA)
Vertebral
arteries (VA)
Internal carotid
arteries (ICA)
Middle cerebral
artery (MCA)
PCA
PCoA
BA
VA
ICA
ACA
MCA
A
B
Investigations
27
1235
system), which provide the posterior circulation. The 
anterior and middle cerebral arteries supply the frontal 
and parietal lobes, while the posterior cerebral artery 
supplies the occipital lobe. The vertebral and basilar 
arteries perfuse the brain stem, mid-brain and cerebel-
lum (Fig. 27.2). The functions of each of these areas of 
the brain are described on page 1141. Communicating 
arteries provide connections between the anterior and 
posterior circulations and between left and right hemi-
spheres, creating protective anastomotic connections 
that form the circle of Willis. In health, regulatory mech-
anisms maintain a constant cerebral blood flow across a 
wide range of arterial blood pressures to meet the high 
resting metabolic activity of brain tissue; cerebral blood 
vessels dilate when systemic blood pressure is lowered 
and constrict when it is raised. This autoregulatory 
mechanism can be disrupted after stroke. The venous 
collecting system is formed by a collection of sinuses 
over the surface of the brain, which drain into the jugular 
veins (Fig. 27.3).
Posterior
Superior sagittal sinus
Cavernous
sinus
Transverse sinus
Jugular vein
Anterior
Fig. 27.3  Venous circulation of the brain. 
Fig. 27.4  Acute stroke seen on CT scan with corresponding MRI appearance. A  CT may show no evidence of early infarction.
 B Corresponding image seen on MRI diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) with changes of infarction in middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory (arrows). 
A
B
INVESTIGATIONS
A range of investigations may be required to answer 
specific questions about brain structure and function 
and about the function of the vascular system.
Neuroimaging
Computed tomography (CT) scanning is the mainstay of 
stroke imaging. It allows the rapid identification of 
intracerebral bleeding and stroke ‘mimics’ (i.e. patholo-
gies other than stroke that have similar presentations), 
such as tumours. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is 
used when there is diagnostic uncertainty or delayed 
presentation, and when more information on brain 
structure and function is required (Fig. 27.4). Contra­
indications to MRI include cardiac pacemakers and 
claustrophobia on entering the scanner. These tech-
niques are described on page 1149.
Vascular imaging
Various techniques are used to obtain images of extra­
cranial and intracranial blood vessels (Fig. 27.5). The 
least invasive is ultrasound (Doppler or duplex scan-
ning), which is used to image the carotid and the verte-
bral arteries in the neck. In skilled hands, reliable 
information can be provided about the degree of arterial 
stenosis and the presence of ulcerated plaques. Blood 
flow in the intracerebral vessels can be examined using 
transcranial Doppler. While the anatomical resolution is 
limited, it is improving and many centres no longer 
require formal angiography before proceeding to carotid 
endarterectomy (see below). Blood flow can also be 
detected by specialised sequences in MR angiography 
(MRA) but the anatomical resolution is still not compa-
rable to that of intra-arterial angiography, which out-
lines blood vessels by the injec­tion of radio-opaque 
contrast intravenously or intra-arterially. The X-ray 
images obtained can be enhanced by the use of computer-
assisted digital subtraction or spiral CT. Because of 
the significant risk of complications, intra-arterial con-
trast angiography is reserved for patients in whom 
Stroke disease
27
1236
PRESENTING PROBLEMS
Most vascular lesions develop suddenly within a matter 
of minutes or hours, and so should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of patients with any acute neuro-
logical presentation.
Weakness
Unilateral weakness is the classical presentation of 
stroke and, much more rarely, of cerebral venous throm-
bosis. The weakness is sudden, progresses rapidly and 
follows a hemiplegic pattern (see Fig. 26.18, p. 1163). 
There is rarely any associated abnormal movement. 
Reflexes are initially reduced but then become increased 
with a spastic pattern of increased tone (see Box 26.20, 
p. 1162). Upper motor neuron weakness of the face (7th 
cranial nerve) is often present.
Speech disturbance
Dysphasia and dysarthria are the most common presen-
tations of disturbed speech in stroke (p. 1168). Dyspha-
sia indicates damage to the dominant frontal or parietal 
lobe (see Box 26.2, p. 1142), while dysarthria is a non-
localising feature reflecting weakness or incoordination 
of the face, pharynx, lips, tongue or palate.
non-invasive methods have provided a contradictory 
picture or incomplete information, or in whom it is nec-
essary to image the intracranial circulation in detail: for 
example, to delineate a saccular aneurysm, an arterio­
venous malformation or vasculitis.
Blood tests
These help identify underlying causes of cerebrovascu-
lar disease: for example, blood glucose (diabetes melli-
tus), triglycerides and cholesterol (hyperlipidaemia) or 
full blood count (polycythaemia) in stroke. Erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) and immunological tests, such 
as measurement of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibod-
ies (ANCA) (p. 1068), may be required when vascu-
litis is suspected. Genetic testing for rarer inherited 
conditions, such as CADASIL (cerebral autosomal domi-
nant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leuco­
encephalopathy), may be indicated.
Lumbar puncture
Lumbar puncture (p. 1153) is largely reserved for the 
investigation of SAH.
Cardiovascular investigations
Electrocardiography (ECG; p. 532) and echocardiogra-
phy (p. 537) may reveal abnormalities that may cause 
cardiac embolism in stroke.
Fig. 27.5  Different techniques of imaging blood vessels.  A Doppler scan showing 80% stenosis of the internal carotid artery (arrow).
 B Three-dimensional reconstruction of CT angiogram showing stenosis at the carotid bifurcation (arrow).  C MR angiogram showing giant aneurysm at 
the middle cerebral artery bifurcation (arrow).  D Intra-arterial angiography showing arteriovenous malformation (arrow). 
A
B
C
D
Stroke
27
1237
Visual deficit
Visual loss in stroke can be due to unilateral optic 
ischaemia (called amaurosis fugax if transient), caused 
by disturbance of blood flow in the internal carotid 
artery and ophthalmic artery, which leads to monocular 
blindness. Ischaemic damage to the occipital cortex or 
post-chiasmic nerve tracts results in a contralateral 
hemianopia (p. 1169).
Visuo-spatial dysfunction
Damage to the non-dominant cortex often results in con-
tralateral visuo-spatial dysfunction, such as sensory or 
visual neglect and apraxia (inability to perform complex 
tasks despite normal motor, sensory and cerebellar func-
tion; p. 1167). This is sometimes misdiagnosed as acute 
confusion.
Ataxia
Stroke causing damage to the cerebellum and its connec-
tions can present as an acute ataxia (p. 1168) and there 
may be associated brainstem features such as diplopia 
(p. 1170) and vertigo (p. 1167). The differential diagnosis 
includes vestibular disorders (p. 1186).
Headache
Sudden severe headache is the cardinal symptom of 
SAH but also occurs in intracerebral haemorrhage. 
Although some degree of headache is common in acute 
ischaemic stroke, it is rarely a dominant feature (p. 1156). 
Headache also occurs in cerebral venous disease.
Seizure
Seizure is unusual in acute stroke but may be general-
ised or focal in cerebral venous disease.
Coma
Coma is an uncommon feature of stroke, though it may 
occur with a brainstem event. If it is present in the first 
24 hours, it usually indicates a subarachnoid or intra­
cerebral haemorrhage (see Box 26.16, p. 1160).
STROKE
Stroke is a common medical emergency. The incidence 
rises steeply with age, and in many lower- and middle-
income countries it is rising in association with less 
healthy lifestyles. About one-fifth of patients with an 
acute stroke die within a month of the event and at least 
half of those who survive are left with physical 
disability.
Pathophysiology
Of the 180–300 patients per 100 000 population present-
ing annually with a stroke, 85% sustain a cerebral infarc-
tion due to inadequate blood flow to part of the brain, 
and most of the remainder have an intracerebral haem-
orrhage (see Fig. 27.1).
Cerebral infarction
Cerebral infarction is mostly caused by thromboembolic 
disease secondary to atherosclerosis in the major extra­
cranial arteries (carotid artery and aortic arch). About 
20% of infarctions are due to embolism from the heart, 
and a further 20% are due to thrombosis in situ caused 
by intrinsic disease of small perforating vessels (lenti­
culostriate arteries), producing so-called lacunar infarc-
tions. The risk factors for ischaemic stroke reflect the risk 
factors for the underlying vascular disease (Box 27.1). 
About 5% are due to rare causes, including vasculitis 
(p. 1115), endocarditis (p. 625) and cerebral venous 
disease (see below). Cerebral infarction takes some 
hours to complete, even though the patient’s deficit may 
be maximal shortly after the vascular occlusion. After 
the occlusion of a cerebral artery, infarction may be fore-
stalled by the opening of anastomotic channels from 
other arterial territories that restore perfusion to its ter-
ritory. Similarly, reduction in perfusion pressure leads 
to compensatory homeostatic changes to maintain tissue 
oxygenation (Fig. 27.6). These compensatory changes 
can sometimes prevent occlusion of even a carotid artery 
from having any clinically apparent effect.
However, if and when these homeostatic mecha-
nisms fail, the process of ischaemia starts, and ultimately 
leads to infarction unless the vascular supply is restored. 
As the cerebral blood flow declines, different neuronal 
functions fail at various thresholds (Fig. 27.7). Once 
blood flow falls below the threshold for the maintenance 
of electrical activity, neurological deficit develops. At 
this level of blood flow, the neurons are still viable; if 
Fixed risk factors
• Age
• Gender (male > female except at extremes of age)
• Race (Afro-Caribbean > Asian > European)
• Previous vascular event
Myocardial infarction
Stroke
Peripheral vascular disease
• Heredity
• High fibrinogen
Modifiable risk factors
• Blood pressure
• Cigarette smoking
• Hyperlipidaemia
27.1  Risk factors for stroke
• Diabetes mellitus
• Excessive alcohol intake
• Oestrogen-containing drugs
Oral contraceptive pill
Hormone replacement 
therapy
• Polycythaemia
• Heart disease
Atrial fibrillation
Congestive cardiac 
failure
Infective endocarditis
Stroke disease
27
1238
(cytotoxic oedema) and the release of the excitatory 
neurotransmitter glutamate into the extracellular fluid. 
Glutamate opens membrane channels, allowing the 
influx of calcium and more sodium into the neurons. 
Calcium entering the neurons activates intracellular 
enzymes that complete the destructive process. The 
release of inflammatory mediators by microglia and 
the blood flow increases again, function returns and the 
patient will have had a transient ischaemic attack (TIA). 
However, if the blood flow falls further, a level is reached 
at which irreversible cell death starts. Hypoxia leads 
to an inadequate supply of adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP), which leads to failure of membrane pumps, 
thereby allowing influx of sodium and water into the cell 
Fig. 27.8  The process of neuronal 
ischaemia and infarction. (1) Reduction of 
blood flow reduces supply of oxygen and hence 
ATP. H+ is produced by anaerobic metabolism of 
available glucose. (2) Energy-dependent 
membrane ionic pumps fail, leading to cytotoxic 
oedema and membrane depolarisation, allowing 
calcium entry and releasing glutamate.  
(3) Calcium enters cells via glutamate-gated 
channels and (4) activates destructive 
intracellular enzymes (5), destroying intracellular 
organelles and cell membrane, with release of 
free radicals. Free fatty acid release activates 
pro-coagulant pathways that exacerbate local 
ischaemia. (6) Glial cells take up H+, can no 
longer take up extracellular glutamate and also 
suffer cell death, leading to liquefactive necrosis 
of whole arterial territory. 
↓Oxygen
+glucose
Anaerobic 
metabolism
↓ATP
H+
Ca2+
Na+/K+  ATPase↓
Lipid peroxidases
Proteases
NO synthase
Ca2+
Na+
AMPA
NMDA
Glutamate
↓Glutamate
uptake by glia
H+
K+
Glia
Fe + H
Water
Na+
Oedema
Free
  radicals
Ca2+
3
1
2
4
2
6
5
Thromboxane
Prostaglandins
Free fatty
acids
Depolarisation
Fig. 27.6  Homeostatic responses to falling perfusion pressure in 
the brain following arterial occlusion. Vasodilatation initially maintains 
cerebral blood flow (A), but after maximal vasodilatation further falls in 
perfusion pressure lead to a decline in blood flow. An increase in tissue 
oxygen extraction, however, maintains the cerebral metabolic rate for 
oxygen (B). Still further falls in perfusion, and therefore blood flow, cannot 
be compensated; cerebral oxygen availability falls and symptoms appear, 
then infarction (C). 
Symptoms
Infarction
Cerebral
oxygen
extraction
Cerebral
blood
volume
Cerebral
oxygen
metabolism
Blood
flow
Perfusion
pressure
Vasodilatation
A
B
C
Time (mins/hrs)
Fig. 27.7  Thresholds of cerebral ischaemia. Symptoms of cerebral 
ischaemia appear when the blood flow has fallen to less than half of 
normal and energy supply is insufficient to sustain neuronal electrical 
function. Full recovery can occur if this level of flow is returned to normal 
but not if it is sustained. Further blood flow reduction below the next 
threshold causes failure of cell ionic pumps and starts the ischaemic 
cascade, leading to cell death. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Increased oxygen
extraction
Failure of
electrical function
Symptoms
Failure of ionic pumps
Potassium efflux
Sodium influx
Cell death
Cerebral blood flow
mL/100 g/min
Stroke
27
1239
astrocytes causes death of all cell types in the area of 
maximum ischaemia. The infarction process is worsened 
by the anaerobic production of lactic acid (Fig. 27.8) and 
consequent fall in tissue pH. There have been attempts 
to develop neuroprotective drugs to slow down the 
processes leading to irreversible cell death but so far 
these have proved disappointing.
The final outcome of the occlusion of a cerebral blood 
vessel therefore depends upon the competence of the 
circulatory homeostatic mechanisms, the metabolic 
demand, and the severity and duration of the reduction 
in blood flow. Higher brain temperature, as occurs in 
fever, and higher blood sugar have both been associated 
with a greater volume of infarction for a given reduction 
in cerebral blood flow. Subsequent restoration of blood 
flow may cause haemorrhage into the infarcted area 
(‘haemorrhagic transformation’). This is particularly 
likely in patients given antithrombotic or thrombolytic 
drugs, and in patients with larger infarcts.
Radiologically, a cerebral infarct can be seen as a 
lesion that comprises a mixture of dead brain tissue 
that is already undergoing autolysis, and tissue that is 
ischaemic and swollen but recoverable (the ‘ischaemic 
penumbra’). The infarct swells with time and is at its 
maximal size a couple of days after stroke onset. At this 
stage, it may be big enough to exert mass effect both 
clinically and radiologically; sometimes, decompressive 
craniectomy is required (see below). After a few weeks, 
the oedema subsides and the infarcted area is replaced 
by a sharply defined fluid-filled cavity.
Intracerebral haemorrhage
Intracerebral haemorrhage causes about 10% of acute 
stroke events but is more common in low-income 
countries. It usually results from rupture of a blood 
vessel within the brain parenchyma but may also occur 
in a patient with an SAH (see below) if the artery rup-
tures into the brain substance as well as into the 
subarachnoid space. Haemorrhage frequently occurs 
into an area of brain infarction and, if the volume of 
haemorrhage is large, it may be difficult to distinguish 
from primary intracerebral haemorrhage both clinically 
and radiologically (Fig. 27.9). The risk factors and under-
lying causes of intracerebral haemorrhage are listed in 
Box 27.2. The explosive entry of blood into the brain 
parenchyma causes immediate cessation of function in 
that area as neurons are structurally disrupted and 
white-matter fibre tracts are split apart. The haemor-
rhage itself may expand over the first minutes or hours, 
or it may be associated with a rim of cerebral oedema, 
which, along with the haematoma, acts like a mass lesion 
to cause progression of the neurological deficit. If big 
enough, this can cause shift of the intracranial contents, 
producing transtentorial coning and sometimes rapid 
death (p. 1212). If the patient survives, the haematoma 
is gradually absorbed, leaving a haemosiderin-lined slit 
in the brain parenchyma.
Clinical features
Acute stroke and TIA are characterised by a rapid-onset, 
focal deficit of brain function. The typical presentation 
occurs over minutes, affects an identifiable area of the 
brain and is ‘negative’ in character (i.e. abrupt loss of 
function without positive features such as abnormal 
movement). Provided that there is a clear history of this, 
the chance of a brain lesion being anything other than 
vascular is 5% or less (Box 27.3). If symptoms progress 
over hours or days, other diagnoses must be excluded. 
Confusion and memory or balance disturbance are 
more often due to stroke mimics. Transient symptoms, 
such as syncope, amnesia, confusion and dizziness, 
do not reflect focal cerebral dysfunction, but are often 
Fig. 27.9  CT scans showing 
intracerebral haemorrhage.  A Basal 
ganglia haemorrhage with intraventricular 
extension.  B Small cortical haemorrhage. 
A
B
Disease
Risk factors
Complex small-vessel 
disease with disruption of 
vessel wall
Age
Hypertension
High cholesterol
Amyloid angiopathy
Familial (rare)
Age
Impaired blood clotting
Anticoagulant therapy
Blood dyscrasia
Thrombolytic therapy
Vascular anomaly
Arteriovenous malformation
Cavernous haemangioma
Substance misuse
Alcohol
Amphetamines
Cocaine
27.2  Causes of intracerebral haemorrhage and 
associated risk factors
Stroke disease
27
1240
mistakenly attributed to TIA (see Fig. 26.17, p. 1158, and 
Box 27.4). Public health campaigns to raise awareness of 
the emergency nature of stroke exploit the fact that 
weakness of the face or arm, or disturbance of speech is 
the commonest presentation.
The clinical presentation of stroke depends upon 
which arterial territory is involved and the size of the 
lesion (see Fig. 27.1). These will both have a bearing on 
management, such as suitability for carotid endarterec-
tomy. The neurological deficit can be identified from the 
patient’s history and (if it is persistent) the neurological 
examination. The presence of a unilateral motor deficit, 
a higher cerebral function deficit such as aphasia or 
neglect, or a visual field defect usually places the lesion 
in the cerebral hemisphere. Ataxia, diplopia, vertigo 
and/or bilateral weakness usually indicate a lesion in 
the brainstem or cerebellum. Different combinations of 
these deficits define several stroke syndromes (Fig. 
27.10), which reflect the site and size of the lesion and 
may provide clues to underlying pathology.
Reduced conscious level usually indicates a large-
volume lesion in the cerebral hemisphere but may result 
from a lesion in the brainstem or complications such as 
obstructive hydrocephalus, hypoxia or severe systemic 
infection. The combination of severe headache and vom-
iting at the onset of the focal deficit is suggestive of 
intracerebral haemorrhage.
General examination may provide clues to the cause, 
and identify important comorbidities and complications.
Several terms have been used to classify strokes, often 
based on the duration and evolution of symptoms.
•	 Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) describes a stroke in 
which symptoms resolve within 24 hours – an 
arbitrary cutoff that has little value in practice, apart 
from perhaps indicating that underlying cerebral 
haemorrhage or extensive cerebral infarction is 
extremely unlikely. The term TIA traditionally also 
includes patients with amaurosis fugax, usually due 
to a vascular occlusion in the retina.
•	 Stroke describes those events in which symptoms 
last more than 24 hours. The differential diagnosis 
of patients with symptoms lasting a few minutes or 
hours is similar to those with persisting symptoms 
(see Box 27.3).
•	 Progressing stroke (or stroke in evolution) describes a 
stroke in which the focal neurological deficit 
worsens after the patient first presents. Such 
worsening may be due to increasing volume of 
infarction, haemorrhagic transformation or 
increasing cerebral oedema.
•	 Completed stroke describes a stroke in which the focal 
deficit persists and is not progressing.
When assessing a patient within hours of symptom 
onset, it is not possible to distinguish stroke from TIA 
unless symptoms have already resolved. In clinical prac-
tice, it is important to distinguish those patients with 
strokes who have persisting focal neurological symptoms 
when seen from those whose symptoms have resolved.
Investigations
Investigation of acute stroke aims to confirm the vascu-
lar nature of the lesion, distinguish cerebral infarction 
from haemorrhage and identify the underlying vascular 
disease and risk factors (Box 27.5).
‘Structural’ stroke mimics
• Primary cerebral tumours
• Metastatic cerebral 
tumours
• Subdural haematoma
• Cerebral abscess
• Peripheral nerve lesions 
(vascular or compressive)
• Demyelination
‘Functional’ stroke mimics
• Todd’s paresis (after 
epileptic seizure)
• Hypoglycaemia
• Migrainous aura (with or 
without headache)
• Focal seizures
• Ménière’s disease or other 
vestibular disorder
• Conversion disorder (p. 246)
• Encephalitis
27.3  Differential diagnosis of stroke and TIA
Feature
Stroke
Stroke mimics
Symptom onset
Sudden (minutes)
Often slower onset
Symptom 
progression
Rapidly reaches 
maximum severity
Often gradual onset
Severity of 
deficit
Unequivocal
May be variable/
uncertain
Pattern of 
deficit
Hemispheric 
pattern
May be non-specific 
with confusion, 
memory loss, 
balance disturbance
Loss of 
consciousness
Uncommon
More common
27.4  Characteristic features of stroke and 
non-stroke syndromes (‘stroke mimics’)
Diagnostic question
Investigation
Is it a vascular lesion?
CT/MRI
Is it ischaemic or 
haemorrhagic?
CT/MRI
Is it a subarachnoid 
haemorrhage?
CT/lumbar puncture
Is there any cardiac 
source of embolism?
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
24-hour ECG
Echocardiogram
What is the underlying 
vascular disease?
Duplex ultrasound of carotids
Magnetic resonance  
angiography (MRA)
CT angiography (CTA)
Contrast angiography
What are the risk factors?
Full blood count
Cholesterol
Blood glucose
Is there an unusual 
cause?
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Serum protein electrophoresis
Clotting/thrombophilia screen
27.5  Investigation of a patient with 
an acute stroke
Stroke
27
1241
Fig. 27.10  Clinical and radiological features of the stroke syndromes. The top three diagrams show coronal sections of the brain, and the 
bottom one shows a sagittal section. The anatomical locations of cerebral functions are shown with the nerve tracts in green. A motor (or sensory) deficit 
(shown by the red shaded areas) can occur with damage to the relevant cortex (PACS), nerve tracts (LACS) or both (TACS). The corresponding CT scans 
show horizontal slices at the level of the lesion, highlighted by the arrows. 
Combination of:
Hemiparesis
Higher cerebral dysfunction
(e.g. aphasia)
Hemisensory loss
Homonymous hemianopia
(damage to optic radiations)
Leg
Total anterior circulation
syndrome (TACS)
Clinical syndrome
Common symptoms
Common cause
CT scan features
Arm
Higher
cerebral
functions
Face
Optic
radiations
Middle cerebral artery
occlusion
(Embolism from heart
or major vessels)
Isolated motor loss (e.g. leg only,
arm only, face)
Isolated higher cerebral
dysfunction (e.g. aphasia,
neglect)
Mixture of higher cerebral
dysfunction and motor loss
(e.g. aphasia with right
hemiparesis)
Leg
Partial anterior circulation
syndrome (PACS)
Arm
Higher
cerebral
functions
Face
Optic
radiations
Occlusion of a branch
of the middle cerebral
artery or anterior
cerebral artery
(Embolism from heart
or major vessels)
Pure motor stroke – affects
two limbs
Pure sensory stroke
Sensory-motor stroke
No higher cerebral dysfunction
or hemianopia
Leg
Lacunar syndrome (LACS)
Posterior circulation
stroke (POCS)
(lateral view)
Arm
Higher
cerebral
functions
Visual cortex
Cerebellum
Cranial nerve
nuclei
Face
Optic
radiations
Thrombotic occlusion
of small perforating
arteries
(Thrombosis in situ)
Homonymous hemianopia
(damage to visual cortex)
Cerebellar syndrome
Cranial nerve syndromes
Occlusion in vertebral,
basilar or posterior
cerbral artery territory
(Cardiac embolism or
thrombosis in situ)
Risk factor analysis
Initial investigation includes a range of simple blood 
tests to detect common vascular risk factors and markers 
of rarer causes, an ECG and brain imaging. Where there 
is uncertainty about the nature of the stroke, further 
investigations are indicated. This especially applies to 
younger patients, who are less likely to have athero­
sclerotic disease (Box 27.6).
Neuroimaging
Brain imaging with either CT or MRI should be per-
formed in all patients with acute stroke. Exceptions are 
where results would not influence management, such as 
in the advanced stage of a terminal illness. CT remains 
the most practical and widely available method of 
imaging the brain. It will usually exclude non-stroke 
lesions, including subdural haematomas and brain 
tumours, and will demonstrate intracerebral haemor-
rhage within minutes of stroke onset (see Fig. 27.9). 
However, especially within the first few hours after 
symptom onset, CT changes in cerebral infarction may 
be completely absent or only very subtle. Changes often 
develop over time (see Fig. 27.11, p. 1245), but small 
cerebral infarcts may never show up on CT scans. For 
most purposes, a CT scan performed within 24 hours is 
Stroke disease
27
1242
adequate but there are certain circumstances in which 
an immediate CT scan is essential (Box 27.7). Even in 
the absence of changes suggesting infarction, abnormal 
perfusion of brain tissue can be imaged with CT after 
injection of contrast media (i.e. perfusion scanning). 
This can be useful in guiding immediate treatment of 
ischaemic stroke.
MRI is not as widely available as CT and scanning 
times are longer. However, MRI diffusion weighted 
imaging (DWI) can detect ischaemia earlier than CT, and 
other MRI sequences can also be used to demonstrate 
abnormal perfusion (see Fig. 27.4). MRI is more sensitive 
than CT in detecting strokes affecting the brainstem and 
Cause
Investigation
Cerebral infarct
Cardiac embolism
Echocardiography (including 
transoesophageal)
Premature atherosclerosis
Serum lipids
Arterial dissection
MRI
Angiography
Thrombophilia
Protein C, protein S
Antithrombin III
Factor V Leiden, prothrombin
Homocystinuria (p. 449)
Urinary amino acids
Methionine loading test
Antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome (p. 1055)
Anticardiolipin antibodies/
lupus anticoagulant
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Antinuclear antibodies
Vasculitis
ESR
C-reactive protein
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody (ANCA)
CADASIL (cerebral autosomal 
dominant arteriopathy with 
subcortical infarcts and 
leucoencephalopathy)
MRI brain
Genetic analysis
Skin biopsy
Mitochondrial cytopathy
Serum lactate
White cell mitochondrial DNA
Muscle biopsy
Mitochondrial molecular 
genetics
Fabry’s disease
Alpha-galactosidase levels
Neurovascular syphilis
Syphilis serology
Primary intracerebral haemorrhage
Arteriovenous malformation 
(AVM)
MRI/angiography
Drug misuse
Drug screen (amphetamine, 
cocaine)
Coagulopathy
Prothrombin time (PT) and 
activated partial 
thromboplastin time (APTT)
Platelet count
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Saccular (‘berry’) aneurysm
MRI/angiography
AVM
MRI/angiography
Vertebral dissection
MRI/angiography
27.6  Causes and investigation of acute stroke in 
young patients
cerebellum, and unlike CT, can reliably distinguish 
haemorrhagic from ischaemic stroke even several weeks 
after the onset. CT and MRI may reveal clues as to the 
nature of the arterial lesion. For example, there may be 
a small, deep lacunar infarct indicating small-vessel 
disease, or a more peripheral infarct suggesting an 
extracranial source of embolism (see Fig. 27.10). In a 
haemorrhagic lesion, the location might indicate the 
presence of an underlying vascular malformation, sac-
cular aneurysm or amyloid angiopathy.
Vascular imaging
Many ischaemic strokes are caused by atherosclerotic 
thromboembolic disease of the major extracranial 
vessels. Detection of extracranial vascular disease can 
help establish why the patient has had an ischaemic 
stroke and, in highly selected patients, may lead on to 
specific treatments, including carotid endarterectomy to 
reduce the risk of further stroke (see below). The pres-
ence or absence of a carotid bruit is not a reliable 
indicator of the degree of carotid stenosis. Extracranial 
arterial disease can be non-invasively identified with 
duplex ultrasound, MRA or CT angiography (see Fig. 
27.5), or occasionally intra-arterial contrast radiography 
as above.
Cardiac investigations
Approximately 20% of ischaemic strokes are due to 
embolism from the heart. The most common causes are 
atrial fibrillation, prosthetic heart valves, other valvular 
abnormalities and recent myocardial infarction. These 
may be identified by clinical examination and ECG, but 
a transthoracic or transoesophageal echocardiogram is 
also required to confirm the presence of a clinically 
apparent cardiac source or to identify an unsuspected 
source such as endocarditis, atrial myxoma, intracardiac 
thrombus or patent foramen ovale. Such findings may 
lead on to specific cardiac treatment.
Management
Management is aimed at minimising the volume of brain 
that is irreversibly damaged, preventing complications 
(Box 27.8), reducing the patient’s disability and handi-
cap through rehabilitation, and reducing the risk of 
recurrent stroke or other vascular events. With TIA there 
is no brain damage and disability, so the priority is to 
reduce the risk of further vascular events.
Supportive care
Early admission of patients to a specialised stroke unit 
facilitates coordinated care from a specialised multidis-
ciplinary team (Box 27.9), and has been shown to reduce 
both mortality and residual disability amongst survi-
vors. Consideration of a patient’s rehabilitation needs 
• Patient on anticoagulants or with abnormal coagulation
• Consideration of thrombolysis or immediate anticoagulation
• Deteriorating conscious level or rapidly progressing deficits
• Suspected cerebellar haematoma, to exclude hydrocephalus
27.7  Indications for emergency CT/MRI in 
acute stroke
Stroke
27
1243
sepsis, epileptic seizures or metabolic abnormalities that 
may be reversed more easily. Patients with cerebellar 
haematomas or infarcts with mass effect may develop 
obstructive hydrocephalus and some will benefit from 
insertion of a ventricular drain and/or decompressive 
should commence at the same time as acute medical 
management. Dysphagia is common and can be detected 
by an early bedside test of swallowing. This allows 
hydration, feeding and medication to be given safely, if 
necessary by nasogastric tube or intravenously. In the 
acute phase, a checklist may be useful (Box 27.10) to 
ensure that all the factors that might influence outcome 
have been addressed.
The patient’s neurological deficits may worsen during 
the first few hours or days after their onset. This is most 
common in those with lacunar infarcts but may occur in 
other patients, due to extension of the area of infarction, 
haemorrhage transformation, or the development of 
oedema with consequent mass effect. It is important 
to distinguish these patients from those who are deterio-
rating as a result of complications such as hypoxia, 
‘Admitting 1000 patients to a stroke unit prevents about 50 
patients from being dead or dependent at 6 months.’
• Stroke Unit Trialists’ Collaboration. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
2007, issue 4. Art. no.: CD000197.
For further information: 
www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
27.9  Specialist stroke units
Complication
Prevention
Treatment
Chest 
infection
Nurse semi-erect
Avoid aspiration (nil by 
mouth, nasogastric 
tube, possible 
gastrostomy)
Antibiotics
Physiotherapy
Epileptic 
seizures
Maintain cerebral 
oxygenation
Avoid metabolic 
disturbance
Anticonvulsants
Deep venous 
thrombosis/
pulmonary 
embolism
Maintain hydration
Early mobilisation
Anti-embolism 
stockings
Heparin (for high-risk 
patients only)
Anticoagulation 
(exclude 
haemorrhagic 
stroke first)
Painful 
shoulder
Avoid traction injury
Shoulder/arm supports
Physiotherapy
Physiotherapy
Local corticosteroid 
injections
Pressure 
sores
Frequent turning
Monitor pressure areas
Avoid urinary damage 
to skin
Nursing care
Pressure-relieving 
mattress
Urinary 
infection
Avoid catheterisation  
if possible
Use penile sheath
Antibiotics
Constipation
Appropriate aperients 
and diet
Appropriate 
aperients
Depression 
and anxiety
Maintain positive 
attitude and provide 
information
Antidepressants
27.8  Complications of acute stroke
Airway
• Perform bedside swallow screen and keep patient nil by 
mouth if swallowing unsafe or aspiration occurs
Breathing
• Check respiratory rate and oxygen saturation and give 
oxygen if saturation < 95%
Circulation
• Check peripheral perfusion, pulse and blood pressure and 
treat abnormalities with fluid replacement, anti-arrhythmics 
and inotropic drugs as appropriate
Hydration
• If signs of dehydration, give fluids parenterally or by 
nasogastric tube
Nutrition
• Assess nutritional status and provide nutritional supplements 
if necessary
• If dysphagia persists for > 48 hrs, start feeding via a 
nasogastric tube
Medication
• If patient is dysphagic, consider alternative routes for 
essential medications
Blood pressure
• Unless there is heart or renal failure, evidence of 
hypertensive encephalopathy or aortic dissection, do not 
lower blood pressure in first week as it may reduce cerebral 
perfusion. Blood pressure often returns towards patient’s 
normal level within first few days
Blood glucose
• Check blood glucose and treat when levels are  
≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) (by insulin infusion or glucose/
potassium/insulin (GKI)
• Monitor closely to avoid hypoglycaemia
Temperature
• If pyrexic, investigate and treat underlying cause
• Control with antipyretics, as raised brain temperature may 
increase infarct volume
Pressure areas
• Reduce risk of skin breakdown:
Treat infection
Maintain nutrition
Provide pressure-relieving mattress
Turn immobile patients regularly
Incontinence
• Check for constipation and urinary retention; treat 
appropriately
• Avoid urinary catheterisation unless patient is in acute 
urinary retention or incontinence is threatening pressure 
areas
Mobilisation
• Avoid bed rest
27.10  Management of acute stroke
Stroke disease
27
1244
surgery (Box 27.11). Some patients with large haemato-
mas or infarction with massive oedema in the cerebral 
hemispheres may benefit from anti-oedema agents, such 
as mannitol or artificial ventilation. Surgical decompres-
sion to reduce intracranial pressure should be consid-
ered in appropriate patients.
Thrombolysis
Intravenous thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plas-
minogen activator (rt-PA) increases the risk of haem­
orrhagic transformation of the cerebral infarct with 
potentially fatal results. However, if it is given within 
4.5 hours of symptom onset to carefully selected patients, 
the haemorrhagic risk is offset by an improvement in 
overall outcome (see Box 27.11). The earlier treatment is 
given, the greater the benefit.
Aspirin
In the absence of contraindications, aspirin (300 mg 
daily) should be started immediately after an ischaemic 
stroke unless rt-PA has been given, in which case it 
should be withheld for at least 24 hours. Aspirin reduces 
the risk of early recurrence and has a small but clinically 
worthwhile effect on long-term outcome (see Box 27.11); 
it may be given by rectal suppository or by nasogastric 
tube in dysphagic patients.
Heparin
Anticoagulation with heparin has been widely used to 
treat acute ischaemic stroke in the past. Whilst it reduces 
the risk of early ischaemic recurrence and venous 
thrombo­embolism, it increases the risk of both intracra-
nial and extracranial haemorrhage. Furthermore, routine 
use of heparin does not result in better long-term out-
comes, and therefore it should not be used in the routine 
management of acute stroke. It is unclear whether 
heparin might provide benefit in selected patients, such 
as those with recent myocardial infarction, arterial dis-
section or progressing strokes. Intracranial haemorrhage 
must be excluded on brain imaging before considering 
anticoagulation.
Treatment
Target group
Approximate proportion of 
patients eligible for treatment
NNT to prevent 1 death or 
disability in those treated
Aspirin1
Acute ischaemic stroke
90%
80
Thrombolysis with rt-PA2
Acute ischaemic stroke
Treated within 3 hrs of onset
Treated within 3–4.5 hrs of onset
10%
10%
9
20
Decompressive 
hemicraniectomy3
Large cerebral infarction
< 1%
2
Stroke unit care4
Acute stroke
80%
20
• 1Sandercock P, et al. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, issue 3. Art. no.: CD000029.
• 2Lees KR, et al. Lancet 2010; 375:1695–1703.
• 3Vahedi K, et al. Lancet Neurol 2007; 6(3):215–222.
• 4Stroke Unit Trialists’ Collaboration. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, issue 4. Art. no.: CD000197.
For further information: 
www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
(NNT = number needed to treat; rtPA = tissue plasminogen activator)
27.11  Role of treatments in acute stroke
Coagulation abnormalities
In those with intracerebral haemorrhage, coagulation 
abnormalities should be reversed as quickly as possible 
to reduce the likelihood of the haematoma enlarging. 
This most commonly arises in those on warfarin therapy. 
There is no evidence that clotting factors are useful in 
the absence of a clotting defect.
Management of risk factors
The approaches used are summarised in Figure 27.11. 
The average risk of a further stroke is 5–10% within the 
first week of a stroke or TIA, perhaps 15% in the first 
year and 5% per year thereafter. The risks are not 
substantially different for intracerebral haemorrhage. 
Patients with ischaemic events should be put on long-
term antiplatelet drugs and statins to lower cholesterol. 
For patients in atrial fibrillation, the risk can be reduced 
by about 60% by using oral anticoagulation to achieve 
an INR of 2–3. The role of newer oral anticoagulants 
(such as dabigatran) is currently being investigated. The 
risk of recurrence after both ischaemic and haemor-
rhagic strokes can be reduced by blood pressure reduc-
tion, even for those with relatively normal blood 
pressures (Box 27.12).
Carotid endarterectomy  
and angioplasty
A small proportion of patients with a carotid territory 
ischaemic stroke or TIA will have a greater than 50% 
stenosis of the carotid artery on the side of the brain 
lesion. Such patients have a greater than average risk 
of stroke recurrence. For those without major residual 
disability, removal of the stenosis has been shown 
to reduce the overall risk of recurrence, although the 
operation itself carries about a 5% risk of stroke (see 
Box 27.12). Surgery is most effective in patients with 
more severe stenoses (70–99%) and in those in whom 
it is performed within the first couple of weeks after 
the TIA or ischaemic stroke. Carotid angioplasty and 
stenting are technically feasible but have not been 
shown to be as effective as endarterectomy for the 
Stroke
27
1245
Fig. 27.11  Strategies for secondary prevention of stroke. (1) Lower BP with caution in patients with postural hypotension, renal impairment or 
bilateral carotid stenosis. (2) Pravastatin 40 mg can be used as an alternative to simvastatin in patients on warfarin or digoxin. (3) Warfarin and aspirin can 
be used in combination in patients with prosthetic heart valves. (4) The combination of aspirin and clopidogrel is only indicated in patients with unstable 
angina who demonstrate ECG or enzyme changes. 
Antiplatelet drugs4
• Aspirin 300 mg at once
    then 75 mg daily
• Clopidogrel 75 mg daily
    if aspirin-intolerant
• Dipyridamole MR
    200 mg twice daily if
    event whilst on aspirin
Lower cholesterol2
if total cholesterol
> 3.5 mmol/L
(135 mg/dL) with
simvastatin 40 mg
nocte, after checking
liver function tests
Warfarin3
if no
contraindications
Target INR 2–3, or
3.5 if mechanical
prosthetic valve
Consider
• Cardioversion
• Anti-arrhythmic
Carotid
endarterectomy
Refer if > 70%
stenosis on
symptomatic side
Carotid duplex
Lower BP1
if BP > 130/70 mmHg
1–2 weeks after onset
• Thiazide diuretic
• ACE inhibitor
    (check U & Es)
• Other agents
Lifestyle 
• Smoking cessation
• Lower salt intake
• Lower fat intake
• Lower excess
   alcohol intake
• Increase exercise
• Lose excess weight
Haemorrhagic
Sinus rhythm
If contraindications
to warfarin, e.g.
bleeding, falls,
binge drinking,
poor compliance
Thyroid function tests
and
echocardiogram
Atrial fibrillation
ECG
Ischaemic
Single
typical TIA
Stroke
or atypical or multiple
cerebral TIAs
CT brain scan within
24 hours of onset;
MRI if later than 7 days
Treatment
Target group
Approximate proportion of 
patients eligible for treatment
NNT to prevent 1 
recurrent stroke
Antiplatelet drugs (clopidogrel, 
aspirin/dipyridamole1
Ischaemic stroke or TIA (in sinus rhythm)
90%
100
Statins2
Ischaemic stroke or TIA
80%
60
Blood pressure-lowering3
All stroke (ischaemic or haemorrhagic) 
with blood pressure > 130/80 mmHg
60%
50
Anticoagulation with warfarin 
(or newer oral anticoagulant)4
Ischaemic stroke patients in atrial 
fibrillation
20%
15
Carotid endarterectomy5
Ischaemic stroke or TIA
Recently symptomatic severe carotid 
stenosis
< 10%
15
27.12  Strategies for secondary prevention
• 1Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collaboration. BMJ 2002; 324:71–86.
• 2Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. Lancet 2002; 360:7–22 and SPARCL 
investigators. N Engl J Med 2006; 355:549–559.
• 3PROGRESS Collaborative Group. Lancet 2001; 358:1033–1041.
• 4Lip GYH, et al. Lancet 2012; 379:648–661.
• 5Rothwell PM, et al. Lancet 2003; 361:107–116.
For further information: 
www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
Stroke disease
27
1246
Fig. 27.12  Investigation of subarachnoid haemorrhage. 
Emergency CT
Traumatic lumbar punctures
do not cause xanthochromia
in that specimen
Negative
(15% of subarachnoid
haemorrhage)
Shows subarachnoid
haemorrhage
Blood/xanthochromia
CSF
(after 12 hours)
If CT and CSF at 12 hours are
negative the patient has not had
a subarachnoid haemorrhage
Refer to neurosurgeons
Resuscitate
Nimodipine 60 mg
majority of eligible patients. Endarterectomy of asymp-
tomatic carotid stenosis has been shown to reduce the 
subsequent risk of stroke, but the small absolute benefit 
does not justify its routine use.
SUBARACHNOID HAEMORRHAGE
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) is less common than 
ischaemic stroke or intracerebral haemorrhage (see Fig. 
27.1) and affects about 6/100 000 of the population. 
Women are affected more commonly than men and the 
condition usually presents before the age of 65. The 
immediate mortality of aneurysmal SAH is about 30%; 
survivors have a recurrence (or rebleed) rate of about 
40% in the first 4 weeks and 3% annually thereafter.
Eighty-five percent of SAH are caused by saccular 
or ‘berry’ aneurysms arising from the bifurcation 
of cerebral arteries (see Fig. 27.2), particularly in the 
region of the circle of Willis. The most common sites 
are in the anterior communicating artery (30%), poste-
rior communicating artery (25%) or middle cerebral 
artery (20%). There is an increased risk in first-degree 
relatives of those with saccular aneurysms, and in 
patients with polycystic kidney disease (p. 505) and 
congenital connective tissue defects such as Ehlers–
Danlos syndrome (p. 1045). In about 10% of cases, 
SAH are non-aneurysmal haemorrhages (so-called peri-
mesencephalic haemorrhages), which have a very char-
acteristic appearance on CT and a benign outcome 
in terms of mortality and recurrence. Five percent of 
SAH are due to arteriovenous malformations and verte-
bral artery dissection.
Clinical features
SAH typically presents with a sudden, severe, ‘thunder-
clap’ headache (often occipital), which lasts for hours or 
even days, often accompanied by vomiting, raised blood 
pressure and neck stiffness or pain. It commonly occurs 
on physical exertion, straining and sexual excitement. 
There may be loss of consciousness at the onset, so SAH 
should be considered if a patient is found comatose. 
About 1 patient in 8 with a sudden severe headache has 
SAH and, in view of this, all who present in this way 
require investigation to exclude it (Fig. 27.12).
On examination, the patient is usually distressed and 
irritable, with photophobia. There may be neck stiffness 
due to subarachnoid blood but this may take some hours 
to develop. Focal hemisphere signs, such as hemiparesis 
or aphasia, may be present at onset if there is an associ-
ated intracerebral haematoma. A third nerve palsy may 
be present due to local pressure from an aneurysm of 
the posterior communicating artery, but this is rare. Fun-
doscopy may reveal a subhyaloid haemorrhage, which 
represents blood tracking along the subarachnoid space 
around the optic nerve.
Investigations
CT brain scanning and lumbar puncture are required. 
The diagnosis of SAH can be made by CT, but a negative 
result does not exclude it, since small amounts of blood 
in the subarachnoid space cannot be detected by CT (see 
Fig. 27.12). Lumbar puncture should be performed 12 
hours after symptom onset if possible, to allow detection 
of xanthochromia (p. 1153). If either of these tests is posi-
tive, cerebral angiography (see Fig. 27.5) is required to 
determine the optimal approach to prevent recurrent 
bleeding.
Management
Nimodipine (30–60 mg IV for 5–14 days, followed by 
360 mg orally for a further 7 days) is usually given 
to prevent delayed ischaemia in the acute phase. Inser-
tion of platinum coils into an aneurysm (via an endovas-
cular procedure) or surgical clipping of the aneurysm 
neck reduces the risk of both early and late recurrence. 
Coiling is associated with fewer perioperative com­
plications and better outcomes than surgery; where 
Cerebral venous disease
27
1247
feasible, it is now the procedure of first choice. Arterio-
venous malformations can be managed either by surgi-
cal removal, by ligation of the blood vessels that feed or 
drain the lesion, or by injection of material to occlude 
the fistula or draining veins. Treatment may also be 
required for complications of SAH, which include 
obstructive hydrocephalus (that may require drainage 
via a shunt), delayed cerebral ischaemia due to vaso­
spasm (which may be treated with vasodilators), 
hyponatraemia (best managed by fluid restriction) and 
systemic complications associated with immobility, 
such as chest infection and venous thrombosis.
CEREBRAL VENOUS DISEASE
Thrombosis of the cerebral veins and venous sinuses 
(cerebral venous thrombosis) is much less common than 
arterial thrombosis. However, it has been recognised 
with increasing frequency in recent years, as access to 
non-invasive imaging of the venous sinuses using MR 
venography has increased. The main causes are listed in 
Box 27.13.
Clinical features
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis usually presents with 
symptoms of raised intracranial pressure, seizures and 
focal neurological symptoms. The clinical features vary 
according to the sinus involved (Box 27.14 and see 
Fig. 27.3, p. 1235). Cortical vein thrombosis presents 
with focal cortical deficits such as aphasia and hemi­
paresis (depending on the area affected), and epilepsy 
(focal or generalised). The deficit can increase if spread-
ing thrombophlebitis occurs.
Investigations and management
MR venography demonstrates a filling defect in the 
affected vessel.
Anticoagulation, initially with heparin followed by 
warfarin, is usually beneficial, even in the presence of 
venous haemorrhage. In selected patients, the use of 
endovascular thrombolysis has been advocated. Man-
agement of underlying causes and complications, such 
as persistently raised intracranial pressure, is also 
important.
About 10% of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, par-
ticularly cavernous sinus thrombosis, is associated with 
infection (most commonly Staphylococcus aureus), which 
necessitates antibiotic treatment. Otherwise, the treat-
ment of choice is anticoagulation.
Further information
Websites
www.eso-stroke.org/pdf/ESO%20Guidelines_update_
Jan_2009.pdf European Stroke Organisation guidelines.
www.nhs.uk/actfast/pages/stroke.aspx Details of the FAST 
(face, arms, speech, time) campaign to raise public awareness of 
the emergency nature of stroke.
www.rcplondon.ac.uk/resources/stroke-guidelines Royal 
College of Physicians of London stroke guideline.
www.stroketraining.org Stroke training awareness and 
resources website.
Predisposing systemic causes
• Dehydration
• Thrombophilia (p. 1001)
• Pregnancy
• Hypotension
• Behçet’s disease (p. 1119)
• Oral contraceptive use
Local causes
• Paranasal sinusitis
• Facial skin infection
• Meningitis, subdural 
empyema
• Otitis media, mastoiditis
• Skull fracture
• Penetrating head and eye 
wounds
27.13  Causes of cerebral venous thrombosis
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
• Proptosis, ptosis, headache, external and internal 
ophthalmoplegia, papilloedema, reduced sensation in 
trigeminal first division
• Often bilateral, patient ill and febrile
Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis
• Headache, papilloedema, seizures
• Clinical features may resemble idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (p. 1217)
• May involve veins of both hemispheres, causing advancing 
motor and sensory focal deficits
Transverse sinus thrombosis
• Hemiparesis, seizures, papilloedema
• May spread to jugular foramen and involve cranial nerves 9, 
10 and 11
27.14  Clinical features of cerebral venous 
thrombosis
This page intentionally left blank
1249
28 
Clinical examination in skin disease 1250
Functional anatomy and physiology 1252
Investigations 1254
Presenting problems in skin disease 1256
Lumps – new or changing lesions 1256
Rashes – papulosquamous eruptions 1257
Blisters 1258
Itch (pruritus) 1258
Photosensitivity 1260
Leg ulcers 1262
Abnormal skin colour 1263
Hair and nail abnormalities 1264
Acute skin failure 1264
Therapeutics 1264
Topical treatment of skin disease 1264
Phototherapy and photochemotherapy 1266
Systemic therapies 1267
Dermatological surgery 1268
Other physical therapies 1268
Skin tumours 1269
Pathogenesis of skin malignancy 1269
Malignant tumours 1270
Benign lesions that may be confused with skin 
cancers 1274
Skin disease
Hair disorders 1296
Nail disorders 1297
Common nail changes and disorders 1297
Nail changes in systemic disease 1298
The nail in congenital disease 1299
Skin disease in general medicine 1299
Conditions involving cutaneous  
vasculature 1299
Connective tissue disease 1300
Granulomatous disease 1301
Metabolic disease 1301
Abnormal deposition disorders 1302
Genetic disorders 1302
Reactive disorders 1302
Drug eruptions 1303
S.H. Ibbotson
R.S. Dawe
Common skin infections and  
infestations 1275
Bacterial infections 1275
Viral infections 1278
Fungal infections 1279
Scabies 1280
Lice 1281
Acne and rosacea 1281
Eczemas 1283
Psoriasis and other erythematous scaly 
eruptions 1286
Lichen planus and lichenoid eruptions 1289
Urticaria 1290
Bullous diseases 1291
Toxic epidermal necrolysis 1292
Immunobullous diseases 1292
Pigmentation disorders 1295
Decreased pigmentation 1295
Increased pigmentation 1296
Skin disease
1250
CLINICAL EXAMINATION IN SKIN DISEASE
Involvement of face
Central
Hairline
Cheeks and nasal bridge:
‘butterfly’ distribution
Sparing of light-protected
sites, e.g. behind ears, under chin
Individual lesions
Discrete, grouped, confluent,
reticulate (lace-like), linear
Observation
                    If symmetrical
Extensor, e.g. psoriasis 
      Flexor, e.g. eczema
Involvement of hands,
including nail folds
and finger webs
10
9
The patient must be undressed, with
make-up and dressings removed,
and examined in good lighting.
Consider the following:
• Age
• General health
• Distress
• Scratching
Distribution of rash
Symmetrical vs asymmetrical
Proximal vs distal vs facial
Localised vs widespread
1
Eye involvement
e.g. Conjunctivitis/blepharitis
in rosacea or eyelash loss in
alopecia areata
General medical examination
Including lymph nodes and other
systems as indicated
14
2
Involvement of axillae/groin
e.g. hidradenitis suppurativa
3
Oral and genital involvement
12
11
Nail involvement
4
Psoriatic changes in nails
and peri-ungual involvement
Palmoplantar pustulosis
Hand lens
5
Morphology of rash
Monomorphic or polymorphic
6
7
Morphology of
individual lesions
Use a hand lens in good
lighting to assist
Use correct terminology, e.g.
macules, papules, pustules
8
Reticulate (lacy) network on
buccal mucosa in lichen planus.
May also be genital involvement
Joint involvement
e.g. Psoriatic arthritis
13
Examination
of scalp
Hair loss
Scalp changes
Heavy infestation with
head lice
Arthritis, plaque psoriasis and
psoriatic nail dystrophy
Clinical examination in skin disease
1251
Lesion types
• Macule: a circumscribed flat area of skin of ≤ 1 cm diameter that appears different from the skin surrounding it, usually because of 
different colour
• Patch: the same as a macule but larger (see Fig. 28.38, p. 1295)
• Papule: a discrete elevation of skin of ≤ 1 cm diameter (see Fig. 28.23, p. 1279)
• Nodule: similar to a papule but having significant depth (into dermis or even subcutaneous layer) and usually > 1 cm in diameter 
(see Fig. 28.9, p. 1270)
• Plaque: a raised area of skin with a flat top, > 1 cm in diameter (see Fig. 28.32A, p. 1287)
• Vesicle and bulla: a small (≤ 1 cm) and a larger (> 1 cm in diameter) fluid-filled blister, respectively (see Fig. 28.37A, p. 1294)
• Pustule: a visible accumulation of pus in a blister (see opposite)
Other terms
• Abscess: a localised collection of pus in a cavity
• Atrophy: an area of thin, translucent skin caused by loss of epidermis, dermis or subcutaneous fat, e.g. secondary to excess topical 
corticosteroids (see Fig. 28.8, p. 1265)
• Burrow: a linear or curvilinear papule, caused by a burrowing scabies mite (see Fig. 28.25A, p. 1280)
• Comedone: a plug of keratin and sebum in a dilated pilosebaceous orifice
• Crust: dried exudate of blood or serous fluid (see Fig. 28.17, p. 1275)
• Erosion: an area of skin denuded by complete or partial loss of the epidermis
• Excoriation: a linear ulcer or erosion resulting from scratching
• Fissure: a slit-shaped deep ulcer, e.g. in irritant dermatitis of the hands
• Petechiae, purpura and ecchymosis: petechiae are pinhead-sized, flat macules of extravascular blood in the dermis; purpura are 
larger and may be palpable; ecchymosis (‘bruise’) is the term used to describe bleeding that involves deeper structures
• Scale: a flake arising from the stratum corneum. Any condition with a thickened stratum corneum, i.e. hyperkeratosis, can cause 
scaling. An immature thickened and cohesive stratum corneum, e.g. as in psoriasis or Bowen’s disease, gives characteristic  
optical and physical properties that cause a different scale from that due to a thickened, but otherwise normal, stratum corneum  
(see Fig. 28.11, p. 1271)
• Scar: replacement of normal structures by fibrous tissue at the site of an injury
• Sinus: a cavity or channel that permits the escape of pus or fluid
• Stria: a linear, atrophic, pink, purple or white band caused by connective tissue changes (see Fig. 28.8, p. 1265)
• Telangiectasia: visible dilatation of small cutaneous blood vessels (see Fig. 28.9A, p. 1270)
• Ulcer: an area from which the epidermis and at least the upper part of the dermis have been lost (see Fig. 28.7, p. 1263)
• Weal: an evanescent discrete area of dermal oedema, often centrally white due to masking of local blood supply by fluid; weals can 
be papules, macules, patches and plaques, and are the hallmark of urticaria (see Fig. 28.34, p. 1291)
Terms used to describe skin lesions
It may be tempting to examine the skin before anything else. This is a mistake; take a history first, and then examine the skin and the 
rest of the patient.
History
History-taking should follow general principles:
• What was the onset of the condition and what is its course (coming and going, fluctuating severity, persistent, progressing)?
• Are there any excerbating or relieving factors?
• Is there a past history of skin disease, atopy or autoimmune disease?
• What is the patient’s medication and allergy history? This is important, as drug-induced eruptions are common
• What is the social history? Several factors, including occupation, might be relevant both in making a diagnosis and in deciding on the 
best treatment approach
• How does this condition affect my patient? A widespread eruption may have little effect on one individual’s quality of life, whereas 
another person might be severely troubled by what appears to be a minor problem to an outside observer
Examination
• Assessment requires particular emphasis on examination of the skin, hair, nails, mucous membranes and peripheral lymph nodes
Terminology
• Correct use of terminology for examination findings (see below) helps in making a differential diagnosis and allows you to describe 
the findings so that colleagues can visualise the process
Assessment of disease severity
• Tools for objective assessment of disease severity, such as the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score, can be useful in 
determining treatment responses (p. 1288)
• Skin disease can have major psychological effects, and the impact on patients can be gauged by dermatology health-related life 
quality indices, e.g. the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI)
Key points in the history and examination in skin disease
Skin disease
28
1252
The skin is a barrier against physical stresses. Cell-to-
cell attachments must be able to transmit and dissipate 
stress, a function performed by desmosomes. Diseases 
that affect desmosomes, such as pemphigus (p. 1294), 
result in blistering due to keratinocyte separation.
The remaining 10% of epidermal cells are:
•	 Langerhans’ cells: dendritic, bone marrow-derived 
cells that circulate between the epidermis and local 
lymph nodes. Their prime function is antigen 
presentation to lymphocytes. Other dermal antigen-
presenting dendritic cells are also present.
•	 Melanocytes: predominantly in the basal layer and 
of neural crest origin. They synthesise the pigment 
melanin from tyrosine, package it in melanosomes 
and transfer it to surrounding keratinocytes via 
their dendritic processes.
•	 Merkel cells: occur in the basal layer and are thought 
to play a role in signal transduction of fine touch. 
Their embryological derivation is unclear.
Basement membrane
The basement membrane (see Fig. 28.1) is an anchor for 
the epidermis and allows movement of cells and nutri-
ents between dermis and epidermis. The cell membrane 
of the epidermal basal cell is attached to the basement 
membrane via hemi-desmosomes. The lamina lucida lies 
immediately below the basal cell membrane and is com-
posed predominantly of laminin. Anchoring filaments 
extend through the lamina lucida to attach to the lamina 
densa. This electron-dense layer consists mostly of type 
IV collagen; from it extend loops of type VII collagen, 
forming anchoring fibrils that fasten the basement mem-
brane to the dermis.
Dermis
The dermis is vascular and supports the epidermis 
structurally and nutritionally. It varies in thickness 
from just over 1 mm on the inner forearm to 4 mm on 
the back. Fibroblasts are the predominant cells; others 
include mast cells, mononuclear phagocytes, T lym-
phocytes, dendritic cells, neurons and endothelial cells. 
The acellular part of the dermis consists mainly of fibres, 
including collagen I and III, elastin and reticulin, synthe-
sised by fibroblasts. Support is provided by an amor-
phous ground substance (mostly glycosaminoglycans, 
hyaluronic acid and dermatan sulphate), whose produc-
tion and catabolism are altered by hormonal changes 
and ultraviolet radiation (UVR). Based on the pattern of 
collagen fibrils, the superficial dermis is termed the 
‘papillary dermis’, and the deeper, coarser part is the 
‘reticular dermis’.
Epidermal appendages
Hair follicles
There are 3–5 million hair follicles, epidermal invagina-
tions that develop during the second trimester. They 
occur throughout the skin, with the exception of palms, 
soles and parts of the genitalia (glabrous skin). 
The highest density of hair follicles is on the scalp 
(500–1000/cm2). Newborns are covered with fine 
‘lanugo’ hairs, which are usually non-pigmented and 
lack a central medulla; these are subsequently replaced 
by vellus hair, which is similar but more likely to be 
Disease affecting the human skin is common, and 
is important because the absence of normal skin func-
tion, as well as sometimes being life-threatening, can 
severely impair quality of life. This may be exacerbated 
by the fact that people with skin disease may suffer the 
effects of stigma, on occasion stemming from others’ 
belief that skin changes are the result of contagious 
disease.
Skin diseases affect all ages and number more than 
two thousand. Assessment of the skin is valuable in the 
management of anyone presenting with any medical 
problem and, conversely, assessment of the other body 
systems is important when managing primarily skin 
disease. This chapter concentrates on those skin diseases 
seen most frequently and those that are important as 
components of general medical conditions affecting 
other organ systems along with the skin. Skin infections, 
including those related to the human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV), are also discussed in Chapters 13, 14 and 15.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY  
AND PHYSIOLOGY
The skin covers just under 2 m2 in the average adult. The 
outer layer is the epidermis, a stratified squamous epi-
thelium consisting mainly of keratinocytes. The epider-
mis is attached to, but separated from, the underlying 
dermis by the basement membrane. The dermis is 
less cellular and supports blood vessels, nerves and 
epidermal-derived appendages (hair follicles and sweat 
glands). Below it is the subcutis, consisting of adipose 
tissue.
Epidermis
On most sites, the epidermis is only 0.1–0.2 mm thick, 
except on the palms or soles where it can extend to 
several millimetres. Keratinocytes make up approxi-
mately 90% of epidermal cells (Fig. 28.1). The main pro-
liferative compartment is the basal layer. Keratinocytes 
synthesise a range of structural proteins, such as kerat-
ins, loricrin and filaggrin (filament aggregating protein), 
that play key roles in maintaining normal cutaneous 
physiology. There are more than 50 types of keratin and 
their expression varies by body site, site within the epi-
dermis and disease state. Mutations of certain keratin 
genes can result in blistering disorders (p. 1291) and 
ichthyosis (characterised by scale without major inflam-
mation). As keratinocytes migrate from the basal layer, 
they differentiate, producing a variety of protein and 
lipid products. Keratinocytes undergo apoptosis in the 
granular layer before losing their nuclei and becoming 
the flattened corneocytes of the stratum corneum 
(keratin layer). The epidermis is a site of lipid produc-
tion, and the ability of the stratum corneum to act as a 
hydrophobic barrier is the result of its ‘bricks and 
mortar’ design; dead corneocytes with highly cross-
linked protein membranes (‘bricks’) lie within a meta-
bolically active lipid layer synthesised by keratinocytes 
(‘mortar’). Terminal differentiation of keratinocytes 
relies on the keratin filaments being aggregated and this 
is, in part, mediated by filaggrin. Mutations of the filag-
grin gene are found in icthyosis vulgaris, and occur in 
some patients with atopic eczema (p. 1283).
Functional anatomy and physiology 
28
1253
length of hair at different sites reflects the differing 
lengths of anagen.
Sebaceous glands
Sebaceous glands are epidermal downgrowths, usually 
associated with hair follicles and comprised of modified 
keratinocytes. The cells of the sebaceous gland (sebo-
cytes) produce a range of lipids, discharging the con-
tents into the duct around the hair follicle. Sebum 
excretion is under hormonal control, with androgens 
pigmented. By contrast, scalp hair becomes terminal 
hair, which is thicker with a central medulla, is usually 
pigmented and grows longer. At puberty, vellus hairs in 
hormonally sensitive regions, such as the axillary and 
genital areas, become terminal.
Human hairs grow in a cycle with three phases: 
anagen (active hair growth), catagen (transitional phase) 
and telogen (resting phase). The duration of each phase 
varies by site. On the scalp, anagen lasts several years, 
catagen a few days and telogen around 3 months. The 
Fig. 28.1  Structure of normal skin. 
Hair shaft
Sebaceous gland
Hair sheath
Hair matrix
Dermal papilla
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutis
Superficial vascular
plexus
Eccrine sweat gland
Eccrine sweat duct
Deep vascular plexus
Subcutaneous
vessel
Melanocyte
Basal layer
Prickle
cell layer
Granular layer
Stratum corneum
(keratin layer)
Langerhans'
cell
Epidermis
Basement membrane
Basal keratinocyte
Basal cell membrane
Lamina lucida
(laminin-1)
Lamina densa
(type IV collagen)
Sub-lamina densa
Desmosome
(desmoglein-1 and 3,
desmoplakin)
Tonofilaments
(keratins 5 and 14)
Hemi-desmosome
(BP230, type XVII collagen,
α6β4 integrin, plectin)
Anchoring filament
(laminin 332)
Anchoring fibrils
(collagen VII)
Epidermis
Dermis
Keratinocytes containing
keratins 1 and 10
Keratinocytes containing
keratins 5 and 14
Skin disease
28
1254
increasing it (as do progesterones, to a lesser degree) 
and oestrogens reducing it. In animals, sebum is impor-
tant for hair waterproofing but its role in humans is 
unclear.
Sweat glands
Eccrine sweat glands develop in the second trimester 
and are also epidermal invaginations found all over the 
• Chronological ageing: due to the intrinsic ageing process.
• Photoageing: due to cumulative UVR exposure and 
superimposed on intrinsic ageing.
• Typical changes include: atrophy, laxity, yellow 
discoloration, wrinkling, dryness, irregular pigmentation, and 
thinning and greying of hair.
• Causes: age-related alterations in structure and function of 
the skin, cumulative effects of environmental insults, 
especially UVR and smoking, cutaneous consequences of 
disease in other organ systems.
• Consequences: reduction in immune and inflammatory 
responses, reduction in absorption and clearance of topical 
medications, reduced healing, increased susceptibility to 
irritants, dermatitis, adverse drug effects (including topical 
corticosteroid-induced atrophy and purpura) and diseases 
such as skin cancer.
28.2  Skin changes in old age
Function
Structure/cell involved
Protection against:
Chemicals, particles, 
desiccation
Stratum corneum
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR)
Melanin produced by 
melanocytes and transferred 
to keratinocytes
Stratum corneum 
hyperproliferation
Antigens, haptens
Langerhans’ cells, 
lymphocytes, mononuclear 
phagocytes, mast cells, 
dermal dendritic cells
Microorganisms
Stratum corneum, Langerhans’ 
cells, mononuclear 
phagocytes, mast cells, 
dermal dendritic cells
Maintenance of fluid 
balance
Prevents loss of water, 
electrolytes and 
macromolecules
Stratum corneum
Shock absorber
Strong, elastic and compliant 
covering
Dermis and subcutaneous fat
Sensation
Specialised nerve endings 
mediating pain and withdrawal
Itch leading to scratch and 
(e.g.) removal of a parasite
Vitamin D synthesis
Keratinocytes
Metabolism e.g. 
Detoxification of xenobiotics, 
retinoid metabolism, 
isomerisation of urocanic acid
Predominantly keratinocytes
Temperature regulation
Eccrine sweat glands and 
blood vessels
Protection, and fine 
manipulation of small 
objects
Nails
Hormonal
Steroidogenesis, testosterone 
synthesis and conversion to 
other androgenic steroids
Hair follicles, sebaceous 
glands
Conversion of thyroxine (T4) to 
triiodothyronine (T3)
Keratinocytes
Pheromonal
(Importance unknown in 
humans)
Apocrine sweat glands, 
possibly sebaceous glands
Psychosocial, grooming and 
sexual behaviour
Appearance, tactile quality of 
skin, hair, nails
28.1  Functions of the skin
body. Their coiled ducts open directly on to the skin 
surface. They play a major role in thermoregulation 
and, unusually, are innervated by cholinergic fibres of 
the sympathetic nervous system. Eccrine glands of the 
palms and soles are innervated differently and are acti-
vated in the ‘fight or flight’ response. Apocrine sweat 
glands are restricted to the axillae and the mammary 
and genital areas, are connected to hair follicles and are 
not involved in thermoregulation.
Nails
Fingernail growth commences at approximately 8 weeks 
of gestation and is complete by 32 weeks. Toenails 
develop slightly later. The anatomy of the nail apparatus 
is covered later in the chapter (p. 1297).
Blood vessels and nerves
Human skin has a plentiful blood supply, arranged in 
superficial and deep plexuses consisting of arterioles, 
arterial and venous capillaries, and venules. The upper 
plexus in the papillary dermis communicates with the 
lower plexus at the junction between the dermis and the 
subcutis. Capillary loops arise from terminal arterioles 
in the horizontal papillary plexus. Blood vessels are sup-
plied by sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves, with 
the relative contributions of the pathways differing by 
site. Sympathetic signals are important in mediating 
autonomic-induced vasoconstriction. The blood supply 
of skin is far greater than that required for normal skin 
physiology and reflects the importance of skin in 
thermoregulation.
Functions of the skin
The skin has many functions, all of which can be affected 
by disease (Box 28.1). Skin changes associated with 
ageing are shown in Box 28.2.
INVESTIGATIONS
Magnifying glass
A hand lens used under good lighting conditions (ideally 
daylight) is valuable in examination of the skin.
Investigations
28
1255
Mycology
Scale, nail clippings (or scrapings of crumbly subungual 
hyperkeratosis) and plucked hairs can be examined by 
light microscopy. If potassium hydroxide and a simple 
light microscope are available, this can be performed 
in any outpatient clinic. Microbiology laboratories 
will also examine samples and can culture for fungi 
and yeasts.
Patch testing
Patch testing investigates delayed, cell-mediated, type 
IV hypersensitivity, which manifests as dermatitis. It is 
a provocation test with potential allergens (see Box 
28.26, p. 1285) applied, at concentrations and in vehicles 
to minimise false positive and false negative reactions, 
under occlusion to the back for 48 hours before examina-
tion. When interpreting patch test readings, it is impor-
tant to determine the clinical relevance of any allergic 
reactions before giving avoidance advice.
Photopatch testing is similar to patch testing, but 
investigates delayed hypersensitivity to an agent (usu­
ally a sunscreen or a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
(NSAID)) after the absorption of UVR. It involves 
applying substances in duplicate and irradiating one 
set with UVR (typically UVA, 5 J/cm2), with readings 
then conducted in a similar manner to patch testing.
Prick tests and specific 
immunoglobulin E testing
Prick tests are used to investigate cutaneous type I 
(immediate) hypersensitivity to various antigens such as 
pollen, house dust mite or dander. Skin is pricked with 
commercially available stylets through a dilution of the 
appropriate antigen solution (p. 90). Alternatively, spe-
cific immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels to antigens can be 
measured in serum, and occasionally challenge tests are 
undertaken (p. 90).
Phototesting
Phototesting is important for assessing suspected photo­
sensitivity. The mainstay investigation is monochroma-
tor phototesting, which involves exposing the patient’s 
back to increasing doses of irradiation using narrow 
wavebands across the solar spectrum and then assessing 
responses, using the minimal erythema dose (MED) 
at each waveband. This is the dose required to cause 
just perceptible skin reddening and is compared with 
values for the normal population. If a patient has 
reduced MEDs (i.e. develops erythema at lower doses 
than healthy subjects), this indicates abnormal photo-
sensitivity. Thus, monochromator phototesting can 
be used to determine whether a patient is abnormally 
photosensitive, which wavebands are involved and how 
sensitive the patient is (p. 1260). Provocation testing 
can be performed with a broadband (usually UVA) 
source to induce rash at a test site (most useful for 
polymorphic light eruption) and can be helpful for 
diagnosis.
Patients who are referred for phototherapy will also 
usually undergo an MED test, in which they are exposed 
to a series of test doses of the light source that will be 
used therapeutically (often narrowband UVB), and the 
MED is determined 24 hours later (or 72–96 hours for 
Wood’s light
Wood’s light is a long-wavelength ultraviolet A/short-
wavelength visible (violet) light source that can be used 
in various ways. In hypopigmentation, such as in vitil-
igo, it can help in appreciating the extent of disease. In 
pigmented conditions, such as melasma, it can deter-
mine whether pigmentation is mainly epidermal (sharp 
cut-off under Wood’s lamp) or mixed epidermal and 
dermal (ill-defined cut-off). Wood’s lamp can also be 
used to help with the diagnosis of some fungal infections 
because of their characteristic fluorescence.
Dermatoscopy and diascopy
Dermatoscopy (also known as dermoscopy and epilumi-
nescence microscopy) is increasingly performed with 
hand-held dermatoscopes. What makes dermatoscopy 
unique is the fact that it allows visualisation through 
contact of a glass plate on the instrument with a liquid 
film applied to the skin, or through special optics to 
allow non-contact dermatoscopy, enabling deeper struc-
tures to be seen without interference by reflection and 
refraction of light in the epidermis.
Diascopy is simply pressing on the lesion with a 
glass slide. This provides some of the effect of derma­
toscopy, but is mainly used to remove blood from 
vascular lesions to make the appearance of the lesion 
clearer.
Histopathology
Histopathological examination of skin biopsies is espe-
cially useful for tumour diagnosis. When a dermatolo-
gist or pathologist with dermatopathology expertise is 
involved, it can also assist in the diagnosis of inflamma-
tory skin diseases. It is rare for histopathology of a previ-
ously undiagnosed inflammatory skin disease to provide 
a diagnosis on its own; clinico-pathological correlation 
is key. Most biopsies are stained with haematoxylin 
and eosin, but other stains may be useful in special 
situations, such as for fungal hyphae, iron or mucin. 
Direct immunofluorescence can also be undertaken 
on a fresh skin biopsy, allowing antigen visualisation 
using fluorescein-labelled antibodies; this is especially 
important in the diagnosis of autoimmune bullous 
disorders.
Microbiology
Bacteriology
Bacterial swabs may identify a causative infective agent. 
However, organisms identified from the skin surface 
may not be implicated in the underlying disease but 
reflect colonisation of skin damaged by a primary 
disease. Potential pathogens grown from the skin surface 
are not always the cause. For example, cellulitis is nearly 
always caused by pyogenic streptococci, whereas a 
surface skin swab will often show Staphylococcus aureus, 
which may not be the cause of the cellulitis.
Virology
A number of techniques, including immunofluorescence 
and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), are available to 
diagnose herpes simplex or herpes zoster viruses from 
vesicle fluid (p. 139).
Skin disease
28
1256
•	 Site: Is it sun-exposed or covered? The scalp, face, 
upper limbs and back in men, and face, hands and 
lower legs in women, are the most chronically 
sun-exposed sites.
•	 Are there other similar lesions? These might include 
actinic keratoses (see Fig. 28.11, p. 1271) or basal cell 
papillomas (see Fig. 28.15, p. 1274).
•	 Morphology of the lesion: Tenderness, size, symmetry, 
regularity of border, colour, surface characteristics 
and the presence of features such as crust, scale and 
ulceration must be assessed. Stretching the skin and 
using a magnifying lens can be helpful, e.g. in 
detecting the raised, pearled edge of a basal cell 
carcinoma (p. 1270).
•	 Dermatoscopy: This can be used to detect the 
presence of abnormal vessels, such as in basal  
cell carcinoma or the characteristic keratin cysts  
in basal cell papillomas. It is invaluable for 
assessing pigmented and vascular lesions  
(Fig. 28.2).
Is it a melanocytic naevus or  
a malignant melanoma?
This is a common differential and one that it is critical 
to resolve correctly.
•	 The precise nature of the change should be 
determined (as above). Listen to the patient and pay 
attention to subtle changes, as patients know their 
skin well.
the psoralen–ultraviolet A (PUVA) minimal phototoxic 
dose) (p. 1266). This allows treatment regimens to be 
individualised, based on a patient’s erythemal responses, 
and may detect abnormal photosensitivity.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS IN  
SKIN DISEASE
The major presentations in dermatology are outlined 
below. Detail about the underlying disorders is mostly 
provided in the disease-specific sections later on.
Lumps – new or changing lesions
A ‘new or changed lesion’ is one of the key dermatology 
presentations. The challenge is to distinguish between 
benign and malignant disease (p. 1269). Detailed history-
taking and examination are essential:
•	 Lesion: Is this new or has a pre-existing lesion 
changed? What is the nature of the change – is it  
in size, colour, shape or surface? Has change been 
rapid or slow? Are there other features – pain, itch, 
inflammation, bleeding or ulceration?
•	 Patient: What is the patient’s age? Are they fair-
skinned and freckled? Has there been much sun 
exposure? Have they used sunbeds or lived in 
sunny climates? Have they used photoprotection?
Fig. 28.2  Dermatoscopy. A A changing lesion.  B Dermatoscopy highlights the abnormal pigment network and other features suggestive of 
melanoma. Excision biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of superficial spreading malignant melanoma (Breslow thickness 0.8 mm).  C Another changing lesion.
 D Dermatoscopy highlights the vascular lacunae of this benign angioma and the patient was reassured. 
A
D
C
B
Presenting problems in skin disease 
28
1257
Rashes – papulosquamous eruptions
A rash is the other common presentation in dermatol-
ogy. The main categories of scaly rashes are listed in Box 
28.4. Diagnosis can often be made on clinical grounds, 
although a biopsy may be required. Important aspects 
of the history are:
•	 Age at onset and duration of rash? For example, atopic 
eczema often starts in early childhood and psoriasis 
between 15 and 40 years, and both may be chronic. 
Infective or drug-induced rashes are more likely to 
be of short duration and the latter occur in relation 
to drug ingestion. Duration of individual lesions is 
also important, as, for example, in urticaria.
•	 Body site at onset and distribution? For example, 
flexural sites are involved in atopic eczema and 
extensor surfaces and scalp in psoriasis. Symmetry 
is often indicative of an endogenous disease, such 
as psoriasis, whereas asymmetry is more common 
with exogenous causes, such as contact dermatitis 
or infections like herpes zoster.
•	 Is it itchy? For example, eczema is usually extremely 
itchy and psoriasis less so.
•	 Was there a preceding illness or were systemic symptoms 
present? Examples include guttate psoriasis 
precipitated by a β-haemolytic streptococcal throat 
infection; almost all patients with infectious 
mononucleosis (p. 320) treated with amoxicillin will 
develop an erythematous maculopapular eruption; 
the rash of secondary syphilis follows a history  
•	 If the patient has other pigmented lesions, then 
these should be examined too, as they may be 
informative. For example, if the presenting lesion 
looks different from the others, then suspicion is 
needed; conversely, if the patient has multiple basal 
cell papillomas, this may be reassuring – although 
do not be falsely reassured.
•	 Is there a positive family history of melanoma? A 
suspicious naevus in a patient with a first-degree 
relative with melanoma probably warrants excision.
The ABCDE ‘rule’ is a guide to the characteristic fea-
tures of melanoma (Box 28.3 and see Fig. 28.2), although, 
ideally, melanomas should be diagnosed before the 
diameter is greater than 0.5 cm. Loss of normal skin 
markings in a pigmented lesion may be suggestive of 
melanoma. Conversely, normal skin markings and fine 
hairs dispersed evenly over a lesion are reassuring but 
do not exclude melanoma. The Glasgow seven-point 
checklist is another useful guide:
•	 major features: change in size, shape and colour
•	 minor features: diameter over 0.5 cm, inflammation, 
oozing or bleeding, and itch or altered sensation.
• Asymmetry
• Border irregular
• Colour irregular
28.3  ABCDE features of malignant melanoma
• Diameter > 0.5 cm
• Elevation irregular
(+ Loss of skin markings)
Diagnosis
Distribution
Morphology
Associated signs
Atopic eczema
(p. 1283)
Face and flexures
Poorly defined erythema, scaling
Vesicles
Lichenification if chronic
Shiny nails
Infra-orbital crease
‘Dirty neck’ (grey-brown discoloration)
Psoriasis
(p. 1286)
Extensor surfaces
Lower back
Well-defined
Erythematous plaques
Silvery scale
Nail pitting, onycholysis
Scalp involvement
Axillae and genital areas often affected
Joint involvement
Köbner phenomenon
Pityriasis rosea
(p. 1289)
‘Fir tree’ pattern on trunk
Well-defined
Small, erythematous plaques
Collarette of scale
Herald patch
Drug eruption
(p. 1303)
Widespread
Macules and papules
Erythema and scale
Exfoliation
Possible mucosal involvement or 
erythroderma
Pityriasis versicolor
(p. 1280)
Upper trunk and shoulders
Hypo- and hyper-pigmented scaly 
patches
Lichen planus
(p. 1289)
Distal limbs
Flexural aspect of wrists
Lower back
Shiny, flat-topped, violaceous papules 
Wickham’s striae
White lacy network on buccal mucosa
Nail changes
Scarring alopecia
Köbner phenomenon
Tinea corporis
(p. 1279)
Asymmetrical
Often isolated lesions
Erythematous, often annular plaques
Peripheral scale (sometimes pustules)
Expansion with central clearing
Possible associated nail, scalp, groin 
involvement
Secondary syphilis
(p. 419)
Trunk and proximal limbs
Palms and soles
Red macules and papules, which 
become ‘gun-metal’ grey
History of chancre
Systemic symptoms, e.g. malaise and 
fever
28.4  Causes and clinical features of common scaly rashes
Skin disease
28
1258
of chancre at the site of inoculation; malaise and 
arthralgia are common in drug eruptions and 
vasculitis.
The morphology of the rash and the characteristics of 
individual lesions are important (see Box 28.4).
Blisters
There are a limited number of conditions that present 
with blisters (Box 28.5). Blistering occurs due to loss of 
cell adhesion within the epidermis or sub-epidermal 
region (see Fig. 28.1, p. 1253), and the clinical presenta-
tion depends on the site or level of blistering within the 
skin, which in turn reflects the underlying pathogenesis 
(p. 1291):
•	 Intact blisters are not often seen if the split is high 
in the epidermis (below the stratum corneum), as 
the blister roof is so fragile that it ruptures easily, 
leaving erosions (e.g. pemphigus foliaceus, 
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (see Fig. 
28.18, p. 1276) and bullous impetigo).
•	 If the split is lower in the epidermis, then intact 
flaccid blisters and erosions may be seen (e.g. 
pemphigus vulgaris and toxic epidermal necrolysis 
(see Fig. 28.36, p. 1292)).
•	 If the split is sub-epidermal, then tense-roofed 
blisters occur (e.g. bullous pemphigoid (see Fig. 
28.37, p. 1294), epidermolysis bullosa acquisita and 
porphyria cutanea tarda (see Fig. 28.47, p. 1302)).
•	 If there are foci of separation at different levels of the 
epidermis, as in a dermatitis (p. 1283), multilocular 
bullae (made up of coalescing vesicles) occur.
A history of onset, progression, mucosal involve-
ment, drugs and systemic symptoms should be taken. 
Clinical assessment of the distribution, extent and mor-
phology of the rash should then be made. The Nikolsky 
sign is useful: sliding pressure from a finger on normal-
looking epidermis can dislodge the epidermis in condi-
tions with intra-epidermal defects, such as pemphigus 
and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Generalised pruritus
• Scabies
• Eczemas
• Pre-bullous pemphigoid
• Urticarias
• Xeroderma of old age
• Psoriasis
Localised pruritus
• Eczemas
• Lichen planus
• Dermatitis herpetiformis
• Pediculosis
• Tinea infections
28.6  Primary skin diseases causing pruritus
Localised
Generalised
Vesicular
Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster
Impetigo
Pompholyx
Eczema herpeticum*
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Acute eczema
Bullous
Impetigo
Cellulitis
Stasis oedema
Acute eczema
Insect bites
Fixed drug eruption
Toxic epidermal necrolysis*
Erythema multiforme
Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome*
Bullous pemphigoid
Pemphigus*
Epidermolysis bullosa 
acquisita
Lupus erythematosus
Porphyria cutanea tarda/
pseudoporphyria
Drug eruptions
*Usually also mucosal involvement.
28.5  Causes of acquired blisters
A systematic approach to diagnosis is required:
1.	
Exclude infection: e.g. herpes simplex, varicella 
zoster or Staph. aureus.
2.	
Consider common skin disorders in which blistering 
uncommonly occurs: e.g. severe peripheral oedema, 
cellulitis, allergic contact dermatitis and eczema.
3.	
Remember that bullae may develop in drug eruptions: 
e.g. fixed drug eruption (p. 1303), erythema 
multiforme (p. 1302) and vasculitis (p. 1115).  
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a medical 
emergency (p. 1292).
4.	
Consider immunobullous disease (p. 1292): the age 
of the patient may be informative (see Box 28.35, 
p. 1293).
Investigations and management are guided by the 
clinical presentation and differential diagnosis, and are 
described in this chapter under the specific diseases.
Itch (pruritus)
Itch is an unpleasant sensation that leads to scratching 
or rubbing. The terms ‘itch’ and ‘pruritus’ are synony-
mous; however, ‘pruritus’ is often used when itch is 
generalised. Itch can arise from primary cutaneous 
disease or from systemic disease, which may cause itch 
by central or peripheral mechanisms. Even when the 
mechanism is peripheral, there are not always signs of 
primary skin disease.
The nerve endings that signal itch are in the epider-
mis or near the dermo–epidermal junction. Transmis-
sion is by unmyelinated slow-conducting C fibres 
through the spinothalamic tract to the thalamus and 
then the cortex. There is an inhibitory relationship 
between pain and itch. Scratching either causes inhibi-
tion of itch receptors by stimulating ascending sensory 
pathways that inhibit itch at the spinal cord (Wall’s 
‘gate’ mechanism), or interferes directly with cutaneous 
itch fibres by direct damage.
The mechanisms of itch in most systemic diseases 
remain unclear. The itch of kidney disease, for example, 
may be mediated by circulating endogenous opioids. 
The clinical observation that peritoneal dialysis helps 
reduce itch more frequently than haemodialysis is 
consistent with this, smaller molecules generally being 
dialysed more readily if the peritoneal membrane is 
used rather than a dialysis machine membrane.
Clinical assessment
Diagnosis is important and full assessment, through 
history, examination and, sometimes, investigations, is 
necessary. When a patient presents with generalised 
Presenting problems in skin disease 
28
1259
itch, it is important to determine whether skin changes 
are primary (a process in the skin causing itch) or sec-
ondary (skin changes caused by rubbing and scratching 
because of itch). Many common primary skin disorders 
are associated with itch (Box 28.6). If itch is not con-
nected with primary skin disease, many causes should 
be considered (Box 28.7); these include liver diseases 
(mainly cholestatic diseases, such as primary biliary cir-
rhosis), malignancies (e.g. generalised itch may be the 
presenting feature of lymphoma), haematological condi-
tions (e.g. generalised itch in chronic iron deficiency or 
water contact-provoked (aquagenic) intense itch in poly-
cythaemia), endocrine diseases (including hypo- and 
hyperthyroidism), chronic kidney disease (in which 
severity of itch is not always clearly associated with 
plasma creatinine concentration) and psychogenic 
causes (such as in ‘delusions of infestation’). Pruritus is 
common in pregnancy and may be due to one of the 
pregnancy-specific dermatoses. Diagnosis is particularly 
important in pregnancy, as some disorders can be asso-
ciated with increased fetal risk (Box 28.8).
Management
There are no consistently effective therapies to suppress 
itch, regardless of its cause but establishing the diag­
nosis is the first step. If a clear-cut diagnosis is not 
28.7  Secondary causes of pruritus
Diagnosis
Pregnancy, gestation and features
Treatment
Polymorphic eruption of 
pregnancy (pruritic urticarial 
papules and plaques, PUPP)
Typically first pregnancy and uncommonly recurs
3rd trimester, after delivery
Polymorphic urticated papules and plaques, start in striae
Chlorphenamine, emollients
Topical steroids
Acute cholestasis of 
pregnancy (p. 977)
3rd trimester and commonly recurs in subsequent 
pregnancies
Abnormal liver function tests
Increased fetal and maternal risk
Emollients
Chlorphenamine
Colestyramine
UVB
Early delivery
Pemphigoid gestationis
Any stage, often 2nd trimester and commonly recurs in 
subsequent pregnancies
Urticated erythema, blistering initially periumbilical
Characteristic histology and immunofluorescence
Topical or oral corticosteroids
Prurigo gestationis
2nd trimester
Excoriated papules
Emollients
Topical corticosteroids
Chlorphenamine
UVB
Pruritic folliculitis
3rd trimester
Sterile pustules on trunk
Topical corticosteroids
UVB
28.8  Causes of pruritus in pregnancy
Skin disease
28
1260
rash. Photoaggravated skin diseases are exacerbated by 
sunlight but not caused by it. The main photosensitive 
and photoaggravated diseases are listed in Box 28.9.
Sunlight consists mainly of visible light, and the UVR 
component is divided into three wavebands (Fig. 28.4):
•	 UVC (280–300 nm), which is absorbed by ozone and 
does not reach the earth’s surface.
•	 UVB (300–320 nm), which constitutes less than 10% 
of UVR exposure but is around 1000-fold more 
biologically effective than UVA and so accounts for 
the erythemal ‘sunburning’ effects of sunlight.
•	 UVA (320–400 nm), which is the most abundant 
UVR component reaching the earth’s surface.
apparent, various non-specific approaches can be used 
for symptom control. It is important to re-assess the 
patient intermittently in order to avoid missing the 
diagnosis.
Approaches to symptomatic relief include sedation, 
often with H1 antagonist antihistamines; emollients; and 
counter-irritants (such as topical menthol-containing 
preparations). UVB phototherapy is useful in itch stem-
ming from a variety of causes, although the only ran-
domised controlled study evidence of its efficacy in 
generalised itch not caused by a skin disease is for the 
itch of chronic kidney disease. Other treatments include 
tricyclic antidepressants (probably through similar 
mechanisms to those involved when these drugs are 
used for chronic pain) and opiate antagonists. Itch can 
be severe and its effects on quality of life are not always 
appreciated.
Photosensitivity
Cutaneous photosensitivity is an abnormal response of 
the skin to ultraviolet (UVR) or visible radiation. The sun 
is the natural source but patients may also be exposed 
to artificial sources of UVR through the use of sunbeds 
and/or phototherapy (p. 1266). Chronic UVR exposure 
increases skin cancer risk and photoageing (p. 1254). 
Acute exposure can induce erythema (redness) as a 
normal response (Fig. 28.3). However, abnormal photo-
sensitivity occurs when a patient reacts to lower doses 
than would normally cause a response, either with a 
heightened erythemal reaction or the development of a 
Fig. 28.3  Sunburn. Acute exposure to ultraviolet radiation results in an 
erythemal response which peaks 12–24 hours later. Sensitivity depends on 
the individual’s constitutive skin phototype. 
Cause
Condition
Clinical features
Idiopathic
Polymorphic light eruption (PLE)
Itchy, papulovesicular rash on photo-exposed sites; face and back of 
hands often spared. Often hours of UVR exposure needed to provoke; 
lasts a few days; affects 20% in Northern Europe, more common in 
young women
Chronic actinic dermatitis (CAD)
Chronic dermatitis on sun-exposed sites. Most common in elderly males. 
UVB, UVA and often visible light photosensitivity. Most also have contact 
allergies
Solar urticaria
Immediate-onset urticaria on photo-exposed sites, usually UVA and 
visible light photosensitivity. Can occur at any age
Actinic prurigo
Uncommon, presents in childhood. Often familial. Some similarities to 
PLE, although scarring occurs
Hydroa vacciniforme
Rare childhood photodermatosis. Varioliform scarring
Drugs
Variety of mechanisms
Usually UVA (and visible) light photosensitivity
Phototoxicity
Most common. Exaggerated sunburn and exfoliation. Many drugs such 
as thiazides, tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, quinine, NSAIDs
Pseudoporphyria
e.g. NSAIDs, retinoids, tetracyclines, furosemide
Photoallergy
Usually to topical agents, such as sunscreens and NSAIDs
Metabolic
Porphyrias
Pellagra
Mainly porphyria cutanea tarda and erythropoietic protoporphyria  
(p. 458). Photoexposed site dermatitis due to tryptophan deficiency  
(see Fig. 16.17, p. 459)
Photogenodermatoses
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Rare. Defect in DNA excision repair, abnormal photosensitivity, 
photoageing and skin cancer. May be neurological features
Photo-aggravation 
of pre-existing 
conditions
e.g. Lupus erythematosus
Can also be drug-induced, e.g. by thiazides (see Box 28.44, p. 1304)
Erythema multiforme
p. 1302
Rosacea
p. 1283
(NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug)
28.9  The photosensitivity and photoaggravated diseases
Presenting problems in skin disease 
28
1261
Fig. 28.4  The electromagnetic spectrum. The action spectrum is not well defined for many conditions and, for some, is approximate and may vary 
between patients. The action spectrum for non-melanoma skin cancer mirrors that for erythema. The action spectrum for melanoma is not known but 
includes UVB. Photoprotection measures vary, depending on condition, although the mainstay always includes behavioural modification and clothing cover. 
200 nm
290 nm
320 nm
400 nm
Atmospheric ozone
Window glass
Behavioural avoidance, shelter, clothing
Sunscreens
γ-rays
X-rays
UVC
UVB
UVA
Visible
Infrared
Sunburn (erythema)
Pigmentation
Skin cancer
Skin ageing
Porphyria
Most photodermatoses
Most drug photosensitivity
Skin disorders
and the main 
wavelengths
involved
UVR absorbers
or reflectors
Wavelength
760 nm
UVA2
Grenz rays
UVA1
Fig. 28.5  Chronic actinic dermatitis. Note the sharp cut-off and 
sparing behind the ear in the shadow cast by the earlobe (Wilkinson’s 
triangle). 
Patients with photosensitivity diseases can be abnor-
mally sensitive to UVB, UVA, visible light (over 400 nm) 
or, commonly, a combination of wavebands. UVB is 
absorbed by window glass, whereas UVA and visible 
light are transmitted through glass.
Clinical assessment
History-taking is essential, as the patient may not have 
the rash when assessed. Seasonal pattern and distribu-
tion of rash are important. Key sites are the face (particu-
larly nose, cheeks and forehead), top of ears, neck (Fig. 
28.5), bald scalp, back of hands and forearms. Sparing is 
often seen under the chin and nose, behind the ears, on 
the upper eyelids and the distal digits – as we normally 
walk about with our eyes open and fingers flexed! It 
can be misleading if there is covered site involvement 
(patients who are sensitive to UVA and visible light may 
be affected through clothing, and some photosensitive 
conditions, such as actinic prurigo, typically also involve 
covered sites), or if habitually exposed sites, such as the 
face, are not involved (this ‘hardening’ phenomenon is 
commonly seen in polymorphic light eruption (PLE)). 
Furthermore, if patients have UVA and/or visible light 
photosensitivity, they will commonly experience peren-
nial symptoms and may not be aware of the association 
with daylight exposure. Although some conditions, such 
as solar urticaria, develop rapidly after sunlight expo-
sure, others, such as cutaneous lupus, can take several 
days to evolve.
Investigations and management
If photosensitivity is suspected, the patient should be 
referred to a specialist centre for monochromator photo-
testing (p. 1255), if feasible. Other investigations will 
often include provocation, patch or photopatch testing, 
and screening for lupus and the porphyrias (p. 1301).
Management depends on the diagnosis. If there is 
a phototoxic drug or chemical cause, this must be 
addressed: for instance, by stopping the drug or treating 
the porphyria. Counselling regarding sun avoidance is 
essential: keeping out of direct sun in the middle of the 
day, covering up with clothing, wearing hats with a 
wide brim and careful use of high-factor sunscreens. 
Paradoxically, in some conditions, particularly PLE 
and solar urticaria, phototherapy can be used to 
induce ‘hardening’; the mechanism is uncertain. Other 
approaches may be necessary, depending on disease 
and severity, and may include antihistamines (useful 
in two-thirds of patients with solar urticaria) and sys-
temic immunosuppression (sometimes required in the 
Skin disease
28
1262
•	 Bacterial swab if there is a purulent discharge, 
rapid extension, cellulitis, lymphangitis or 
septicaemia. This can guide antibiotic therapy  
for secondary infection but pathogenic bacteria  
are not always the same as those identified from  
the ulcer surface.
•	 Doppler ultrasound to assess arterial circulation. The 
normal ratio of ankle systolic pressure to brachial 
systolic pressure (ABPI) is 1.1 or more; if it is below 
0.8, this suggests significant arterial disease. 
However, arterial calcification, such as in diabetes, 
can produce a spuriously high ABPI.
idiopathic photodermatoses). Patients with photo­
sensitivity are at risk of vitamin D deficiency, as UVB-
induced cutaneous photosynthesis of vitamin D is an 
important source (p. 126). Patients should optimise 
dietary vitamin D intake and take supplements if levels 
are low (p. 1127).
Sunscreens
Sunscreen agents can be divided into two categories: 
chemical sunscreens, which absorb specific wavelengths 
of UVR, and physical sunscreens, which reflect UVR and 
the shorter visible wavelengths (see Fig. 28.4). Current 
sunscreen products are highly refined and most contain 
several sunscreen agents, offering protection against 
UVB and most UVA wavelengths. If a patient has pho-
tosensitivity to the longer wavelengths of UVA and the 
visible part of the spectrum, then conventional sun-
screens that offer maximal protection in the UVB region 
will not be beneficial and specific reflectant sunscreens 
will be required. Historically, due to visible light reflec-
tion, these agents were less cosmetically acceptable, 
although current formulations, some of which are tinted, 
have reduced this problem.
Sunscreen protection levels are described by sun pro-
tection factor (SPF). This is the ratio of the dose of UVR 
required to produce skin erythema in the presence and 
absence of the sunscreen. Thus, a sunscreen of SPF20 
theoretically means that it would take 20 times as long 
for a person to develop sunburn in the presence of the 
sunscreen, as compared to not using it. Therefore, SPF 
is really a sunburn protection factor and is not a good 
guide to how well a sunscreen will perform in protecting 
against other reactions (such as skin pain in erythropoi-
etic protoporphyria). SPF values are determined under 
experimental conditions and, in practice, people use 
25–33% of the amount of sunscreen required to achieve 
the stated SPF – thus, a sunscreen of SPF30 will, in prac-
tice, offer an SPF10 at best, and patients need to be coun-
selled regarding application. There is also no such thing 
as a ‘sunblock’, as all sunscreens offer, at best, only 
partial protection and are no substitute for modifying 
behaviour and covering up.
Leg ulcers
Ulceration of the skin is defined as complete epidermal 
loss, thus exposing dermal (or deeper) layers. ‘Leg ulcer’ 
is not a diagnosis. Making a comprehensive diagnosis is 
the key to management. Ulcers on the lower leg are 
frequently caused by vascular disease, particularly, at 
least in part, venous hypertension. For each cause of leg 
ulceration there are several different underlying pathol-
ogies that have to be considered (Box 28.10).
Clinical assessment
A detailed history of the onset and course of leg ulcera-
tion and predisposing conditions should be taken. The 
site and surrounding skin should be assessed. Varicose 
veins are often present, although not inevitably. The site 
of ulceration may help indicate the cause (Fig. 28.6).
Appropriate investigations include:
•	 Urinalysis for glycosuria.
•	 Full blood count to detect anaemia and blood 
dyscrasias.
Venous hypertension
• Sometimes following deep vein thrombosis
Arterial disease
• Atherosclerosis
• Vasculitis
• Buerger’s disease
Small-vessel disease
• Diabetes mellitus
• Vasculitis
Haematological disorders
• Sickle-cell disease
• Cryoglobulinaemia
• Spherocytosis
• Hyperviscosity states, e.g. 
polycythaemia
• Immune complex disease
Neuropathy
• Diabetes mellitus
• Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)
• Syphilis
Tumour
• Squamous cell carcinoma
• Basal cell carcinoma
• Malignant melanoma
• Kaposi’s sarcoma
Trauma
• Injury
• Artefact
28.10  Causes of leg ulceration
Fig. 28.6  Causes of lower limb ulceration. The main types of leg 
ulcer tend to affect particular sites. 
Anterior
Posterior
Venous
Vasculitis
Arterial
Neuropathic
Presenting problems in skin disease 
28
1263
vasculature or indirectly due to neuropathy (e.g. in sys-
temic polyarteritis nodosa, p. 1117).
Leg ulceration due to neuropathy
The most common causes of neuropathic ulcers are dia-
betes and Hansen’s disease (leprosy). Microangiopathy 
also contributes to ulceration in diabetes (p. 833). The 
ulcers occur over weight-bearing areas, such as the heel. 
In the presence of neuropathy, protection of skin from 
trauma is essential to prevent ulceration.
Management
Making a diagnosis is the first step. General advice on 
exercise, weight loss and smoking cessation is impor-
tant. Underlying factors, such as diabetes or anaemia, 
must be treated. Oedema must be reduced by leg eleva-
tion and, if there is no arterial compromise, graduated 
compression bandaging from toes to knees to enhance 
venous return and improve healing. Compression 
bandaging is effective for individuals with an ABPI of 
more than 0.8 but should be avoided if the ABPI is less 
than 0.8.
If the ulcer is purulent, weak potassium permanga-
nate soaks may help, and exudate and slough can be 
removed with normal saline or clean water. Dressings 
do not themselves heal leg ulcers, but can reduce dis-
comfort and odour and, by reducing colonisation by 
potential pathogens, may reduce the frequency of sec-
ondary infection. A variety of dressings may be used, 
including non-adherent and absorbent (alginates, hydro-
gels, hydrocolloids) types. The frequency of dressing 
changes will vary: heavily exudative ulcers may need 
daily dressings, whereas changes once weekly may 
suffice.
Surrounding eczema should be suppressed with a 
topical corticosteroid. Commonly, this is venous eczema, 
but there should be a low threshold for referral for patch 
testing, as contact allergy to topical applications is 
common (p. 1255). Systemic antibiotics are only indi-
cated if there is evidence of infection, as opposed to colo-
nisation. Various techniques of split thickness grafting 
(such as pinch and mince grafts) may hasten healing of 
clean ulcers but do not reduce recurrence risk. Leg ulcers 
can be very persistent. Symptomatic relief, including 
oral analgesics, and sometimes chronic pain treatments 
(such as tricyclic antidepressants) are important. Once 
the ulcer has healed, ongoing use of compression hosiery 
may limit the risk of recurrence.
Abnormal skin colour
Loss of skin pigmentation (depigmentation), reduction 
in pigmentation (hypopigmentation) and increased 
pigment (hyperpigmentation) are features of a variety of 
disorders. Detailed history-taking and examination, 
including use of a Wood’s light, are required to establish 
the diagnosis. Investigations will depend on the presen-
tation. For example, microscopy of skin scrapings should 
be undertaken if hypopigmentation is associated with 
inflammation and scaling; screening for autoimmune 
disease may be required if vitiligo is suspected; and 
investigation for endocrine disease or the porphyrias 
may be appropriate in hyperpigmentation. Further 
details of the specific conditions are included later 
(p. 1295).
Leg ulceration due to venous disease
Varicose veins, a history of deep venous thrombosis and 
obesity are predisposing factors. Incompetent valves in 
the deep and perforating veins of the lower leg result in 
retrograde flow of blood to the superficial system, and 
a rise in capillary pressure (‘venous hypertension’). Peri-
capillary fibrin cuffing occurs, leading to impairment of 
local tissue oxygenation and homeostasis.
The first symptom in venous ulceration is often 
heavi­ness of the legs, followed by oedema. Haemo­
siderin pigmentation, pallor and firmness of surround-
ing skin, and sometimes venous/gravitational eczema 
(p. 1285) subsequently develop. This progresses to lipo-
dermatosclerosis – firm induration due to fibrosis of the 
dermis and subcutis, which may produce the well-
known ‘inverted champagne bottle’ appearance. Ulcera-
tion, often precipitated by trauma or infection, follows. 
Venous ulcers typically occur on the medial lower leg 
(Fig. 28.7).
Complications of venous leg ulceration include bacte-
rial colonisation and infection, and contact allergic der-
matitis to topical medicaments, dressings and bandages. 
Lipodermatosclerosis may cause lymphoedema and 
hyperkeratosis, and, rarely, a squamous cell carcinoma 
(SCC) may develop in a long-standing venous ulcer 
(Marjolin’s ulcer).
Leg ulceration due to arterial disease
Deep, painful, punched-out ulcers on the lower leg, 
especially the shin and foot and in the context of inter-
mittent claudication, are likely to be due to arterial 
disease. Risk factors include smoking, hypertension, dia-
betes and hyperlipidaemia. The foot is cold and dusky 
and the skin atrophic and hairless. Peripheral pulses are 
absent or reduced. If the ABPI is below 0.8, a vascular 
surgical assessment should be sought (p. 601).
Leg ulceration due to vasculitis
Vasculitis can cause leg ulceration directly through epi-
dermal necrosis due to damage to the underlying 
Fig. 28.7  A chronic venous ulcer on the medial lower leg, with 
surrounding lipodermatosclerosis. 
Skin disease
28
1264
Hair and nail abnormalities
Many conditions affect the skin appendages, particu-
larly hair and nails. Conditions causing hair loss (alo-
pecia) are listed in Box 28.39 (p. 1296). Nail changes may 
be a marker for systemic disease (e.g. iron deficiency) or 
a feature of certain skin conditions (e.g. psoriasis).
Acute skin failure
Acute skin failure is a medical emergency. Several con-
ditions can cause widespread and acute failure of many 
skin functions (see Box 28.1, p. 1254), including thermo­
regulation, fluid balance control and barrier to infection. 
A lot of these conditions involve widespread dilatation 
of the dermal vasculature and can provoke high-output 
cardiac failure; they are also associated with increased 
protein loss from the skin and often from the gut. Many 
lead to acute skin failure by causing erythroderma (ery-
thema affecting at least 80% of the body surface area), 
although severe autoimmune blistering diseases and the 
spectrum of Stevens–Johnson syndrome–toxic epider-
mal necrolysis (TEN) disease can produce acute skin 
failure without erythroderma.
Eczema, psoriasis, drug eruptions and cutaneous 
T-cell lymphoma (Sézary syndrome, p. 1272) are amongst 
the diseases which can either present with, or progress 
to, erythroderma. Other causes include the psoriasis-like 
condition, pityriasis rubra pilaris, and rare types of ich-
thyosis. Erythroderma may occur at any age and is asso-
ciated with severe morbidity and significant mortality 
(see Fig. 28.32D, p. 1287). Older people are at greatest 
risk, especially if they have comorbidities. It may appear 
suddenly or evolve slowly. In dark skin, the presence of 
pigmentation may mask erythema, giving a purplish hue.
Erythrodermic patients are usually systemically 
unwell with shivering and hypothermia, secondary to 
excess heat loss. They may also be pyrexial, however, and 
unable to lose heat due to damage to sweat gland func-
tion and sweat duct occlusion. Tachycardia and hypo­
tension may be present because of volume depletion. 
Peripheral oedema is common in erythroderma, owing 
to low albumin and high-output cardiac failure. Lymph 
nodes may be enlarged, either as a reaction to skin inflam-
mation or, rarely, due to lymphomatous infiltration.
Management of erythroderma
Regardless of the cause, important aspects of the man-
agement of erythroderma include supportive measures 
to ensure adequate hydration, maintenance of core tem-
perature and adequate nutrition. Insensible fluid loss 
can be many litres above what is normal. Protein may 
be lost directly from the skin and because of the protein-
losing enteropathy that often accompanies conditions 
such as erythrodermic psoriasis. To reduce the risks of 
infection, any intravenous cannulae should be sited in 
peripheral veins, if possible. In the initial management 
of acute erythroderma, urinary catheterisation is often 
required (for patient comfort and accurate fluid balance 
monitoring) but such catheters should be removed as 
soon as possible. Frequent application of a simple oint-
ment emollient (such as white soft paraffin/liquid paraf-
fin mix) is usually appropriate.
THERAPEUTICS
Topical treatment of skin disease
Many skin diseases are treated effectively by topical 
therapies alone. Selection of the appropriate active 
drug/ingredient and vehicle is essential. Ointments are 
preferred for dry skin conditions, such as chronic 
eczemas, as they are more hydrating and contain fewer 
excipients than creams, and so allergy risk is reduced. 
In contrast, creams are not as hydrating and have greater 
allergic potential due to a higher content of excipients, 
although patients find creams easier to apply and so 
compliance may be better. Gels and lotions can be easier 
to use on hair-bearing sites. The molecular weight and 
lipid–water coefficient of a drug determine its skin pen-
etration, with larger, water-soluble, polar molecules 
penetrating poorly. In skin disease, if the stratum 
corneum is impaired – as in eczema – increased drug 
absorption occurs. Occlusion under dressings also 
increases absorption. Drugs can be used in different 
potencies or concentrations, or in com­bination with 
other active ingredients, and many are available in more 
than one formulation. The properties of different vehi-
cles are listed in Box 28.11. Overall, compliance with 
topical treatments can be problematic, so it is essential 
for patients to know exactly what is required of them 
and for regimens to be kept as simple as possible.
Emollients
These are mainstays in the treatment of eczema, psoria-
sis and many other conditions, and are used to mois­
turise, lubricate, protect and ‘soften’ skin. They are 
essentially vehicles without active drug and are avail­
able in many formulations: creams, ointments, gels, and 
bath, shower and soap substitutes. White soft paraffin is 
the most effective and is widely used.
Topical corticosteroids
Glucocorticoids are available in a variety of formula-
tions, although most commonly as creams and oint-
ments. Corticosteroids are available in different potencies 
and strengths (Box 28.12) and selection of the correct 
product will depend on the patient, the condition being 
treated, body site and duration of expected use. Mild 
topical corticosteroids are used in delicate areas, such as 
the face or genitals, and close supervision of corticoster-
oid use at these sites is required. In contrast, very potent 
corticosteroids may be required under occlusion for 
chronic resistant disease such as nodular prurigo.
Although the adverse cutaneous effects of chronic 
corticosteroid use are well known and include atrophy, 
striae (Fig. 28.8), purpura and telangiectasiae, infection 
risk and systemic absorption (causing suppression of the 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and Cushingoid 
features), under-treatment is more common in practice. 
Patients should use the lowest potency of steroid for the 
shortest period to gain control of their disease, but 
this will vary between individuals and diseases. Initial 
use of a more potent corticosteroid, with reduction in 
potency or frequency of application as control is gained, 
is a sensible approach. Tolerance (‘tachyphylaxis’) can 
develop with chronic use, so intermittent courses of 
Therapeutics
28
1265
Dithranol and coal tar
These treatments are used mainly for psoriasis; they 
increase cellular differentiation and inhibit proliferation. 
Although often effective, they are messy and time-
consuming. Modified versions of Goeckerman’s regimen 
(the combination of coal tar and UVB) are still in use. 
Short-contact dithranol therapy using higher concentra-
tions applied for 15–30 minutes can be used. Dithranol 
is highly irritant and causes brown staining of skin 
and purple discoloration of light hair. In recent years, 
efforts have been made to improve the tolerance of tar 
treatment are advised. Caution is required with cortico­
steroid use in psoriasis, as rebound, unstable or pustular 
psoriasis can occur with sudden cessation of use. 
Nevertheless, corticosteroids are invaluable for many 
sites, particularly the flexures. Topical corticosteroids 
are often formulated in combination with antiseptics, 
antibiotics or antifungals, and their controlled use may 
be appropriate, e.g. in infected eczema or flexural pso-
riasis. Intralesional injections of corticosteroids can be 
used in a variety of indications, including nodular 
prurigo, keloid scar, acne cysts and alopecia areata.
Vehicle
Definition
Use
Site
Cosmetic 
acceptability
Risk of contact 
sensitisation
Creams
Emulsions of oil and 
water, e.g. aqueous 
cream
Acute presentations
Cooling, soothing
Well absorbed
Mild emollients
All sites, including 
mucous membranes 
and flexures, but not 
hair-bearing areas
Very good
Helps compliance
Significant, due 
to preservatives, 
antimicrobials 
and often lanolin
Ointments
Greasy preparations
Insoluble in water, e.g. 
white soft paraffin
Soluble, e.g. emulsifying 
ointment
Chronic dry skin conditions
Occlusive and emollient
Hydrating
Mildly anti-inflammatory
Avoid hair-bearing 
areas and flexures
Moderate
Low
Lotions
Water-based
Liquid formulations
Cooling effect
Used to clean the skin and 
remove exudates
Often antiseptic and 
astringent (e.g. potassium 
permanganate)
Large areas of the 
skin and the scalp
Good, but can 
sting if in an 
alcoholic base
Rarely
Gels
Thickened lotions
Hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic bases
For specific sites
Hair-bearing areas 
and the face
Good
Low
Pastes
Semi-solid preparations 
consisting of finely 
powdered solids 
suspended in an 
ointment
Occlusive, protective
Hydrating
Used for circumscribed 
skin lesions, e.g. psoriasis, 
lichen simplex chronicus
Any area of skin
Often used in 
medicated bandages
Moderate
Moderate
28.11  Characteristics of vehicles used in topical treatments
Mild
• Hydrocortisone 0.5%, 1%, 2.5%
• Hydrocortisone 1% and fusidic acid 2% (Fucidin H)
Moderate
• Clobetasone butyrate 0.05% (Eumovate)
• Betamethasone valerate 0.025% (Betnovate RD)
• Fluocinolone acetonide 0.00625% (Synalar 1 : 4)
Potent
• Betamethasone valerate 0.1% (Betnovate)
• Betamethasone valerate 0.1% and clioquinol 3% 
(Betnovate-C)
• Fluocinolone acetonide 0.025% (Synalar)
• Hydrocortisone butyrate 0.1% (Locoid)
• Mometasone furoate 0.1% (Elocon)
Very potent
• Clobetasol propionate 0.05% (Dermovate)
28.12  Potencies and strengths of commonly used 
topical corticosteroid preparations*
*UK trade names are given in brackets.
Fig. 28.8  Striae induced by excess prolonged potent topical 
corticosteroid use. 
Skin disease
28
1266
Phototherapy and photochemotherapy
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) treatments (most com-
monly, narrowband ultraviolet B and psoralen–
ultraviolet A (PUVA)) are used in the management 
of many different diseases. The best study evidence for 
their efficacy is in psoriasis, atopic eczema, vitiligo and 
chronic urticaria, although there is some controlled 
study evidence for other phototherapy use, such as UVB 
to treat the generalised itch of kidney disease.
Psoralens are natural photosensitisers found in a 
number of plants. Psoralen molecules intercalate 
between the two strands of DNA and, upon excitation 
with UVA, photons cross-link the DNA strands. It is 
thus a pro-drug that is distributed throughout the body 
and dithranol preparations, but at reduced efficacy. 
Overall, the use of tar and dithranol has reduced in 
recent years.
Calcipotriol
Calcipotriol is a vitamin D agonist and is mainly used 
in psoriasis. It increases differentiation and reduces pro-
liferation, and therefore lowers plaque scale and thick-
ness. It is applied once to twice daily and, if less than 
100 g of ointment is used each week, does not cause 
hypercalcaemia. Patient compliance is improved, as 
calcipotriol is odourless and does not stain. Irritancy is 
the main side-effect, although often temporary. Calcipo-
triol is a mainstay of primary care management of 
psoriasis.
Calcineurin inhibitors
Topical tacrolimus and, in children, pimecrolimus can 
be used to treat eczema and a variety of other conditions. 
They are calcineurin inhibitors and cause local cutane-
ous immunosuppression. They have an important role 
as steroid-sparing agents, e.g. in eczema. Initial burning 
and stinging may limit use but are usually transient. 
Caution should be employed with sun exposure and 
these agents should not be used in combination with 
phototherapy because of their immunosuppressive 
effects.
Anti-infective agents
Before antibiotics are used, antiseptics should be consid-
ered, as they cover a wide range of organisms and help 
reduce the risk of antibiotic resistance. Antiseptics can 
be extremely important in the treatment of patients with 
eczema and are often employed in combination formula-
tions: for example, with emollients. Antibiotics can be 
used either for their anti-infective properties – for 
example, topical fusidic acid for impetigo, or for their 
anti-inflammatory properties – such as topical erythro-
mycin or clindamycin for mild inflammatory acne vul-
garis, or topical metronidazole for rosacea.
Anti-comedogenic agents
Benzoyl peroxide is widely used in mild comedonal 
acne and has both anti-comedogenic and antiseptic 
effects. It is an irritant, which may contribute to the 
therapeutic response, but this can be minimised by 
adjusting treatment regimes. Azelaic acid has both anti-
microbial and anti-comedogenic action in acne vulgaris. 
Topical retinoids, in particular all-trans retinoic acid and 
adapalene, are widely employed for mild to moderate 
comedonal acne vulgaris. Again, irritancy is an adverse 
effect but dose adjustments reduce this.
Other anti-infective agents
These can be used topically for mild viral disease, such 
as aciclovir for prophylaxis or treatment of herpes 
simplex virus (cold sore) infection. Topical imidazoles 
are widely employed for superficial fungal and yeast 
infections, such as clotrimazole for candidal infections 
and ketoconazole for pityriasis versicolor or seborrhoeic 
folliculitis. Terbinafine is commonly applied topically 
for superficial dermatophyte infections, such as tinea 
pedis. Scabies and lice infections can be treated with 
topical permethrin or malathion.
• Protection
• Symptomatic relief from pain or itch
• Maintenance of direct application of topical treatment
• Possible improvement in healing time
• Reduction of exudate
• Reduction of odour
28.13  Indications for dressings
Topical treatment for dysplasia 
and non-melanoma skin cancer
Medical treatment for non-melanoma skin cancer and 
dysplasia is a developing area and facilitates treat-
ment of field carcinogenesis. The anti-metabolite, 5- 
fluorouracil (p. 1271), is used topically, mainly for actinic 
keratosis. Subclinical disease can be treated, highlight-
ing the advantages of these field-directed approaches. 
Diclofenac in a hyaluronic acid gel base can also be 
employed topically for low-grade actinic keratosis; the 
rationale for its use is the over-expression of cyclo-
oxygenase (COX)-2 in actinic keratosis. Ingenol mebu-
tate is also now in use for actinic keratosis.
Immune response modifiers
Imiquimod was introduced for the treatment of anogeni-
tal warts but can be used for actinic keratosis, Bowen’s 
disease, basal cell carcinoma and lentigo maligna. Its 
mechanism of action is via stimulation of endogenous 
Th2 immune responses and release of cytokines, includ-
ing interferon-gamma. It can cause significant inflamma-
tion, requiring dose adjustments, but can treat subclinical 
disease.
Dressings
A ‘wound’ covering is called a dressing. Box 28.13 shows 
the indications for their use. The active agent, vehicle and 
‘wound’ type should be considered. Wet lesions should 
be treated with wet dressings, e.g. acute eczema with 
potassium permanganate soaks, emollients and topical 
corticosteroids under wet wraps. A topical corticosteroid 
in a cream formulation and a paste bandage is used to 
soothe and cool inflamed skin. Chronic eczema may be 
treated with a potent topical corticosteroid in an oint-
ment formulation and occlusion with paste bandage to 
ease itching and scratching. Dressings for venous leg 
ulcers are described on page 1263.
Therapeutics
28
1267
Antivirals
Systemic antivirals are indicated for significant viral skin 
disease. For example, systemic aciclovir is given for 
eczema herpeticum (see Fig. 13.13C, p. 326).
Antihistamines
A range of H1 and H2 antagonists are used in dermatol-
ogy. For diseases in which histamine in the skin is rel-
evant (such as urticaria), non-sedating antihistamines 
should be given: for example, fexofenadine or cetirizine. 
For pruritic conditions such as eczema, the sedating 
effect of antihistamines like hydroxyzine is important. 
Leukotriene receptor antagonists, such as montelukast, 
may be added to antihistamine regimes.
Retinoids
Oral retinoids are widely used in a range of conditions, 
including acne, psoriasis and other keratinisation 
disorders. They have several functions, including pro-
motion of differentiation, reduction in hyperkeratosis, 
sebum production and Propionibacterium acnes, and anti-
inflammatory effects. Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid) is 
commonly given for moderate or severe acne, at a dose 
of 0.5–1 mg/kg over 4 months. Low-dose continuous 
isotretinoin may also be used for longer periods. Acitre-
tin can be effective in psoriasis and other keratinisation 
disorders, such as ichthyosis, as can alitretinoin (9-cis-
retinoic acid) in hand and foot eczema, and bexarotene 
in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Retinoid side-effects include drying of the skin and 
mucous membranes, abnormalities in liver function or 
hepatitis, and increase in serum triglycerides (levels 
should be checked before and during therapy). Depres-
sion and suicide have been reported in association with 
isotretinoin, although a causal role has not been estab-
lished. However, pre-drug screening for depressive 
symptoms should be undertaken. Alitretinoin and bex-
arotene can cause hypothyroidism. Systemic retinoids 
are teratogenic; females must have a negative pregnancy 
test before, during and after therapy. Pregnancy must be 
avoided for 2 months after isotretinoin, but for 2 years 
after acitretin, due to differences in drug disposition.
Immunosuppressant and 
immunomodulatory drugs
Systemic corticosteroids
Corticosteroids, particularly prednisolone, are widely 
used in inflammatory and immune-based skin diseases, 
such as eczema, immunobullous disease and connective 
tissue disorders. The usual steroid side-effects occur 
(pp. 776 and 1102), and often other immunosuppres-
sants are added in as steroid-sparing agents (see below).
Methotrexate
Methotrexate can be highly effective for psoriasis, 
eczema and several other skin diseases. In dermatology, 
it is used once weekly. It is an immunosuppressant 
(p. 1102), which is important therapeutically but also 
increases susceptibility to infection. It causes myelosup-
pression and has adverse interactions with other com-
monly used drugs, such as NSAIDs. Methotrexate is 
hepatotoxic and long-term use can be associated with 
hepatic fibrosis/cirrhosis; regular monitoring of liver 
function tests and a full blood count is required.
after oral administration, but only activated in skin that 
is exposed to UVA. Alternatively, psoralens can be 
applied in a bath before irradiation with UVA (‘bath 
PUVA’). PUVA is a more complex treatment than UVB 
and has greater adverse effects; in particular, cumulative 
exposure to high PUVA treatment numbers increases 
the risk of skin cancer, particularly squamous cell carci-
noma. Therefore, PUVA is generally used for poor 
responders to UVB, or in a few diseases for which it is 
the first-line phototherapy choice, such as plaque-stage 
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Longer-wavelength UVA1 (340–400 nm) is also being 
investigated for use in several conditions, particularly 
the fibrosing skin diseases, such as morphoea, although 
is not widely available at present.
Systemic therapies
General information is provided here, with disease-
specific details given later on.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are generally used for their anti-infective 
properties, particularly for staphylococcal and strepto-
coccal skin infections. In these indications, the correct 
antibiotic should be selected, based on bacterial sensitiv-
ity and patient factors. As examples, oral flucloxacillin 
may be indicated for infected eczema, intravenous 
benzyl penicillin and flucloxacillin for cellulitis, and 
erythromycin for a patient with a staphylococcal carbun-
cle who is penicillin-allergic. Optimal therapeutic doses 
and courses must be chosen. Several antibiotics, such as 
tetracyclines, erythromycin and trimethoprim, can be 
used for their anti-inflammatory effects in indications 
like acne vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid and pyoderma 
gangrenosum. Oxytetracycline is commonly given for 
acne but must be taken on an empty stomach, in a dose 
of up to 1.5 g a day. It has a good safety profile, even 
with long-term use. Lymecycline is an alternative and is 
taken once daily, with or without food, thereby improv-
ing compliance. Doxycycline is another option but 
commonly causes photosensitivity. Minocycline may be 
given, but with caution, as it can cause hyperpigmenta-
tion, autoimmune hepatitis and drug-induced lupus, 
and monitoring is required.
Hormonal treatments
In women with acne, oestrogen-containing oral contra-
ceptives can be a useful adjunct, as they are associated 
with a small reduction in sebum production. Combined 
oestrogen and anti-androgen (such as cyproterone 
acetate) contraceptives can also be effective, particularly 
in women with acne and hirsutism, as seen in polycystic 
ovary syndrome (p. 764).
Antifungals
The azoles (ketoconazole, miconazole), triazoles (itraco-
nazole, fluconazole) and triallylamines (terbinafine) are 
used most widely in fungal skin disease. Topical or sys-
temic use is based on clinical presentation. For example, 
dermatophyte nail infection requires prolonged oral ter-
binafine, whereas an isolated patch of tinea corporis will 
respond rapidly to topical treatment.
Skin disease
28
1268
(p. 1102), and omalizumab (an IgE monoclonal). While 
introduced to treat allergic asthma, the latter may also 
prove useful in non-allergic diseases such as chronic 
urticaria (pp. 91 and 671). Intravenous immunoglobulin, 
pooled from donor plasma, is often used in immune 
complex disease, such as dermatomyositis (p. 81).
Dermatological surgery
The choice of procedure is critical; for example, basal cell 
papillomas should be treated by cryotherapy or curet-
tage, and melanomas widely excised. Most dermatologi-
cal surgical procedures are performed under local 
anaesthetic. Knowledge of local anatomy is essential, 
particularly the locations of vessels and nerves. In certain 
sites, local cutaneous nerve blocks are useful (e.g. fingers, 
sole of foot and nose). Some sites are associated with 
particular risks, such as keloidal scarring on the upper 
trunk of young patients, unsightly scars over the scapu-
lae, and poor healing and risk of ulceration following 
procedures on the lower legs.
Excisional biopsy
The lesion is removed and sent for histology. The most 
common indication is suspicion of malignancy. The 
lesion and line of excision should be marked out. Basal 
cell carcinoma (BCC) is usually excised with a 4 mm 
margin, whereas initial excision of suspicious pigmented 
lesions is usually with a 2 mm margin with further 
excision arranged if melanoma is confirmed (p. 1273). It 
is important to excise down to the appropriate anatomi-
cal plane. Depending on body site, a range of procedures 
can minimise the resulting defect. Healing by secondary 
intention can also achieve good cosmetic results.
Mohs’ micrographic surgery
Mohs’ micrographic surgery is employed to ensure ade-
quate tumour excision margins, while conserving unaf-
fected tissue. It is most commonly used for BCC. The 
method involves processing to allow examination of all 
margins and is done in stages (usually on the same day) 
until all of the tumour is removed. The procedure is time-
consuming (so can be arduous for elderly, frail patients) 
and requires particular surgical and pathology skills. It 
should be considered for recurrent and for morphoeic 
and ill-defined BCC, and at sites where tissue conserva-
tion is particularly important, such as eyelid skin.
Curettage
Curettage involves using a small, spoon-shaped imple-
ment (curette), not only as a definitive treatment but also 
to obtain histology. The latter may, however, be compro-
mised, as tissue architecture is not well preserved and it 
may be difficult to distinguish between dysplasia and 
invasive malignancy. Curettage may be effective for 
basal cell papillomas, actinic keratoses, intra-epidermal 
carcinoma and superficial BCC.
Other physical therapies
Cryotherapy
Cryotherapy is a destructive treatment that uses liquid 
nitrogen. The freezing and thawing process causes cell 
Hydroxycarbamide
This is an alternative immunosuppressant to methotrex-
ate, although it appears to be less effective for psoriasis 
and the risk of myelosuppression is greater.
Ciclosporin
Ciclosporin (p. 1102) is an immunosuppressant with 
rapid onset of action and is effective in inducing clear-
ance of psoriasis and eczema. Caution and monitoring 
are required, as, in addition to immunosuppression, 
hypertension and nephrotoxicity are important adverse 
effects. Furthermore, ciclosporin should be used only 
with caution after phototherapy, particularly PUVA, 
because of the increased risk of skin cancer. Chronic use 
of ciclosporin is not advised.
Azathioprine
This is an anti-metabolite that is converted to 
6-mercaptopurine; it inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis. 
Azathioprine is mutagenic and detoxified via the enzyme 
thiopurine methyl transferase (TPMT), now routinely 
measured prior to drug commencement to allow indi-
vidualised and safer treatment. Side-effects include 
myelosuppression and gastrointestinal upset.
Mycophenolate mofetil
This immunosuppressant may be effective in diseases 
such as psoriasis but caution is needed, as myelosup-
pression can occur.
Dapsone
Dapsone is an immunomodulator and may be used in 
diseases where neutrophils are implicated, such as der-
matitis herpetiformis (p. 1294). Haemolysis, methaemo-
globinaemia and hypersensitivity can occur, and 
monitoring is required (pp. 158 and 350).
Antimalarials
The antimalarials, such as hydroxychloroquine, have 
multiple anti-inflammatory actions but are of particular 
use in cutaneous lupus (pp. 1102 and 1112).
Fumarates
The active component of fumaric acid ester therapy is 
dimethyl fumarate, and efficacy in psoriasis has been 
confirmed. Common adverse effects are flushing and 
diarrhoea. Lymphopenia is expected at effective doses.
Biological therapies
An increasing variety of monoclonal antibodies, fusion 
proteins and cytokines has been shown to be effective 
for psoriasis, and these agents are sometimes used in 
other recalcitrant skin diseases. The anti-tumour necro-
sis factor-alpha (TNF-α) therapies have the longest track 
record (p. 1102). These include etanercept (a human 
recombinant TNF-α receptor fusion protein), and inflixi-
mab and adalimumab (both anti-TNF-α monoclonal 
antibodies). Potential side-effects include reactivation of 
latent tuberculosis and development of other opportun-
istic infections. The long-term risks of skin and other 
cancers are not yet well quantified. Other biological 
therapies (often abbreviated to ‘biologics’) include B cell-
targeted treatments, such as rituximab, which may be 
used in pemphigus vulgaris, lupus erythematosus, 
dermatomyositis and other immune-based diseases 
Skin tumours
28
1269
maligna that is not suitable for surgical treatment, but 
its use in dermatology has declined. Scarring and 
poikiloderma can occur at treated sites, although these 
are minimised if fractionated regimens are chosen. 
Superficial radiotherapy is now rarely employed to treat 
benign dermatoses. Even more superficial ionising radi-
ation (grenz, or Bucky, rays) can be useful for localised 
dermatoses that are having severe effects on quality of 
life, if conventional treatments have been inadequate; 
for example, it may avoid exposure to the risks of sys-
temic therapy for a patient with severe and hitherto 
unresponsive scalp psoriasis.
SKIN TUMOURS
Pathogenesis of skin malignancy
Skin cancer is the most common malignancy in fair-
skinned populations. It is categorised as non-melanoma 
skin cancer (NMSC) and melanoma. NMSC is further 
subdivided into basal cell carcinoma (BCC), the most 
common skin cancer, and squamous cell carcinoma 
(SCC). The latter has precursor non-invasive states of 
intra-epithelial carcinoma (Bowen’s disease; BD) and 
dysplasia (actinic keratosis; AK). Melanoma is much less 
common than NMSC, but because of its metastatic risk 
it is the cause of most skin cancer deaths.
UVR is a complete carcinogen and is the main envi-
ronmental risk factor for skin cancer, which is much 
more common in countries with high ambient sun expo-
sure, such as Australia. Skin cancer risk also increases if 
an individual migrates to such a country at a young age, 
particularly less than 10 years. Epidemiological evidence 
supports a close link between chronic UVR exposure 
and risk of SCC and AK, and a modest link between sun 
exposure and BCC risk. Melanoma usually arises on 
sites that are intermittently exposed to UVR, and epi-
sodes of sunburn have been implicated as a risk factor 
for melanoma. Sunbed exposure is also a risk for both 
melanoma and NMSC (Box 28.14). Strategies to reduce 
sun exposure are therefore important for skin cancer 
prevention (Box 28.15).
There may also be identifiable genetic predispositions 
for skin cancer, such as in xeroderma pigmentosum, an 
autosomal recessive condition caused by an inherited 
defect in DNA excision repair (pp. 267 and 67), or basal 
cell naevus (Gorlin’s) syndrome, an autosomal domi-
nant disorder in which the PTCH tumour sup­pressor 
gene on chromosome 9 is defective (p. 267). Cutaneous 
immune surveillance is also critical and immunosup-
pressed organ transplant recipients have a greatly 
increased risk of skin cancer, particularly SCC. Interest-
ingly, patients who have received high numbers of 
wall and membrane destruction and cell death. Liquid 
nitrogen can be applied either with a cotton bud or, 
more effectively, with a spray gun. A wide variety of 
conditions can be treated but it is essential for the correct 
diagnosis to be made first, if necessary by diagnostic 
biopsy. Cryotherapy should not be employed to treat 
melanocytic naevi. Benign lesions, such as viral warts 
and basal cell papillomas, respond well, and cryo­
therapy can also be effective for actinic keratoses, 
Bowen’s disease or superficial non-melanoma skin 
cancer. Malignant indications require more vigorous 
treatment, usually with two freeze–thaw cycles, and this 
is normally carried out in secondary care. Considerable 
inflammation, blistering and pigmentary change, par-
ticularly hypopigmentation, can occur.
Laser therapy
Laser therapy involves treatment with monochromatic 
light. Skin components, such as haemoglobin and 
melanin, absorb specific wavelengths of electromagnetic 
radiation, and these wavelengths can therefore be used 
to destroy these targets selectively and to treat certain 
skin disorders. Lasers targeting haemoglobin are 
employed for vascular abnormalities, such as spider 
naevi, telangiectasiae and port wine stains, and lasers 
targeting melanin can treat benign pigmentary disorders 
or pigment in tattoos or from drug (e.g. minocycline) 
deposition; the latter can also be used for hair removal 
if the hair is pigmented. Light delivery in short pulses 
restricts damage to the treated site.
The carbon dioxide laser emits infrared light that is 
absorbed by water in tissues and can therefore be used 
for destructive purposes. The depth of effect can be 
controlled, such that the carbon dioxide laser is widely 
employed for resurfacing in photorejuvenation or acne 
scarring. Significant morbidity is associated with this 
destructive laser and general anaesthesia is required.
Photodynamic therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is widely used in derma-
tology, predominantly for actinic keratoses, Bowen’s 
disease and superficial BCC. Topical ‘porphyrin’ PDT is 
the most common type; it involves the application of a 
porphyrin pro-drug to the lesion, which is taken up and 
converted by the cell’s haem cycle to a photosensitiser, 
protoporphyrin IX. This is then photochemically acti-
vated by visible (usually red) light in the presence of 
oxygen, which causes the production of reactive oxygen 
species, inflammation and destruction of treated tissue. 
The photosensitiser is taken up relatively selectively in 
diseased skin, and so inflammation and adverse effects 
in normal skin are minimised. PDT is as effective for 
superficial non-melanoma skin cancer and dysplasia as 
other treatments like cryotherapy and 5-fluorouracil, but 
may be preferred for sites of poor healing, such as the 
lower leg, or where cosmetic outcome is important, due 
to the selectivity of treatment. Pain during irradiation 
occurs during PDT, although adjustments to the irradia-
tion regime can reduce discomfort.
Radiotherapy and grenz (Bucky) 
ray therapy
Radiotherapy can be employed for several skin condi-
tions, including non-melanoma skin cancer or lentigo 
‘Recent meta-analyses have confirmed that there is an 
association between sunbed use and both melanoma and 
non-melanoma skin cancer, particularly when exposure 
commences in early life.’
• Boniol M, et al. Br Med J 2012; 345:14.
• Wehner MR, et al. Br Med J 2012; 345:15.
28.14  Sunbeds and skin cancer
Skin disease
28
1270
to distinguish it from Bowen’s disease. Less commonly, 
a morphoeic, infiltrative BCC presents as an ill-defined, 
slowly enlarging, sclerotic yellow/grey plaque.
Management
Management involves early diagnosis and establish-
ment of the correct treatment approach, taking into 
account patient and lesion factors (Box 28.16). Surgery is 
often the treatment of choice, although, increasingly, the 
place of non-surgical therapies is being recognised for 
low-risk BCC in patients in whom surgery is not appro-
priate. For example, an early nodular BCC in a fit patient 
is best excised surgically, whereas large, multiple, super-
ficial BCCs on the trunk of a frail elderly patient with 
comorbidities may be best treated by a non-surgical 
approach, such as PDT or the immunomodulator 
PUVA treatments (more than 150), which are immuno-
suppressive, are also at increased risk of skin cancer, 
particularly SCC. Despite UVB being a complete car-
cinogen, there is no evidence that UVB phototherapy 
markedly increases skin cancer risk, although ongoing 
vigilance is required. Ionising radiation, notably radio-
therapy, thermal radiation and chemical carcinogens, 
such as arsenic or coal tar, can increase NMSC risk, 
particularly SCC. A role for oncogenic human papilloma­
viruses in NMSC development is also implicated, par-
ticularly in immunosuppressed patients with NMSC; 
viral DNA is detected in more than 80% of this group. 
Chronic inflammation is also a risk factor for SCC, which 
may arise in chronic skin ulcers, in skin inflammation, 
as in lupus, or in patients with the scarring genetic skin 
disease, dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (see Box 28.32, 
p. 1292), in which up to 50% of patients develop SCC.
Malignant tumours
Basal cell carcinoma
The incidence of NMSC has increased dramatically over 
the last 30 years and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) accounts 
for more than 70% of cases. In Europe, the ratio of BCC 
to SCC is 4–5 : 1 in immunocompetent patients. BCC is a 
malignant tumour that rarely metastasises; it is thought 
to derive from immature pluripotent epidermal cells 
and is composed of cells with similarities to basal layer 
epidermis and appendages. Lesions typically occur at 
sites of moderate sun exposure, particularly the face, 
and are slow-growing. Incidence increases with age and 
males are more commonly affected. Lesions may ulcer-
ate and invade locally; hence the term ‘rodent ulcer’. 
Mutations in the PTCH tumour suppressor gene have 
been identified and an aberrant hedgehog signalling 
pathway is implicated in pathogenesis.
Clinical features
Early BCCs usually present as pale, translucent papules 
or nodules, with overlying superficial telangiectatic 
vessels (nodular BCC). If untreated, they will increase in 
size and ulcerate, to form a crater with a rolled, pearled 
edge and ectatic vessels (Fig. 28.9). There may be some 
pigmentation or a cystic component. A superficial multi-
focal type can occur, often on the trunk, and may be 
large (up to 10 cm in diameter); there may be multiple 
lesions. Superficial BCC usually presents as a red/
brown plaque or patch with a raised, thread-like edge, 
which is often best seen by stretching the skin; this helps 
Fig. 28.9  Basal cell carcinoma. A A nodular BCC showing the 
translucent nature of the tumour and the abnormal arborising vessels. 
 B An ulcerated BCC showing the raised rolled edge. 
A
B
Basal cell carcinoma
• Excision results in the lowest recurrence rates
• Mohs’ micrographic surgery is effective for high-risk BCC
• Medical treatments are often appropriate for low-risk 
superficial tumours in patients with comorbidities
• Cryotherapy and topical 5-fluorouracil can be used for 
superficial BCC
• Topical photodynamic therapy and topical imiquimod are 
both effective in superficial BCC
• BCC in patients with Gorlin’s syndrome should not be treated 
with radiotherapy
• Hedgehog pathway inhibitors are being investigated for 
advanced inoperable BCC
Squamous cell carcinoma (and precursors actinic keratosis 
and Bowen’s disease)
• Excision is the treatment of choice for invasive SCC
• Most recurrences or metastases occur within 5 years
• Medical management is not usually considered for invasive 
SCC
• There have been many advances in the medical management 
of field-change carcinogenesis, actinic keratoses and 
Bowen’s disease, e.g. photodynamic therapy, imiquimod and 
other immunomodulators, new formulations of 5-fluorouracil, 
diclofenac in hyaluronic acid gel and ingenol mebutate
28.16  Management of non-melanoma skin 
cancer and pre-cancer
‘Sunscreen use attenuates the development of new naevi on 
intermittently sun-exposed sites in white-skinned (particularly 
freckled) schoolchildren living in areas of high ambient sun 
exposure. There is good evidence that regular sunscreen use in 
adults reduces the development of actinic keratosis and 
squamous cell carcinoma. There is also evidence to support a 
preventative role for regular sunscreen use in melanoma and, to 
a lesser extent, basal cell carcinoma.’
• Green AC, et al. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29:257–263.
• Ulrich C, et al. Br J Dermatol 2009; 161 (suppl. 3):78–84.
28.15  Sunscreens and skin cancer
Skin tumours
28
1271
include curettage and cautery for small, low-risk lesions 
and radiotherapy if surgery is not feasible (see Box 
28.16). Excision with a 3–4 mm margin has a cure rate 
of approximately 90–95% for most SCC. High-risk 
SCC, such as those with poorly differentiated histology 
or at high-risk sites, and metastatic disease require 
management via a multidisciplinary team. In patients 
who are at high risk for further SCC, systemic retinoids 
may have a role in reducing the rate of SCC develop-
ment, but rapid appearance of tumours occurs on drug 
cessation.
Actinic keratosis
Actinic keratoses (AK) are hyperkeratotic erythematous 
lesions arising on chronically sun-exposed sites. Histol-
ogy shows dysplasia, although the diagnosis of typical 
AK is usually made on clinical grounds (Fig. 28.11). 
They are very common in fair-skinned people who have 
had significant sun exposure, are often multiple and 
increase with age. Prevalence is much higher in Aus-
tralia than in the UK and some surveys have shown a 
prevalence of more than 50% in those over 40 years old. 
The rate of progression to SCC is less than 0.1% and 
spontaneous resolution is possible. However, SCC can 
also arise de novo and without progression from AK. 
Increase in size, ulceration, bleeding, pain or tenderness 
can be indicative of transformation into SCC.
Management
A range of treatment options are available for AK (see 
Box 28.16). Emollients and photoprotection, including 
high-factor sunscreens, may suffice for mild disease. 
Single or low numbers of lesions of AK can be effec-
tively treated with cryotherapy. Multiple lesions require 
field-directed therapy, such as 5-fluorouracil, imiqui-
mod, diclofenac in hyaluronic acid, PDT or ingenol 
mebutate. Hyperkeratotic lesions may require curettage 
and cautery.
imi­quimod (p. 426). Cryotherapy can be effective for 
BCC but can cause blistering and scarring, so is best 
suited to small, superficial lesions at low-risk sites. 
Curettage and cautery may also be effective for selected 
lesions. Management of infiltrative morphoeic BCC 
and/or lesions at difficult sites, such as around the eye, 
may require more complex surgical excision with margin 
control (Mohs’). If the primary tumour is not completely 
excised, re-excision or follow-up may be advised, as 
not all tumours that are incompletely excised recur. 
However, this is not recommended for tumours at high-
risk sites or with infiltrative morphoeic BCC, where 
complete excision is advisable. Radiotherapy is less 
commonly used because of the risk of scarring, but can 
be invaluable for large lesions in frail patients. Clearance 
of more than 90% of tumours should be achieved. Non-
surgical approaches are associated with higher recur-
rence rates than surgery (often up to 25% over 5 years) 
but may be most appropriate in some circumstances.
Squamous cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a malignancy that 
arises from epidermal keratinocytes and is the second 
most common skin cancer, occurring more frequently in 
elderly males and smokers.
Clinical features
SCC usually occurs on chronically sun-exposed sites, 
such as bald scalp, tops of ears, face and back of hands. 
The clinical presentation may be diverse, ranging from 
rapid development of a painful keratotic nodule in a 
pre-existing area of dysplasia (Fig. 28.10) to the de novo 
presentation of an erythematous, infiltrated, often-warty 
nodule or plaque that may ulcerate. The clinical appear-
ance depends on histological grading; well-differentiated 
tumours more often present as defined keratotic nodules 
(see Fig. 28.10), whereas poorly differentiated tumours 
tend to be ill-defined and infiltrative, and may ulcerate. 
SCC has metastatic potential; some tumours, such as 
those on lip and ears and in immunosuppressed patients, 
behave more aggressively and are more likely to metas-
tasise to draining lymph nodes.
Management
Early diagnosis is important and complete surgical exci-
sion is the usual treatment of choice. Other options 
Fig. 28.10  Squamous cell carcinoma. A A centrally keratinous, 
symmetrical, well-differentiated SCC. Clinically, this could be confused with 
keratoacanthoma.  B An SCC arising from an area of epidermal dysplasia. 
A
B
Fig. 28.11  Actinic keratosis. Close-up of a hyperkeratotic AK on 
the ear. 
Skin disease
28
1272
to nodules and finally a systemic stage. B-cell lympho-
mas, on the other hand, usually present as nodules or 
plaque-like tumours. The diagnosis of cutaneous T-cell 
lymphoma requires a high index of suspicion, particu-
larly in patients thought to have unusual recalcitrant 
forms of eczema or psoriasis.
Treatment is symptomatic and there is no evidence 
that it alters prognosis. In the early stages of cutaneous 
T-cell lymphoma, systemic or local corticosteroids 
may be indicated; alternatively, PUVA (for plaque stage 
MF) or narrowband UVB phototherapy (for patch stage 
MF) may be used. Once lesions have moved beyond 
plaque stage, localised radiotherapy, electron beam 
radiation or systemic anti-lymphoma regimens may 
be needed. Management often requires collaboration 
between dermatologists, pathologists and haematologi-
cal oncologists.
Melanoma
Melanoma is a malignant tumour of epidermal melano-
cytes and has metastatic potential. There has been a 
steady rise in melanoma incidence in fair-skinned popu-
lations over recent decades, with the highest figures in 
Australasia. Primary prevention and early detection are 
essential, as, despite advances, therapy for advanced 
and metastatic disease is unsatisfactory. Most melano-
mas are sporadic and risk factors are genetic and envi-
ronmental: fair skin, freckles, red hair, number of naevi 
and sunlight exposure. Thus, patients with multiple 
atypical naevi (dysplastic naevus syndrome) and fair-
skinned subjects, often with variant alleles in the 
melanocortin-1 gene, are at increased risk of melanoma. 
The type of sunlight exposure is under debate but 
intermittent exposure, sunburn and sunbed use are 
implicated. Any family history of melanoma increases 
individual risk but a strong family history is rare. In 
familial cases, an autosomal dominant inheritance with 
incomplete penetrance can occur. Mutations in genes 
coding for the p16 (CDKN2A) tumour suppressor gene 
or its binding site are implicated and, in these patients, 
the lifetime risk of melanoma increases to more than 
50%. Advances in molecular technology have identified 
Management
Incisional biopsy is usually undertaken to confirm the 
diagnosis, although histology may be obtained by curet-
tage. The latter also serves to treat the lesion but does 
not allow distinction from SCC to be made, due to loss 
of tissue architecture and orientation. Non-surgical 
thera­pies are commonly preferred (see Box 28.16), 
especially on the lower legs, as they are associated 
with improved healing and reduced risk of ulceration 
at this site.
Keratoacanthoma
Although benign, this squamous tumour is often diffi-
cult to distinguish from SCC and is thus included in this 
section. It has a striking clinical presentation of rapid 
growth over weeks to months and subsequent spontane-
ous resolution. It is thought to be associated with chronic 
sun exposure and most commonly occurs on the central 
face. The classical appearance is of an isolated dome-
shaped nodule often of 5 cm or more in diameter, with 
a central keratin plug (Fig. 28.13). Clinically and histo-
logically, the lesion often resembles SCC (see Fig. 
28.10A); most are treated surgically, either by curettage 
and cautery or excision, to rule out SCC and to avoid 
the unsightly scar after spontaneous resolution.
Cutaneous lymphomas
The most common form of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma 
is mycosis fungoides (MF). This can persist for years 
in patch and plaque stages, often resembling eczema 
or psoriasis. Only sometimes does it progress through 
Fig. 28.12  Intra-epidermal carcinoma (Bowen’s disease). The 
lower leg is a common site and lesions are often treated non-surgically. 
Fig. 28.13  Keratoacanthoma. 
Intra-epidermal carcinoma 
(Bowen’s disease)
Clinical features
Bowen’s disease (BD) usually presents as a slowly 
enlarging, erythematous, scaly plaque on the lower legs 
of fair-skinned elderly women but may occur at other 
sites (Fig. 28.12). It can be confused with eczema or pso-
riasis, but is usually asymptomatic and does not respond 
to topical steroids. It may also be hard to distinguish 
from superficial BCC. Diagnostic biopsy shows intra-
epidermal carcinoma but no invasion through the base-
ment membrane. Transformation into SCC occurs in 3% 
or less.
Skin tumours
28
1273
tumours with greater metastatic risk. They often present 
as a rapidly growing nodule that may bleed and ulcer-
ate. Nodular melanomas may be heavily pigmented, 
or relatively amelanotic and erythematous, and be 
confused with benign vascular lesions. A rim of pigment­
ation may, however, be seen under the dermatoscope. 
Lesions may develop de novo or from a pre-existing 
naevus or SSM.
Lentigo maligna melanoma
This is biologically distinct and arises from a prolonged 
pre-invasive phase, lentigo maligna. It occurs as a very 
slowly expanding, pigmented, macular lesion, usually 
on photo-exposed head and neck sites of elderly patients; 
histology shows in situ changes only. This phase may 
last for several years before a nodule of invasive 
melanoma develops in a proportion of cases (lentigo 
maligna melanoma).
Acral lentiginous or palmoplantar melanoma
This accounts for only approximately 10% of melanoma 
in fair-skinned races but is more common in dark-
skinned people, accounting for 50% of cases and indicat-
ing that UVR exposure may not be implicated in acral 
melanoma risk.
Subungual melanoma
This form of melanoma is rare. It may present as a pain-
less, proximally expanding streak of pigmentation 
arising from the nail matrix, and progresses to nail 
dystrophy and involvement of the adjacent nail fold 
(Hutchinson’s sign).
Management
Initial excision of a suspicious lesion should be per-
formed with a 2 mm margin, where possible. Surgical 
excision is usually required, although radiotherapy or 
imiquimod may be used for lentigo maligna, if surgery 
is not feasible. The Breslow thickness of tumour (i.e. the 
maximal depth from granular cell layer to deepest 
tumour cells) is critical for management and prognosis. 
The clinical staging of extent of melanoma is essential, 
in order to establish whether disease is primary and 
localised, or if there is nodal or metastatic spread.
Wide excision of melanoma with a low risk of 
metastasis (i.e. stage 1 disease, Breslow thickness less 
than 1 mm) with a 1 cm clear margin is accepted prac-
tice. The margin of excision for more advanced disease 
is controversial, although a 2–3 cm margin for thicker 
tumours is common practice as an attempt to reduce 
risk of local recurrence (Box 28.18). The majority of 
tumours can be excised without the need for grafting. 
For tumours with a Breslow thickness of 1 mm or more, 
a sentinel lymph node biopsy may be offered. This is 
usually performed at the time of wider excision and 
involves injection of radio-labelled blue dye at the site 
of the primary melanoma, allowing identification of the 
draining ‘sentinel’ node by radioscintigraphy; this 
sentinel node is then removed and examined in detail 
by histology, immunohistochemistry and/or PCR of 
melanocyte gene products to look for tumour deposits. 
If the biopsy is positive, local lymphadenectomy is 
usually offered. This procedure may provide additional 
prognostic information but there is no evidence of 
improved survival rates in patients who have under-
gone this procedure. Local recurrence of disease and 
other susceptibility genes and potential genetic targets 
for therapeutic intervention in advanced disease.
Clinical features
Melanoma can occur at any age and site and in either 
sex, but typically affects the leg in females and back in 
males. It is rare before puberty. The classification of 
invasive malignant melanoma is shown in Box 28.17. 
Early lesions may be in situ and pre-invasive before 
becoming an invasive SSM.
Any change in naevi or development of new lesions 
should be assessed to exclude malignancy and, for this, 
the dermatoscope is invaluable (see Fig. 28.2, p. 1256). 
Real-time non-invasive imaging techniques are being 
investigated as tools to assist in diagnosis but are largely 
experimental. If in doubt, excision is advised.
Superficial spreading melanoma
Superficial spreading melanoma (SSM) is the most 
common type in Caucasians. It usually presents as a 
slowly enlarging, macular, pigmented lesion, with 
increasing irregularity in shape and pigment; this super-
ficial, radial growth phase can last for approximately 
2 years. Subsequently, the lesion becomes palpable and 
this is indicative of the development of vertical growth 
phase invasive disease in the dermis; this now has the 
potential to invade lymphatics and vessels and become 
metastatic (Fig. 28.14). Approximately 50% of melano-
mas arise from a pre-existing naevus.
Nodular melanoma
Nodular melanoma is most common in the fifth and 
sixth decades, particularly in men and on the trunk (see 
Fig. 28.14). This may account in part for the increased 
mortality rates from melanoma in men, as these are 
Fig. 28.14  Superficial spreading melanoma.  A A superficial 
spreading malignant melanoma with a palpable area indicative of vertical 
growth phase (Breslow thickness 1.3 mm).  B A nodular malignant 
melanoma arising de novo and with Breslow thickness 3.5 mm. 
B
A
Melanoma without metastatic potential (non-invasive)
• Melanoma in situ
• Lentigo maligna
Melanoma with invasive potential
• Superficial spreading 
melanoma
• Nodular melanoma
• Acral lentiginous melanoma
• Subungual melanoma
• Lentigo maligna melanoma
28.17  Classification of cutaneous 
malignant melanoma
Skin disease
28
1274
Melanocytic naevi
Melanocytic naevi (moles) are localised benign clonal 
proliferations of melanocytes. Their cause is unknown 
but may relate to abnormalities of the normal migratory 
pattern of melanocytes during development. It is quite 
normal to have 20–50, although, interestingly, individu-
als with red hair have fewer. Genetic and environmental 
factors are implicated. Monozygotic twins have higher 
concordance in naevi numbers than dizygotic twins. 
Individuals who have had greater sun exposure have 
higher numbers of naevi. Most melanocytic naevi appear 
in childhood and early adult life, or during pregnancy 
palpable local node involvement should be treated 
surgically.
Prognosis for metastatic disease is poor and chemo-
therapy is palliative. Melanoma is immunogenic and 
immunotherapy may be used in patients with advanced 
disease, although there is no evidence of improved 
overall survival. Other biological and gene therapies 
and vaccines are being investigated. Genetic advances 
have facilitated the introduction of tumour-targeted 
treatments for late-stage disease, such as B-Raf and c-Kit 
inhibitors for patients expressing these gene mutations, 
and this approach is under further investigation.
Prognosis
The Breslow thickness of the primary tumour is the most 
important prognostic factor in stage I disease, although 
other indices, including mitotic rate and presence/
absence of ulceration, are also important. Patients with 
a primary tumour of less than 1 mm have more than a 
95% chance of disease-free survival at 10 years, but this 
figure drops to approximately 50% for a tumour of 
greater than 3.5 mm thickness. Survival rates fall to less 
than 10% for those with advanced nodal or metastatic 
disease. In general, the prognosis is better in females and 
for tumours at certain sites, such as the leg.
Benign lesions that may be confused 
with skin cancers
In practice, it is often difficult to distinguish between 
skin cancer and a benign lesion on clinical grounds. 
Benign melanocytic naevi and basal cell papillomas can 
often be mistaken for melanoma, even by dermatolo-
gists. If there is any doubt, histology is required.
Freckle (ephelis)
Histologically, a freckle consists of normal numbers of 
melanocytes, but with focal increases in melanin in 
keratinocytes. They are most common on sun-exposed 
sites in fair-skinned individuals, particularly children 
and in those with red hair, and on the face. There is a 
familial tendency. Clinically, freckles are brown macules, 
which darken following UVR exposure.
Lentigines
A lentigo consists of increased numbers of melanocytes 
along the basement membrane, but without formation 
of the nests that occur in melanocytic naevi. These 
‘There is no evidence that radical surgery (4–6 cm excision 
margins) reduces the risk of local recurrence or survival 
compared with more conservative surgery.
Recommended surgical excision margins:
• Breslow thickness < 1 mm: 1 cm margin
• Breslow thickness 1.01–2 mm: 1–2 cm margin
• Breslow thickness 2.1–4 mm: 2–3 cm margin
• Breslow thickness > 4 mm: 3 cm margin.’
• Marsden JR, et al., British Association of Dermatologists. Br J Dermatol 2010; 
163:238–256.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
28.18  Margin of excision of melanoma
Fig. 28.15  A typical basal cell papilloma. Note the neighbouring 
basal cell papillomas and the coincidental benign angiomas (Campbell de 
Morgan spots). 
lesions usually occur at sites of chronic sun exposure 
(see the background skin changes in Fig. 28.10A), 
become more common with age, and are often referred 
to as ‘liver spots’ or ‘age spots’. They can vary in colour 
from light to very dark brown. Distinction from 
melanoma is essential and histology may be required.
Haemangiomas
Benign vascular tumours or hamartomas are common 
and include Campbell de Morgan spots, which present 
as pink/red papules on the upper half of the body. They 
can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from melano-
cytic lesions, particularly if they are thrombosed or 
occur on particular sites, such as the lip or genitalia. The 
dermatoscope is helpful for this (see Fig. 28.2, p. 1256).
Basal cell papilloma  
(seborrhoeic wart)
Basal cell papillomas (seborrhoeic warts or keratoses) 
are common, benign epidermal tumours (Fig. 28.15). The 
name is misleading, as they do not involve sebaceous 
glands. They can be confused with melanoma and may 
be cosmetically troublesome. They may be flat, raised, 
pedunculated or warty-surfaced, and can appear to be 
‘stuck on’. They occur in both sexes and with increasing 
age, and are most common on the face and trunk. The 
colour may vary from yellow to almost black and 
the surface may seem ‘greasy’, with pinpoint keratin 
plugs visible, particularly with a magnifying lens. If 
there is no diagnostic doubt, they can be left alone or 
treated by cryotherapy or curettage. If the differential 
diagnosis includes melanoma, excision biopsy should be 
undertaken.
Common skin infections and infestations 
28
1275
lower legs. Its aetiology is unclear, although a reactive 
process secondary to insect bites or trauma is one 
hypothesis. There is frequently a ring of pigment around 
the lesion and dimpling when the skin is pinched, 
reflecting epidermal tethering.
Acrochordon (skin tag)
Acrochordons are benign pedunculated lesions, most 
common in skin flexures. They may be confused with 
melanocytic naevi.
Lipoma
Lipomas are benign tumours of adipocytes, which are 
characteristically soft and lie more deeply in the skin 
than epidermal tumours. A variant, angiolipoma, is 
typically painful.
COMMON SKIN INFECTIONS  
AND INFESTATIONS
Bacterial infections
Impetigo
Impetigo is a common and highly contagious superficial 
bacterial skin infection. There are two main presenta-
tions: bullous impetigo, caused by a staphylococcal epi-
dermolytic toxin, and non-bullous impetigo (Fig. 28.17), 
which can be caused by either Staphylococcus aureus or 
streptococcus, or both together. Staphylococcus is the 
most common agent in temperate climates, whereas 
streptococcal impetigo is more often seen in hot, humid 
areas. All ages can contract the infection but non-bullous 
disease particularly affects young children, often in late 
summer. It can be sporadic, although outbreaks can 
arise in conditions of overcrowding and poor hygiene or 
in institutions. A widespread form can occur in neonates. 
Predisposing factors are minor skin abrasions and the 
existence of other skin conditions, such as infestations or 
eczema.
In non-bullous impetigo, a thin-walled vesicle devel-
ops; it rapidly ruptures and is rarely seen intact. Dried 
or oestrogen therapy. The onset of a new mole is less 
common after the age of 25 years. Congenital melano-
cytic naevi occur at or shortly after birth.
Clinical features
Acquired melanocytic naevi are classified according to 
the microscopic location of the melanocyte nests (Fig. 
28.16). Junctional naevi are usually macular, circular or 
oval, and mid- to dark brown. Compound and intrader-
mal naevi are nodules, because of the dermal compo-
nent, and may be hair-bearing. Intradermal naevi are 
usually less pigmented than compound naevi. Their 
surface may be smooth, cerebriform, hyperkeratotic or 
papillomatous.
Some individuals have large numbers of naevi, often 
at unusual sites, such as the scalp, palms or soles, and 
these may often appear ‘atypical’ in terms of variability 
in pigmentation, size and shape. Some may be very 
dark or pink and may show a depigmented or inflamed 
halo. If these naevi are removed, then ‘dysplastic 
changes’ are often seen. Such naevi are known to occur 
in some rare families with an inherited melanoma pre-
disposition. However, the significance of such changes 
in non-familial cases is unclear and there is no consensus 
on management and follow-up.
Although approximately 50% of melanomas arise in 
pre-existing naevi, most naevi do not become malignant; 
although a changing naevus must be taken seriously, 
most will not be melanomas. Malignant change is most 
likely in large congenital melanocytic naevi (risk may 
correlate with the size of the lesion) and possibly in 
families who have been diagnosed as showing large 
numbers of atypical naevi with a history of melanoma.
Management
Melanocytic naevi are normal and do not require exci-
sion, unless malignancy is suspected or they become 
repeatedly inflamed or traumatised. Advice on photo-
protection is important for fair-skinned individuals with 
multiple naevi.
Blue naevi
These are melanocytic naevi in which there is a prolifera-
tion of spindled melanocytes relatively deep within the 
dermis. Light scattering means that the pigment appears 
blue rather than brown. They may be difficult to distin-
guish from nodular melanoma and are therefore often 
excised.
Dermatofibroma
A dermatofibroma is a characteristically firm, often pig-
mented, raised lesion, most commonly found on the 
Fig. 28.16  Classification of melanocytic naevi. Classification is 
based on microscopic location of the nests of naevus cells. 
Junctional
Compound
Intradermal
Fig. 28.17  Non-bullous impetigo. 
Skin disease
28
1276
Ecthyma
Ecthyma is caused by either staphylococcus or strepto-
coccus, or both together and is characterised by adherent 
crusts overlying ulceration. It occurs worldwide but is 
more common in the tropics. In Europe, it occurs more 
frequently in children. Predisposing factors include poor 
hygiene, malnutrition and underlying skin disease, such 
as scabies. It is commonly seen in drug abusers, and 
minor trauma can predispose to lesion development.
Folliculitis, furuncles  
and carbuncles
Hair follicle inflammation can be superficial, involving 
just the ostium of the follicle (folliculitis) or deep (furun-
cles and carbuncles).
Superficial folliculitis
This is very common, usually minor and subacute or 
chronic. Primary lesions are follicular pustules and ery-
thema. It is often infective, caused by Staph. aureus, but 
can also be sterile and caused by physical (e.g. traumatic 
epilation) or chemical (e.g. mineral oil) injury. Staphylo-
coccal folliculitis is most common in children and often 
exudate, forming golden crusting, arises on an ery-
thematous base. In bullous disease, the toxins cleave 
desmoglein-1, causing a superficial epidermal split and 
the occurrence of intact blisters with clear to cloudy 
fluid, which last for 2–3 days. The face, scalp and limbs 
are commonly affected but other sites can also be 
involved, particularly if there are predisposing factors 
such as eczema. Lesions may be single or multiple and 
coalesce. Constitutional symptoms are uncommon. A 
bacterial swab should be taken from blister fluid or 
active lesion before treatment commences. Around one-
third of the population are nasal carriers of Staphylococ-
cus, so swabs from the nostrils should also be obtained.
In mild, localised disease, topical treatment with 
mupirocin or fusidic acid usually suffices and limits the 
spread of infection. The use of topical antiseptics and 
soap and water to remove infected crusts is also helpful. 
Staphylococcal carriage should be treated, with mupi-
rocin topically to the nostrils if swabs are positive. In 
severe cases, an oral antibiotic, such as flucloxacillin or 
erythromycin, is indicated. If a nephritogenic streptococ-
cus is suspected, then systemic antibiotics should be 
given, as post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis can 
occur (p. 498). Underlying disease, such as infestations, 
must 
be 
treated 
and 
cross-infection 
minimised. 
Scarring does not occur but there may be temporary 
dyspigmentation.
Staphylococcal scalded  
skin syndrome
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) is a poten-
tially serious exfoliating condition occurring predomi-
nantly in children, particularly neonates (Fig. 28.18). 
It is caused by systemic circulation of epidermolytic 
toxins from a Staph. aureus infection. The same toxins 
are implicated in bullous impetigo, which is a localised 
form of SSSS. The focus of infection may be minor skin 
trauma, the umbilicus, urinary tract or nasopharynx. 
The child presents with fever, irritability and skin ten-
derness. Erythema usually begins in the groin, axillae 
and around the mouth. Blisters and superficial erosions 
develop over 1–2 days and can rapidly involve large 
areas, with severe systemic upset. Bacterial swabs 
should be obtained from possible primary sites of infec-
tion. A skin snip should also be taken for urgent histol-
ogy. This is a sample of the superficial peeling skin 
removed by ‘snipping with scissors’, without the need 
for local anaesthetic. It shows a split beneath the stratum 
corneum, and differentiates SSSS from toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, in which the whole epidermis is affected (see 
Fig. 28.36, p. 1292). Systemic antibiotics (e.g. flucloxacil-
lin) and intensive supportive measures should be com-
menced immediately. Bacterial swabs from nostrils, 
axillae and groins should be taken from family members 
to exclude staphylococcal carriage. Although the acute 
presentation of SSSS is often severe, rapid recovery and 
absence of scarring are usual, as the epidermal split is 
superficial.
Toxic shock syndrome
This condition is characterised by fever, desquamating 
rash, circulatory collapse and multi-organ involvement 
(p. 331). It is caused by staphylococcal toxins and early 
cases were thought to arise with tampon use. Intensive 
supportive care and systemic antibiotics are required.
Fig. 28.18  Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. A Extensive 
erythema and superficial peeling of the skin. From Savin, et al. 2002 – see 
p. 1305.  B The condition was rapidly diagnosed by examination of a 
frozen section of skin snip.
A
B
Common skin infections and infestations 
28
1277
commonly caused by group A streptococcus. However, 
culture of swabs from affected sites is often negative. 
There is frequently a source of organism entry, such as 
an ear infection, varicose eczema/ulcer or tinea pedis, 
and swabs should also be taken from these sites. Diabetes 
and immunosuppression are predisposing factors. The 
patient usually has malaise, fever and leucocytosis, and 
streptococcal serology will often be positive. The face 
(erysipelas) and legs (cellulitis) are most often affected 
and the site is hot, painful, erythematous and oedema-
tous. Blistering often occurs and may be haemorrhagic. 
Regional lymphadenopathy is common. Erysipelas typi-
cally has a well-defined edge due to its more superficial 
level of involvement, whereas cellulitis is typically ill-
defined. Treatment is usually with intravenous anti­
streptococcal antibiotics, such as benzylpenicillin, with 
erythromycin or ciprofloxacin as an alternative for 
penicillin-allergic patients. Milder cases may be treated 
with oral antibiotics. If cases are untreated, sequelae 
include lymphoedema, cavernous sinus thrombosis, sep-
ticaemia and glomerulonephritis.
occurs on the scalp or limbs. Pustules usually resolve 
without scarring in 7–10 days but can become chronic. 
In older children and adults, they may progress to a 
deeper form of folliculitis. The condition is often self-
limiting and may respond to irritant removal and anti-
septics. More severe cases may require topical or 
systemic antibiotics and treatment of Staph. aureus 
carrier sites.
Deep folliculitis (furuncles and carbuncles)
A furuncle (boil) is an acute Staph. aureus infection of the 
hair follicle, usually with necrosis. It is most common in 
young adults and males. It is usually sporadic but epi-
demics occasionally occur. Malnutrition, diabetes and 
HIV predispose, although most cases arise in healthy 
subjects. Any body site can be involved but neck, but-
tocks and anogenital areas are common. Infection is 
often associated with chronic Staph. aureus carriage in 
the nostrils and perineum, and may be due to resistant 
strains, such as meticillin-resistant organisms (MRSA). 
Friction caused by tight clothing may be contributory. 
Initially, an inflammatory follicular nodule develops 
and becomes pustular, fluctuant and tender. Crops of 
lesions sometimes occur. There may be fever and mild 
constitutional upset. Lesions rupture over days to weeks, 
discharge pus, become necrotic and leave a scar.
If a deep Staph. aureus infection of a group of contigu-
ous hair follicles occurs, this is termed a carbuncle and 
is associated with intense deep inflammation (Fig. 28.19). 
This usually occurs in middle-aged men, often with pre-
disposing conditions such as diabetes or immunosup-
pression. A carbuncle is an exquisitely tender nodule, 
usually on the neck, shoulders or hips, associated with 
severe constitutional symptoms. Discharge, necrosis and 
scarring are usual. Bacterial swabs must be taken and 
treatment is with anti-staphylococcal antibiotics, e.g. flu-
cloxacillin, and sometimes incision and drainage.
Other staphylococcal toxins may also be pathogenic. 
For example, Panton–Valentine leukocidin-producing 
Staph. aureus can cause recurrent abscesses and may be 
difficult to eradicate.
Cellulitis and erysipelas
Cellulitis is inflammation of subcutaneous tissue, due to 
bacterial infection (Fig. 28.20). In contrast, erysipelas is 
bacterial infection of the dermis and upper subcutaneous 
tissue (Fig. 28.21), although in practice it may be difficult 
to distinguish between them. These conditions are most 
Fig. 28.19  Staphylococcal carbuncle. 
Fig. 28.20  Acute cellulitis of the leg. Note the chronic lymphoedema 
and the haemorrhagic blistering. Blister fluid was positive for group G 
streptococci. 
Fig. 28.21  Erysipelas. Note the blistering and the crusted rash with 
raised, erythematous edge. The yellow discoloration is due to topical iodine 
treatment. 
Skin disease
28
1278
They are most common on the hands (Fig. 28.22) but can 
occur on the face, genitalia and limbs, and are often 
multiple. Plantar warts (verrucae) have a slightly pro-
truding rough surface and horny rim and are often 
painful on walking. Paring reveals capillary loops that 
distinguish plantar warts from corns.
Other varieties of wart include:
•	 mosaic warts: mosaic-like sheets of warts
•	 plane warts: smooth, flat-topped papules, usually on 
the face and backs of hands; they may be 
pigmented and therefore misdiagnosed
•	 facial warts: often filiform
•	 genital warts: may be papillomatous and exuberant.
Management
Most viral warts resolve spontaneously, although this 
may take years and active treatment is therefore often 
sought. However, asymptomatic warts generally should 
not be treated. Viral warts are particularly problematic 
and more recalcitrant to treatment in immunosup-
pressed patients following organ transplantation.
Treatments are destructive. Salicylic acid or salicylic/
lactic acid combinations and regular wart paring for 
several months is the first approach (Box 28.19). Cryo-
therapy is usually the next step and is repeated 
2–4-weekly. However, caution is required, particularly 
on the hands, as over-vigorous cryotherapy can lead 
to scarring, nail dystrophy and even tendon rupture. 
Periungual and subungual warts can be problematic, 
and nail cutting and electrodessication may help. Several 
other therapies have been used for recalcitrant warts, 
Necrotising soft tissue infections 
and anthrax
See pages 305 and 347, respectively.
Erythrasma
Erythrasma is a mild, chronic, localised, superficial skin 
infection caused by Corynebacterium minutissimum, 
which is part of the normal skin flora. Warmth and 
humidity predispose to this infection, which usually 
occurs in flexures and toe clefts. It is asymptomatic or 
mildly itchy and lesions are well defined, red/brown 
and scaly. C. minutissimum has characteristic coral-pink 
fluorescence under Wood’s light. Microscopy and 
culture of skin scrapings can confirm the diagnosis but 
are not usually needed if Wood’s light examination is 
positive. A topical azole (clotrimazole or miconazole) or 
fusidic acid is usually effective. Oral erythromycin can 
be used for extensive or resistant disease. Antiseptics 
can be used to prevent disease recurrence.
Pitted keratolysis
This is another superficial skin infection with Corynebac-
terium, producing characteristic circular erosions (‘pits’) 
on the soles. It is usually asymptomatic. The bacterium 
can be identified in skin scrapings and typically occurs 
in association with hyperhidrosis, which must be treated 
to prevent recurrence. Treatment is as for erythrasma.
Other skin infections
Syphilis and the non-venereal treponematoses are 
described on pages 419 and 332. Lyme disease is 
described on page 334.
Viral infections
Herpesvirus infections
The cutaneous manifestations of the human herpes­
viruses are described on page 325.
Papillomaviruses and viral warts
Viral warts are extremely common and are caused by 
the DNA human papillomavirus (HPV). There are over 
90 subtypes, based on DNA sequence analysis, causing 
different clinical presentations. Transmission is by direct 
virus contact, in living or shed skin, and is encouraged 
by trauma and moisture (e.g. swimming pools). Genital 
warts are spread by sexual activity and show a clear 
relationship with cervical and intra-epithelial cancers of 
the genital area. HPV-16 and 18 appear to inactivate 
tumour suppressor gene pathways and lead to squa-
mous cell carcinoma of the cervix or intra-epithelial car-
cinoma of the genital skin (p. 425). Vaccinations are now 
available against HPV-16 and 18 and are recommended 
for adolescent females before they become sexually 
active. The relationship between skin HPV and skin 
cancer is unclear. Individuals who are systemically 
immunosuppressed, e.g. after organ transplantation, 
have greatly increased risks of skin cancer and HPV 
infection, but a causal link is not certain.
Clinical features
Common warts are initially smooth, skin-coloured 
papules, which become hyperkeratotic and ‘warty’. 
Fig. 28.22  Viral wart on the finger. The capillary loops are evident 
within the warty hyperkeratosis. Periungual sites are common and more 
difficult to treat. 
‘Salicylic acid is the most consistently effective treatment. For 
certain types (such as filiform warts on the face), cryotherapy is 
generally the treatment of choice but, for common hand and foot 
warts, a salicylic acid wart paint should be used first.’
• Kwok CS, et al. Topical treatments for cutaneous warts. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, 2012, issue 9. Art. no.: CD001781.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
28.19  Treatment of viral skin warts
Common skin infections and infestations 
28
1279
required, unless there is secondary infection. Erythema 
multiforme (p. 1302) can be provoked by orf.
Other viral exanthems
See page 313.
Fungal infections
Fungal skin infections can be superficial (dermatophytes 
and yeasts) or, less commonly, deep (chromomycosis 
or sporotrichosis); the latter are more often seen in tropi-
cal climates or in the immunocompromised. Dermato-
phyte infections (ringworm) are extremely common 
and usually caused by fungi of the Microsporum, Tricho-
phyton and Epidermophyton species. The fungi can origi-
nate from soil (geophilic) or animals (zoophilic), or be 
confined to human skin (anthropophilic). Dermatophyte 
infections usually present with skin (tinea corporis), 
scalp (tinea capitis), groin (tinea cruris), foot (tinea 
pedis) and/or nail (onychomycosis) involvement 
(Fig. 28.24).
Tinea corporis
Tinea corporis should feature in the differential diagno-
sis of a red, scaly rash (p. 1257). Typically, lesions are 
erythematous, annular and scaly, with well-defined 
edge and central clearing. There may also be pustules at 
the active edge. Lesions are usually asymmetrical and 
may be single or multiple. The degree of inflammation 
is dependent on the organism involved and the host 
immune response. Microsporum canis (from dogs) and 
Trichophyton verrucosum (from cats) are common cul-
prits. Ill-advised use of topical steroids can modify the 
clinical presentation and increase disease extension 
(tinea incognito).
Tinea cruris
This is extremely common worldwide and is usually 
caused by Trichophyton rubrum. Itchy, erythematous 
plaques develop in the groins and extend on to the 
thighs, with a raised active edge (Fig. 28.24A).
Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot)
This is the most common fungal infection in the UK and 
USA, and is usually caused by anthropophilic fungi, 
such as T. rubrum, T. interdigitale and Epidermophyton 
including systemic retinoids, intralesional bleomycin or 
interferon injections, and contact sensitisation with, for 
example, diphencyprone. Imiquimod and PDT may also 
be beneficial, particularly for multiple warts in immuno-
suppressed patients.
Molluscum contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a DNA poxvirus 
skin infection. It is most common in children over the 
age of 1 year, particularly those with atopic dermatitis. 
It also frequently occurs in immunosuppressed patients, 
including those with HIV (p. 388). Lesions are dome-
shaped, ‘umbilicated’, skin-coloured papules with 
central punctum (Fig. 28.23). They are often multiple 
and found at sites of apposition, such as the side of the 
chest and the inner arm. Spontaneous resolution occurs 
but can take months. Prior to resolution, they often 
become inflamed and may leave small, atrophic scars. 
Destructive therapies may be painful and risk scarring, 
and the decision not to treat is often sensible. Gentle 
squeezing with forceps after bathing can hasten resolu-
tion. Topical salicylic acid, podophyllin, trichloroacetic 
acid, cryotherapy or curettage is an alternative. Efficacy 
with imiquimod has recently been reported.
Fig. 28.23  Molluscum contagiosum. Note the central umbilication. 
Fig. 28.24  Dermatophyte infections.
 A Trichophyton rubrum infection of the groin 
(tinea cruris).  B Microsporum canis infection 
of the scalp (tinea capitis). 
A
B
Orf
Orf is a parapoxvirus skin infection and is an occupa-
tional risk for those who work with sheep and goats. 
Inoculation of virus, usually into finger skin, causes sig-
nificant inflammation and necrosis, which typically 
resolves within 2–6 weeks. No specific treatment is 
Skin disease
28
1280
floccosum. It typically presents as an itchy rash between 
the toes, with peeling, fissuring and maceration. Involve-
ment of one sole or palm (tinea manuum) with 
fine scaling is characteristic of T. rubrum infection. 
Vesiculation or blistering is more often seen with T. 
mentagrophytes.
Tinea capitis
This is a dermatophyte infection of scalp hair shafts and 
is most common in children (Fig. 28.24B). It typically 
presents as an area of scalp inflammation and scaling, 
often with pustules and partial hair loss. Infection may 
be within the shaft (endothrix, e.g. T. tonsurans), causing 
patchy hair loss, with broken hairs at the surface (‘black 
dot’), little inflammation and no fluorescence with 
Wood’s light. Infection outside the hair shaft (ectothrix, 
e.g. Microsporum audouinii (anthropophilic)) shows 
minimal inflammation; M. canis (from dogs and cats) 
infections are more inflammatory and can be identified 
by green fluorescence with Wood’s light. Kerion is a 
boggy, inflammatory area of tinea capitis, usually caused 
by zoophilic fungi (e.g. cattle ringworm; T. verrucosum).
Onychomycosis
This is a fungal infection of the nail plate and the species 
involved are generally those that cause tinea capitis or 
tinea pedis. Onychomycosis usually presents with 
yellow/brown nail discoloration, crumbling, thickening 
and subungual hyperkeratosis. Usually, some nails are 
spared, there is asymmetry and toenails are more com-
monly involved.
Diagnosis and management
Skin scrapings, hair pluckings or nail clippings must 
be taken from areas of disease activity, typically the 
advancing lesion edge, in order to confirm the diagno-
sis by microscopy and culture (p. 1255). Topical anti­
fungals (e.g. terbinafine or miconazole) may suffice, 
although systemic treatment (terbinafine, griseofulvin or 
itraconazole) may be required for stubborn or extensive 
disease and scalp or nail involvement. In addition to 
systemic antifungals, a short course of systemic cortico­
steroid may be required for kerion to limit hair loss.
Candidiasis
This is a superficial skin or mucosal infection caused by 
a yeast-like fungus, Candida albicans (p. 381). Infections 
are usually not serious, unless the patient is immuno-
compromised, when deeper tissues can be involved 
(p. 389). The organism has a predilection for warm, 
moist environments and typical presentations are napkin 
candidiasis in babies, genital and perineal candidiasis, 
intertrigo and oral candidiasis. Diagnosis can be con-
firmed by microscopy and culture of skin swabs, and 
treatment is with topical or systemic antifungals, such 
as azoles.
Pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis versicolor is a persistent, superficial skin con-
dition caused by a common commensal yeast, Malassezia 
furfur. It occurs in men and women and in different 
races. It is found more frequently in warmer, humid 
climates, and is usually more severe and persistent in 
the immunocompromised. It is characterised by scaly, 
oval macules on the upper trunk, usually hypo­pigmented 
but occasionally hyperpigmented. Hypo­pigmentation is 
more obvious after sun exposure and tanning. The diag-
nosis can be confirmed by microscopy of skin scrapings, 
showing ‘spaghetti and meatballs’ hyphae. Treatment 
with selenium sulphide or ketoconazole shampoos, and 
topical or systemic azole antifungal agents is usually 
effective, although, because these yeasts are skin com-
mensals, recurrence is common and maintenance topical 
therapy may be required. Altered pigmentation can 
persist for months after treatment.
Scabies
Scabies is caused by the mite, Sarcoptes scabiei. It can lead 
to secondary infection, sometimes with complications, 
such as glomerulonephritis due to nephritogenic strep-
tococci. It spreads in households and environments 
where there is intimate personal contact. The diagnosis 
is made by identifying the scabietic burrow (p. 312 and 
Fig. 28.25) and visualising the mite (by extracting with 
a needle or using a dermatoscope). In small children, the 
palms and soles can be involved, with pustules. Pruritus 
is prominent. The clinical features include secondary 
eczematisation elsewhere on the body; the face and scalp 
are rarely affected, except in infants. Involvement of the 
genitals in males and of the nipples commonly occurs. 
Even after successful treatment, itch can continue and 
occasionally nodular lesions persist.
Topical treatment of the affected individual and all 
asymptomatic family members/physical contacts is 
required to ensure eradication. Two applications 1 week 
apart of an aqueous solution of permethrin or malathion 
Fig. 28.25  Scabies.  A Burrows evident on the palm of the hand.  B A 
mite still in its egg, seen on light microscopy of scrapings over a burrow. 
Note that the mite has only six legs, unlike adult mites, which have eight. 
A
B
Acne and rosacea
28
1281
(Fig. 28.26). Severity of acne is associated with sebum 
excretion rate, which increases at puberty. Both andro-
gens and progestogens increase sebum excretion and 
oestrogens reduce it, although the hormonal effects may 
also reflect end-organ sensitivity, as most patients have 
normal hormone profiles. There may be a positive family 
history; there is high concordance in monozygotic twins 
and it is likely that genetic factors are important in some 
families, but candidate genes have not been confirmed.
Clinical features
Acne usually affects the face and often the trunk. Greasi-
ness of the skin may be obvious (seborrhoea). The hall-
mark is the comedone: open comedones (blackheads) 
are dilated keratin-filled follicles, which appear as black 
papules due to the keratin debris; closed comedones 
(whiteheads) usually have no visible follicular opening 
and are caused by accumulation of sebum and keratin 
deeper in the pilosebaceous ducts. Inflammatory 
papules, nodules and cysts occur and may arise from 
comedones (Fig. 28.27). Scarring may follow deep-seated 
or superficial acne and may be keloidal.
There are distinct clinical variants:
•	 Acne conglobata: characterised by comedones, 
nodules, abscesses, sinuses and cysts, usually with 
to the whole body, excluding the head, are usually suc-
cessful. If there is poor compliance, immunosuppression 
or heavy infestation (crusted ‘Norwegian’ scabies), sys-
temic treatment with a single dose of ivermectin is some-
times appropriate.
Lice
Head lice
Infestation with the head louse, Pediculus humanus 
capitis, is common. It is highly contagious and spread by 
direct head-to-head contact. Scalp itch leads to scratch-
ing, secondary infection and cervical lymphadenopathy. 
The diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the living 
louse or nymph on the scalp or on a black sheet of paper 
after careful fine-toothed combing of wet hair following 
conditioner application. The empty egg cases (‘nits’) are 
easily seen on the hair shaft (p. 1250) and are hard to 
dislodge.
Treatment is recommended for the affected individ-
ual and any infected household/school contacts. Eradi-
cation in school populations is difficult because of poor 
compliance and treatment resistance. Malathion, per-
methrin or carbaryl, in lotion or aqueous formulations, 
should be applied twice at an interval of 7–10 days. 
Rotational treatments within a community may avoid 
resistance. Regular ‘wet-combing’ (physical removal of 
live lice by regular combing of conditioned wet hair) 
may be less effective than pharmacological treatments. 
Vaseline should be applied to eyelashes/brows twice 
daily for at least a fortnight.
Body lice
These are similar to head lice but live on clothing, par-
ticularly in seams, and feed on the skin. Poor hygiene 
and overcrowded conditions predispose. Itch, excoriation 
and secondary infection occur. Dry cleaning and high-
temperature washing or insecticide treatment of clothes 
are required.
Pubic (crab) lice
Usually, these are sexually acquired and very itchy. 
Malathion or carbaryl in an aqueous base is the treat-
ment of choice, applied on two occasions to the whole 
body, as body hair can also be infested. Contacts should 
also be treated.
ACNE AND ROSACEA
Acne vulgaris
Acne is chronic inflammation of the pilosebaceous units. 
The condition is extremely common; it generally starts 
after puberty and there are reports of it affecting over 
90% of adolescents. It is usually most severe in the late 
teenage years but can persist into the thirties and forties, 
particularly in females (Box 28.20).
Aetiology
The key components are increased sebum production; 
colonisation of pilosebaceous ducts by Propionibacterium 
acnes, which in turn causes inflammation; and hyper-
cornification and occlusion of pilosebaceous ducts 
• Epidemiology: acne vulgaris is most common between the 
ages of 12 and 20. It often begins around 10–13 years of 
age, lasts 5–10 years and usually resolves by age 20–25.
• Emotional effects: at all ages acne can have negative 
effects on self-esteem, but it is especially important to 
assess how it affects an adolescent. The consequences 
(whether acne is objectively severe or not) can be 
devastating, leading to embarrassment, school avoidance, 
life-long effects on ability to form friendships, attract 
partners, and acquire and keep employment.
• Treatment: effective treatments aim to improve the condition 
and prevent worsening (including later scarring), and to 
restore emotional well-being and self-esteem.
28.20  Acne in adolescence
Fig. 28.26  Pathogenesis of acne. 
Epidermis
Sebaceous
gland
Hair follicle
Rupture of
obstructed
sebaceous
gland, with
release of
contents into
dermis
Increased 
sebum
secretion rate
Bacterial colonisation
of duct and release of
inflammatory mediators
Occlusion of
pilosebaceous duct
Skin disease
28
1282
marked scarring. It is rare, usually affecting  
adult males, and most commonly occurs on  
trunk and upper limbs. It may be associated with 
hidradenitis suppurativa (a chronic, inflammatory 
disorder of apocrine glands, predominantly 
affecting axillae and groins), scalp folliculitis and 
pilonidal sinus.
•	 Acne fulminans: a rare but severe presentation 
of acne, associated with fever, arthralgias and 
systemic inflammation, with raised neutrophil  
count and plasma viscosity. It is usually found  
on the trunk in adolescent males. Costochondritis 
can occur.
•	 Acne excoriée: describes self-inflicted excoriations 
due to compulsive picking of pre-existing or 
imagined acne lesions. It usually affects teenage 
girls and underlying psychological problems are 
common.
•	 Secondary acne: comedonal acne can be caused by 
greasy cosmetics or occupational exposure to oils, 
tars or chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons. 
Predominantly pustular acne can occur in patients 
using systemic or topical corticosteroids, oral 
contraceptives, anticonvulsants, lithium or 
antineoplastic drugs, such as the epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, cetuximab. Most 
patients with acne do not have an underlying 
endocrine disorder. However, acne is a common 
feature of polycystic ovary syndrome (p. 764), 
which should be suspected if acne is moderate to 
severe and associated with hirsutism and menstrual 
irregularities. Virilisation should also raise suspicion 
of an androgen-secreting tumour.
Investigations
Investigations are not required in typical acne vulgaris. 
Secondary causes and suspected underlying endo­crine 
disease or virilisation should be investigated (p. 763).
Management
Mild to moderate disease
Mild disease is usually managed with topical therapy 
(p. 1264). If comedones predominate, then topical 
benzoyl peroxide or retinoids should be used. Treatment 
should initially be applied at low concentrations for 
short duration and increased as tolerated. Azelaic acid 
may also be useful for mild acne. Patients with mild 
inflammatory acne should respond to topical antibiotics, 
such as erythromycin or clindamycin, which can be used 
in combination with other treatments.
For moderate inflammatory acne, a systemic tetra­
cycline, such as oxytetracycline or lymecycline, should 
be used at adequate dose for 3–6 months in the first 
instance (p. 1267; Fig. 28.27B). If the case fails to respond, 
then alternatives include erythromycin or trimethoprim.
Oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives or a com-
bined oestrogen/anti-androgen (such as cyproterone 
acetate) contraceptive may provide additional benefit in 
women. Patients should be referred for consideration of 
isotretinoin (13 cis-retinoic acid) if there is a failure to 
respond adequately to 6 months of therapy with these 
combined systemic and topical approaches (p. 1267).
Moderate to severe disease
Isotretinoin has revolutionised the treatment of moder-
ate to severe acne that has not responded adequately to 
other therapies. It has a multifactorial mechanism of 
action, with reduction in sebum excretion by over 90%, 
follicular hypercornification and P. acnes colonisation. A 
typical course lasts for 4 months. Sebum excretion 
usually returns to baseline over the space of a year 
after treatment is stopped, although clinical benefit is 
usually longer-lasting. Many patients will not require 
further treatment, although a second or third course of 
isotretinoin may be required. A low-dose continuous or 
intermittent-dose regimen may be considered for a 
longer duration, in patients who relapse after a higher-
dose regimen. Combination with systemic steroid may 
be required in the short term for severe acne, in order to 
minimise the risk of disease flare early in the treatment 
course. Thorough screening and monitoring are required, 
given the side-effect profile of isotretinoin (p. 1267).
Other treatments and physical measures
Intralesional injections of triamcinolone acetonide may 
be required for inflamed acne nodules or cysts, which 
can also be incised and drained, or excised under local 
anaesthetic. Scarring may be prevented by adequate 
treatment of active acne. Keloid scars may respond to 
intralesional steroid and/or silicone dressings. Carbon 
dioxide laser, microdermabrasion, chemical peeling or 
localised excision can also be considered for scarring. 
UVB phototherapy or PDT can occasionally be used in 
patients with inflammatory acne who are unable to use 
conventional therapy, such as isotretinoin. There is no 
convincing evidence to support a causal association 
between diet and acne. The psychological impact of acne 
must not be underestimated and should be considered 
in management decisions (see Box 28.20).
Fig. 28.27  Cystic acne in a teenager.  A Before treatment.  B After 
prolonged systemic antibiotic treatment. 
A
B
Eczemas
28
1283
ECZEMAS
The terms ‘eczema’ and ‘dermatitis’ are synonymous. 
Eczema can be acute or chronic and there are several 
causes. Acutely, epidermal oedema (spongiosis) and 
intra-epidermal vesiculation (producing multilocular 
blisters) predominate, whereas with chronicity there is 
more epidermal thickening (acanthosis). Vasodilatation 
and T-cell lymphocytic infiltration of the upper dermis 
also occur.
Clinical features
There are several patterns of eczema (Box 28.21) and 
environmental causes may be identifiable. The clinical 
features are similar, irrespective of the cause (Box 28.22).
Atopic eczema
Generalised, prolonged hypersensitivity to common 
environmental antigens, such as pollen and house dust 
mite, is the hallmark of atopy, in which there is a genetic 
predisposition to produce excess IgE. Atopic individuals 
manifest one or more of a group of diseases that includes 
asthma, hay fever, food and other allergies, and atopic 
eczema. There are strong familial associations with 
atopic diseases. The diagnosis of atopic eczema is made 
using clinical criteria (Box 28.23). Its prevalence has 
increased 2–5-fold since the early 1980s, and the disease 
now affects 1 in 10 schoolchildren.
Aetiology
Genetic factors are important. Epidermal barrier impair-
ment is a major, and perhaps primary, factor in this form 
of eczema. Mutations in the filaggrin gene have been 
identified as important in some. Environmental factors, 
such as exposure to allergens in utero or during child-
hood, may also have an aetiological role and 60–80% of 
Rosacea
This chronic inflammatory condition affects the central 
face and consists of flushing, erythema, papules, pus-
tules and telangiectasiae. The cause is unknown. Rosacea 
is distinct from acne vulgaris; sebum excretion is normal 
and comedones are absent. The relative contribution of 
Demodex mite and cutaneous vasomotor instability to the 
pathogenesis of rosacea remains poorly defined.
Clinical features and diagnosis
Rosacea most commonly affects fair-skinned, middle-
aged females and can be exacerbated by heat, sunlight 
and alcohol. The convexities of nose, forehead, cheeks 
and chin are typically involved (Fig. 28.28). The condi-
tion is heterogeneous and, in some, intermittent flush-
ing, followed by fixed erythema and telangiectasiae, 
predominate; in others, papules and pustules are pro­
minent. Sebaceous gland hyperplasia and soft tissue 
overgrowth of the nose (rhinophyma) can occur, par-
ticularly in males. Conjunctivitis and blepharitis may 
also occur. Facial lymphoedema can be an added com-
plication. Usually, no investigations are required and 
the diagnosis is obvious clinically. However, it must be 
distinguished from acne vulgaris, systemic lupus ery-
thematosus, photosensitivity disorders and seborrhoeic 
dermatitis (the latter may coexist with rosacea).
Management
Mild disease may respond to topical antimicrobials, 
such as metronidazole or azelaic acid. Tetracycline or 
erythromycin for 3–6 months is usually effective in 
inflammatory pustular disease resistant to topical 
therapy (p. 1264). Relapse may require intermittent or 
chronic antibiotic use. Erythema and telangiectasiae do 
not respond well to antibiotics but laser therapy can be 
effective. Systemic isotretinoin may be helpful in severe 
resistant disease and rhinophyma may need laser 
therapy or surgery.
Fig. 28.28  Rosacea. Typical erythematous papulopustular rosacea 
affecting the mid-face. 
Endogenous
• Atopic, seborrhoeic
Exogenous
• Irritant, allergic, photoallergic, chronic actinic dermatitis
Characteristic patterns and morphology
• Asteatotic, discoid, gravitational, lichen simplex, pompholyx
28.21  Classification of eczema
Acute
• Erythema, oedema, usually typically ill-defined
• Papules, vesicles and occasionally bullae
• Exudation, fissuring
• Scaling
Chronic
• May be as above but less oedema, vesiculation and exudate
• Lichenification: skin thickening with pronounced skin 
markings, secondary to chronic rubbing and scratching
• Fissures, excoriations
• Dyspigmentation: hyper- and hypopigmentation can occur
28.22  The clinical morphology of eczema
Skin disease
28
1284
Seborrhoeic eczema
This is an erythematous scaly rash affecting the scalp 
(dandruff), central face, nasolabial folds, eyebrows, 
central chest and upper back. It is associated with, and 
may be due to, overgrowth of Pityrosporum yeasts. When 
severe, it may resemble psoriasis. Severe or recalcitrant 
seborrhoeic eczema can be a marker of immunodefi-
ciency, including HIV infection (p. 397).
Discoid eczema
This is common and characteristically consists of dis-
crete coin-shaped eczematous lesions, which are often 
impetiginised and most commonly occur on the limbs 
of men. It is an eczema type that can be due to any 
chronic itchy condition, whether primarily of skin (e.g. 
atopic eczema) or another system (e.g. renal failure).
Irritant eczema
Detergents, alkalis, acids, solvents and abrasives are 
common irritants. Strong irritants have acute effects, 
whereas weaker irritants commonly cause chronic 
eczema, especially of the hands, after prolonged expo-
sure. Individual susceptibility varies and the elderly, 
atopic and fair-skinned are predisposed. Irritant eczema 
accounts for most occupational cases of eczema and is a 
significant cause of time off work.
Allergic contact eczema
This occurs due to a delayed hypersensitivity reaction 
following contact with antigens or haptens. Previous 
allergen exposure is required for sensitisation and the 
reaction is specific to the allergen or closely related 
chemicals. Common allergens are listed in Box 28.26.
Allergy persists indefinitely and eczema occurs at 
sites of allergen contact and can secondarily spread 
individuals are genetically susceptible to the induction 
of IgE-mediated sensitisation to environmental allergens 
such as food and animal hair. Decreased skin barrier 
function may also allow greater penetration of allergens 
through the epidermis, and thus cause immune stimula-
tion and subsequent inflammation.
Clinical features
Atopic eczema is extremely itchy and scratching accounts 
for many of the signs (Fig. 28.29). Widespread cutaneous 
dryness (roughness) is another feature. The distribution 
and character of the rash vary with age (Box 28.24). 
Complications are listed in Box 28.25.
Fig. 28.29  Atopic eczema.  A This patient had life-long chronic atopic 
eczema and experienced a generalised flare of disease triggered by 
infection.  B Lichenification of chronic flexural eczema secondary to 
rubbing and scratching. 
B
A
Babies and infants
• Often acute and facial involvement prominent
• Trunk involved but nappy area usually spared
Children
• Flexures: behind knees, antecubital fossae, wrists and ankles
Adults
• Face and trunk usually involved, limb involvement not 
restricted to flexures
• Lichenification common
28.24  Atopic eczema: distribution and character 
of rash
Secondary infection
Bacterial
• Staph. aureus most common
Viral
• Herpes simplex virus can cause a widespread severe 
eruption – eczema herpeticum
• Papillomavirus and molluscum contagiosum are more 
common in atopic eczema, especially if treated with topical 
corticosteroids
Increased susceptibility to irritants
• Defective barrier function
Increased susceptibility to allergy
• Food allergy – mainly relevant in infants. Eggs, cow’s milk, 
protein, fish, wheat and soya may cause an immediate 
urticarial eruption rather than exacerbation of eczema
• Increased risk of sensitisation to type IV allergens because of 
impaired barrier function
Impact on life and health
• Poor sleep, loss of schooling, behavioural difficulties, failure 
to thrive in children
• Impact on sleep, work, relationships, hobbies, psychology 
and quality of life in adults
28.25  Complications of atopic eczema
Pruritus and at least three of the following are required:
• History of itch in skin creases (or cheeks if < 4 yrs)
• History of asthma/hay fever (or in a first-degree relative if  
< 4 yrs)
• Dry skin (xeroderma)
• Visible flexural eczema (cheeks, forehead, outer limbs if  
< 4 yrs)
• Onset in first 2 yrs of life
28.23  Diagnostic criteria for atopic eczema
Eczemas
28
1285
beyond this. There are many recognisable patterns, e.g. 
eczema of the earlobes, wrists and umbilicus due to 
contact with nickel in earrings, watches and jeans studs, 
or eczema of the hands and wrists due to rubber gloves. 
Oedema may also be a feature (Fig. 28.30).
Asteatotic eczema
This occurs in dry skin and is common in the elderly. 
Low humidity caused by central heating, over-washing, 
diuretics and cholesterol-lowering drugs predispose. 
The most common site is the lower legs and a ‘crazy 
paving’ pattern of fine fissuring on an erythematous 
background is seen.
Gravitational (stasis) eczema
This occurs on the lower legs and is often associated 
with signs of venous insufficiency: oedema, loss of hair, 
induration, lipodermatosclerosis and ulceration.
Fig. 28.30  Allergic contact eczema. This was caused by the 
application of an antihistamine cream. The acute eczematous reaction and 
bilateral periorbital oedema are typical. 
Allergen
Source
Nickel
Jewellery, jean studs, bra clips, 
watches
Dichromate
Cement, leather, matches
Rubber chemicals
Clothing, shoes, rubber gloves, tyres
Colophony
Sticking plaster, collodion, nail 
varnish
Paraphenylenediamine
Hair dye, clothing, tattoos
Balsam of Peru
Perfumes, citrus fruits, shower/bath 
products
Neomycin, benzocaine
Topical medications
Parabens
Preservative in cosmetics and 
creams
Wool alcohols
Lanolin, cosmetics, creams
Epoxy resin
Resin adhesives, glues
28.26  Common type IV delayed hypersensitivity 
allergens
Lichen simplex
Lichenification of eczema occurs secondary to chronic 
rubbing and scratching, and lichen simplex is a localised 
form. Common sites include the neck, lower legs and the 
anogenital region.
Pompholyx
Intensely itchy vesicles and bullae occur on the palms, 
palmar surface and sides of the fingers and soles. Pom-
pholyx may have several causes, which include atopic 
eczema, irritant and contact allergic dermatitis and 
fungal infection.
Investigation of eczema
Patch tests are performed if contact allergic dermatitis is 
suspected (see Box 28.26). IgE and specific IgE tests are 
not routinely undertaken in atopic eczema and, simi-
larly, prick tests are not usually helpful. Bacterial and 
viral swabs for microscopy and culture are useful in 
suspected secondary infection. Individuals with atopic 
eczema have an increased susceptibility to herpes 
simplex virus (HSV), and are at risk of developing a 
widespread infection, eczema herpeticum. The presence 
of small, punched-out lesions on a background of wors-
ening eczema suggests the possibility of secondary HSV 
infection. Skin scrapings to rule out secondary fungal 
infection should be considered. Skin biopsy is not 
usually required unless there is diagnostic doubt, e.g. of 
a drug adverse effect or cutaneous lymphoma.
General management of eczema
Regular use of emollients (e.g. emulsifying ointment) is 
the mainstay treatment in all eczema types, as they limit 
water loss and help reduce the amount of topical corti-
costeroid used. Emollients are used as bath additives 
and soap substitutes, and directly on to the skin, and are 
often combined with antiseptics. Sedative antihista-
mines are useful if sleep is interrupted, but non-sedating 
antihistamines are ineffective (Box 28.27).
Topical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroid ointments are preferred for 
chronic eczema, whereas cream or lotion-based treat-
ment may be more appropriate for acute eczema. Treat-
ment is once to twice daily (p. 1264). Hydrocortisone 
(1%) or clobetasone butyrate is generally used on the 
face, with potent or very potent corticosteroid use 
restricted to trunk and limbs. It is preferable to use a 
more potent intensive regime initially and taper accord-
ing to response. As a rough guide, 200 g of a mildly 
‘There is currently no high-level evidence to support or refute 
the efficacy or safety of oral H1 antihistamines used as 
monotherapy for eczema. As for various causes of itch not 
mediated primarily by histamine in the skin, however, sedative 
(but not non-sedating) antihistamines may offer symptomatic 
relief.’
Apfelbacher CJ, et al. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2013, issue 2. 
Art. no.: CD007770.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
28.27  Antihistamines and itch in atopic eczema
Skin disease
28
1286
of Caucasians and is less common in Asian, South Amer-
ican and African populations. It occurs equally in both 
sexes and at any age; although it is uncommon under 
the age of 5 years, more than 50% present before the age 
of 30 years. The age of onset follows a bimodal distribu-
tion, with an early-onset type in the teenage or early 
adult years, often with a family history of psoriasis and 
more severe disease course. The later-onset type is typi-
cally seen between 50 and 60 years, usually without a 
family history and a less severe disease course.
Aetiology and pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of psoriasis is multifactorial and 
genetic and environmental factors are important. The 
genetic component is complex and polygenic. Twin 
studies indicate concordance rates of 60–75% and 
15–20% for psoriasis arising in monozygotic and dizyg­
otic twins, respectively, with similarities in age of onset, 
nature and severity of disease in familial cases. If one 
parent has psoriasis, the chance of a child being affected 
is about 15–20%; if both parents have the disease, this 
rises to 50% and the risk is increased further if a sibling 
has the disease. Advances in molecular biology have 
facilitated the identification of several genes with signifi-
cant linkage to psoriasis. The most replicated gene is 
PSORS1, located within the major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) on chromosome 6 (human leucocyte 
antigen (HLA) Cw6) and encoding an epidermal protein, 
corneodesmosin. It is thought that this gene accounts for 
almost half of the heritability of psoriasis.
There are several environmental triggers for psoriasis 
becoming manifest in a genetically predisposed subject 
(Box 28.28). Although the theory is controversial, stress 
potent, 50 g of a moderately potent or 30 g of a potent 
cortico­steroid per week would be appropriate (see Box 
28.11). Very potent topical corticosteroids should not be 
used long-term. The side-effects of topical corticosteroid 
therapy need to be considered when patients are using 
them for a long period of time, although ‘steroid phobia’ 
and under-treatment of eczema are often more of a 
problem. Particular care should be taken on certain sites, 
such as the face and flexures, and in children and the 
elderly (see Box 28.2 and Fig. 28.8, p. 1265). The least 
potent corticosteroid that is effective should be used for 
the shortest possible time. The topical calcineurin inhibi-
tors, tacrolimus and pimecrolimus, may be useful 
steroid-sparing agents, particularly on the face.
Atopic eczema
The impact of atopic eczema on the quality of life of the 
patient and parents must not be under-estimated. Infor-
mation and ongoing support from health-care systems 
and patient support groups, such as the National Eczema 
Society in the UK, are essential. Mainstays of treatment 
are emollients and topical steroids, and tar and ichtham-
mol paste bandages may be required. Secondary infec-
tion should be treated. Identification and avoidance of 
allergens are important. Phototherapy, usually with 
narrowband UVB, is generally the next step, if topical 
therapies are insufficient. PUVA or UVA1 is sometimes 
used. Topical calcineurin inhibitors may be applied, 
and systemic immunosuppression with intermittent 
ciclosporin, oral corticosteroids, azathioprine or meth-
otrexate may be needed.
Seborrhoeic eczema
Topical azoles, such as ketoconazole shampoo and 
cream, often combined with mild corticosteroid, are 
mainstays. Treatment often needs to be repeated.
Irritant eczema
Irritant avoidance, including protective clothing (e.g. 
gloves), is essential. Emollients and topical corticoster-
oids are indicated.
Contact allergic eczema
Allergen avoidance is key and may involve a change of 
occupation or hobbies. Treatment with emollients and 
topical corticosteroids helps.
Gravitational eczema
Topical corticosteroids should be applied to eczematous 
areas but not ulcers. There is a high risk of sensitisation 
to topical preservatives (e.g. chlorocresol), antibiotics 
(e.g. neomycin) and bandages (e.g. rubber additives). 
Oedema and ulceration are treated by leg elevation and 
compression bandages (p. 1263).
PSORIASIS AND OTHER 
ERYTHEMATOUS SCALY ERUPTIONS
Psoriasis
Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory, hyperproliferative 
skin disease. It is characterised by well-defined, ery-
thematous scaly plaques, particularly affecting extensor 
surfaces and scalp, and usually follows a relapsing and 
remitting course. Psoriasis affects approximately 1.5–3% 
Trauma
• Psoriatic lesions can appear at sites of skin trauma, such as 
scratches or surgical wounds (Köbner isomorphic 
phenomenon)
Infection
• β-haemolytic streptococcal throat infections often precede 
guttate psoriasis (see Fig. 28.32B)
• Severe psoriasis may be the initial presentation of HIV 
infection
Sunlight
• A minority of patients experience exacerbation of psoriasis 
after sun exposure, mainly due to Köbnerisation at sites of 
sunburn or polymorphic light eruption
Drugs
• Antimalarials, β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers), 
lithium, NSAIDs and anti-TNF-α drugs, such as infliximab, 
are examples of drugs that can exacerbate psoriasis
• ‘Rebound’ flare of psoriasis may occur after withdrawal of 
systemic corticosteroids or potent topical corticosteroids. 
Rebound psoriasis is often unstable and may be pustular
Psychological factors
• Anxiety and stress may exacerbate psoriasis in predisposed 
individuals
(NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; TNF-α = tumour necrosis 
factor alpha)
28.28  Exacerbating factors in psoriasis
Psoriasis and other erythematous scaly eruptions
28
1287
been confirmed and may, in fact, be secondary to inflam-
mation or vascular changes.
Disordered cell proliferation is reflected by an 
increase in the mitotic index and in keratinocyte and 
T-lymphocyte apoptosis in psoriatic plaques. The tran­
sit time for keratinocyte migration, from basal layer 
to shedding from stratum corneum, is shortened from 
approximately 28 to 5 days, so that immature cells reach 
the stratum corneum prematurely. Proliferation rate is 
also less markedly increased in non-lesional skin. Simi-
larly, even the clinically unaffected nails of patients with 
psoriasis grow more quickly than those of controls.
Interestingly, the HLA association, efficacy of 
immunosuppressants and development of psoriasis in 
haematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients from 
donors with psoriasis support an immune pathogenesis, 
but the mechanisms and sequence of events are unclear.
Clinical features
Psoriasis has several different presentations (Fig. 28.32).
may exacerbate psoriasis in susceptible individuals and 
psoriasis is itself a cause of psychological stress. Like-
wise, there is a higher incidence of smoking and heavy 
alcohol consumption in patients with psoriasis but it is 
unclear whether this is cause or effect.
The histological changes of psoriasis are shown in 
Figure 28.31. The main features are:
•	 keratinocyte hyperproliferation and abnormal 
differentiation, leading to retention of nuclei in the 
stratum corneum
•	 inflammation, with a T-cell lymphocytic infiltrate 
and release of cytokines and adhesion molecules, 
such as interleukins, TNF-α and intercellular 
adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1
•	 vascular changes, with tortuosity of dermal 
capillary loop vessels and release of mediators,  
such as vascular endothelial growth factor  
(VEGF).
The initiating event is unknown; whilst hyperprolif-
eration was considered the primary step, this has not 
Fig. 28.31  The histology of psoriasis. 
Normal
Psoriasis
Upper dermal
T-lymphocyte infiltrate
Irregular thickening
of epidermis
Dilated and tortuous
capillary loops
Micro-abscess
Supra-papillary
plate thinning
Hyperkeratosis
Parakeratosis
Keratin
layer
Epidermis
Dermis
Fig. 28.32  Psoriasis.  A Chronic 
plaque psoriasis, most prominent on 
extensor surfaces.  B Nail involvement, 
with coarse pitting and separation from  
the nail plate (onycholysis). C Guttate 
psoriasis following a streptococcal throat 
infection.  D Erythrodermic psoriasis. 
A
C
D
B
Skin disease
28
1288
Arthropathy
Between 5% and 10% of individuals with psoriasis 
develop an inflammatory arthropathy, which can take 
on a number of patterns (pp. 1250 and 1109).
Assessment and investigations
Biopsy is not required in typical cases but may be 
performed if there is diagnostic doubt. An infection 
screen, particularly throat swab for streptococcus, may 
be informative in guttate psoriasis. Assessment of impact 
on life (e.g. using the Dermatology Life Quality Index, 
or DLQI) and psoriasis severity (e.g. using the Psoriasis 
Area and Severity Index, or PASI) (p. 1251) is essential. 
Rheumatology assessment should be performed if 
the patient has joint symptoms or signs. Due to the 
association of psoriasis with insulin resistance, cardio-
vascular risk factors should be assessed (p. 805). HIV 
testing should be considered in severe or recalcitrant 
psoriasis.
Management
Patient counselling about diagnosis and management is 
paramount. Psoriasis can have a major impact on all 
aspects of life (work, school, leisure, personal relation-
ships and self-esteem) and this must not be under-
estimated. Reassurance is also needed, as the condition 
is generally not life-threatening. Advice regarding 
reduction in risk factors for cardiovascular disease 
should be given (smoking cessation, reduction of alcohol 
intake, adequate exercise and a normal body mass 
index). Patients need to be involved in their own man-
agement, as the disease is usually chronic and the 
benefit/risk profile of treatments needs to be discussed 
and tailored to individuals. The end-point for treatment 
also needs to be discussed because complete disease 
clearance may not be practical or appropriate and 
patients vary considerably in their treatment require-
ments. Extent of disease and impact on quality of life 
must be taken into account. Patient compliance with 
topical and systemic therapies is essential and depend-
ent on the treatment practicalities.
The treatment approach generally follows a stepwise 
progression, as summarised in Box 28.29. Treatment cat-
egories are outlined in Box 28.30. If topical treatment is 
insufficient, then UVB phototherapy or PUVA should 
usually be the next step. If the patient continues to have 
active disease or early recurrence, then the addition of 
systemic retinoid (usually acitretin) or use of immuno-
suppressants, such as methotrexate as first choice, then 
Plaque psoriasis
This is the most common presentation and usually rep-
resents more stable disease. The typical lesion is a raised, 
well-demarcated erythematous plaque of variable size 
(Fig. 28.32A). In untreated disease, silver/white scale is 
evident and more obvious on scraping the surface. The 
most common sites are the extensor surfaces, notably 
elbows and knees, and the lower back. Others include:
•	 Scalp: involvement is seen in approximately 60% of 
patients. Typically, easily palpable, erythematous 
scaly plaques are evident within hair-bearing scalp 
and there is clear demarcation at or beyond the hair 
margin. Occipital involvement is common and 
difficult to treat. Less often, fine diffuse scaling may 
be present and difficult to distinguish from 
seborrhoeic dermatitis. Involvement of other 
‘seborrhoeic sites’, such as eyebrows, nasolabial 
folds and the pre-sternal area, is not uncommon 
and again may be confused with seborrhoeic 
dermatitis. Temporary hair loss can occur but 
permanent loss is unusual.
•	 Nails: involvement is common, with ‘thimble 
pitting’, onycholysis (separation of the nail from the 
nail bed, Fig. 28.32B), subungual hyperkeratosis and 
periungual involvement (p. 1250).
•	 Flexures: psoriasis of the natal cleft and submammary 
and axillary folds is usually symmetrical, 
erythematous and smooth, without scale.
•	 Palms: psoriasis of the palms can be difficult to 
distinguish from eczema.
Guttate psoriasis
This is most common in children and adolescents and is 
often the initial presentation (Fig. 28.32C). It is com-
monly associated with HLA Cw6. It may present shortly 
after a streptococcal throat infection and rapidly evolves. 
Individual lesions are droplet-shaped, small (usually 
less than 1 cm in diameter), erythematous, scaly and 
numerous. An episode of guttate psoriasis may clear 
spontaneously or with topical treatment within a few 
months, but UVB phototherapy is often required and is 
highly effective. Guttate psoriasis often heralds the onset 
of plaque psoriasis in adulthood.
Erythrodermic psoriasis
Generalised erythrodermic psoriasis is a medical emer-
gency (Fig. 28.32D).
Pustular psoriasis
Pustular psoriasis may be generalised or localised. Gen-
eralised pustular psoriasis is uncommon, unstable and 
life-threatening. It will often emerge in the context of 
plaque disease and the onset is usually sudden, with 
large numbers of small sterile pustules on an erythema-
tous background, often merging into sheets, with waves 
of new pustules in subsequent days. The patient is usually 
febrile and systemically unwell, and this must be dealt 
with as a medical emergency (p. 1264). Localised pustular 
psoriasis of the palms and soles (palmoplantar pustulo-
sis) is more common, chronic and closely associated with 
smoking; small, sterile pustules and erythema develop 
and resolve with pigmentation and scaling (p. 1250). A 
localised form of sterile pustulosis of a few digits (acro-
pustulosis) can also occur. It is unclear whether these 
localised forms of pustulosis are truly psoriatic.
• ‘Access to appropriate information and services must be 
facilitated for patients with psoriasis.
• Disease severity and impact must be assessed.
• Associated arthritis must be assessed and managed.
• Comorbidities, such as cardiovascular risk, must be 
addressed.
• Topical therapies are first-line, followed by second- and 
third-line treatments (see below).
• Topical corticosteroids must be used safely.’
For further information: 
 www.nice.org.uk
 
 www.sign.ac.uk
28.29  Assessment and management of psoriasis
Lichen planus and lichenoid eruptions 
28
1289
cause an erythematous papulosquamous rash and must 
be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Pityriasis lichenoides chronica
This is rare but typically presents within the first three 
decades of life. The aetiology is unclear but the condition 
is part of a spectrum and remits spontaneously. The 
more acute variety (pityriasis lichenoides et varioli­
formis acuta, PLEVA) presents as crops of papules that 
rapidly evolve with central necrosis, each attack lasting 
up to 3 months. The more chronic variety presents as a 
persistent, widespread, scaly eruption. Characteristi-
cally, lesions are brown papules with a mica-like scale 
(‘cornflake’). The condition fluctuates but can persist for 
months or years. Emollients, topical steroids and long-
term oral erythromycin can occasionally be helpful. UVB 
phototherapy or PUVA is usually effective, although 
recurrences are high.
Drug eruptions
It is essential to consider a drug cause in anyone present-
ing with an erythematous maculopapular or papulo­
squamous eruption, and a careful drug history is critical 
(p. 1303). Exfoliation (‘peeling’) and post-inflammatory 
hyper- or, less commonly, hypopigmentation, can occur.
LICHEN PLANUS AND  
LICHENOID ERUPTIONS
Lichen planus
Lichen planus occurs worldwide; it typically presents as 
a pruritic rash and the mucosae, hair and nails may be 
involved.
Aetiology and pathology
The cause is unknown; a viral trigger was considered 
but has not been substantiated. An autoimmune patho-
genesis is suspected, as there is an association with 
inflammatory bowel disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, 
autoimmune hepatitis, hepatitis B and C, alopecia areata, 
myasthenia gravis (p. 1226) and thymoma, and there are 
similarities with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD, 
p. 1017). An immune reaction to unknown antigen is 
plausible. Lichen planus can occasionally occur in fami-
lies and possible HLA associations have been proposed, 
although there is no clear inheritance pattern. There 
are characteristic histological changes, with hyper­
keratosis, basal cell degeneration and a heavy, band- 
like T-lymphocyte infiltrate in the papillary dermis, 
with affinity for the epidermis (epidermotropism). 
The dermo-epidermal junction has a ‘sawtooth’ 
appearance.
Clinical features
Lichen planus occurs in both sexes and at any age, 
although usually between 30 and 60 years. It generally 
presents on the distal limbs, most commonly on the 
flexural aspects of the wrists and forearms (Fig. 28.33), 
and on the lower back. It is intensely itchy and lesions 
are violaceous, shiny, flat-topped, polygonal papules, 
with a characteristic fine lacy, white network on the 
surface (Wickham’s striae). New lesions may appear at 
sites of skin trauma (Köbner phenomenon) and the 
ciclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil or hydroxycar-
bamide, may be considered. In severe, unresponsive 
disease, fumaric acid esters or biological therapies, such 
as TNF-α, interleukin (IL)-12 or IL-23 antagonists, may 
be required (p. 1102).
Individualised management is essential. For example, 
a patient with localised plaque psoriasis on elbows, 
knees and sacrum should respond to topical treatment 
only, whereas a patient with guttate psoriasis is likely to 
need phototherapy as a first-line approach because of 
difficulties in topical drug application in extensive 
disease. A patient with extensive chronic plaque psoria-
sis and significant arthropathy would be better suited to 
a systemic drug, such as methotrexate, than photo­
therapy, which would be unlikely to improve joint 
symptoms.
Pityriasis rosea
This is an acute, self-limiting exanthem that particularly 
affects young adults and occurs worldwide, with a slight 
female predominance. It usually occurs in spring and 
summer, although no infective agent has been identified 
and its aetiology is unknown.
Clinical features and management
Pityriasis rosea is characterised by the appearance of a 
‘herald patch’, an oval lesion (1–2 cm) with a central 
pinkish (salmon-coloured) centre, a darker periphery 
and a characteristic collarette of scale. It is followed 
1–2 weeks later by a widespread papulosquamous erup-
tion, which is typically arranged in a symmetrical 
‘Christmas tree’ pattern on the trunk. Individual lesions 
also have a collarette of scale. An inverse variant with 
flexural involvement can occur. Mucosal involvement is 
rare. There is a small risk of recurrence. Symptomatic 
relief can be achieved with emollients and mild topical 
steroids. Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation can 
supervene, particularly in darker skin types.
Other causes of an erythematous 
papulosquamous rash
Secondary syphilis (p. 419), pityriasis versicolor (p. 1280) 
and fungal infection with Tinea corporis (p. 1279) can all 
Topical agents
• Emollients, tars, dithranol, vitamin D agonists, retinoids, 
corticosteroids
Photo(chemo)therapies
• UVB, PUVA, (excimer laser)
Systemic agents
• Retinoids
• Immunosuppressants, e.g. methotrexate, ciclosporin, 
mycophenolate, hydroxycarbamide
• Immunomodulators, e.g. fumaric acid esters
• Biological immunosuppressants, e.g. infliximab, etanercept, 
adalimumab
Intensive inpatient or day-patient care
• Topical agents and photo(chemo)therapies under medical 
supervision
28.30  Treatment categories in psoriasis
Skin disease
28
1290
Lichenoid eruptions
Drug-induced lichenoid reactions that are clinically and 
histologically difficult to distinguish from idiopathic 
lichen planus are important to identify. The culprits are 
gold, quinine, proton pump inhibitors, sulphonamides, 
penicillamine, antimalarials, antituberculous drugs, 
thiazide diuretics, β-blockers, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, NSAIDs, sulphonylureas, 
lithium and dyes in colour developers (Box 28.44, 
p. 1304).
Graft-versus-host disease
In the acute stage of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD, 
p. 1017), there is a distinctive dermatitis associated with 
hepatitis. After about 3 months, chronic GVHD can 
present with a lichenoid eruption on the palms, soles, 
face and upper trunk. Progressive sclerodermatous 
skin thickening may lead to contractures and limited 
mobility.
URTICARIA
Urticaria (‘hives’) is caused by localised dermal oedema 
secondary to a temporary increase in capillary permea-
bility. If oedema involves subcutaneous or submucosal 
layers, the term angioedema is used. Acute urticaria 
may be associated with angioedema of the lips, face, 
tongue, throat and, rarely, wheezing, abdominal pain, 
headaches and even anaphylaxis (p. 91).
Urticaria present for less than 6 weeks is considered 
to be acute, and chronic if it continues for more than 
6 weeks. Individual weals last for less than 24 hours; if 
they persist, urticarial vasculitis needs to be considered. 
Clarification of duration can be achieved by drawing 
around the weal and re-assessing 24 hours later.
History-taking should probe for possible causes (Box 
28.31). Physical triggers can also be assessed in challenge 
testing, such as eliciting dermographism or pressure 
testing. Enquiry about family history is important in 
angioedema. Examination may be unremarkable or 
weals may be evident (Fig. 28.34).
Mast cell degranulation and release of histamine 
and other vasoactive mediators is the basis of urticaria 
(Fig. 28.35). Chronic spontaneous urticaria (previously 
called ‘chronic idiopathic’ or ‘chronic ordinary’ 
rash may become generalised. Individual lesions may 
last for many months and can become hypertrophic 
and modified by scratching, particularly on the lower 
legs. The eruption usually remits over months, but can 
become chronic, particularly with hypertrophic disease. 
Post-inflammatory pigmentary change is common, 
particularly in darker skin types. Mucous membrane 
involvement occurs in 30–70% of patients, usually as a 
network of white, lacy striae on the buccal mucosae 
(p. 1250) and tongue. These oral changes are often 
asymptomatic and should be sought on examination. 
Genital and other mucosal surfaces can also be affected 
(pp. 416 and 418). Nail involvement occurs in about 
10% and can range from longitudinal ridging to a 
destructive nail dystrophy, scarring (pterygium) and 
nail loss (p. 1298). Scalp involvement usually presents as 
an inflammatory scarring alopecia, often with tufting of 
residual hairs. The classical presentation of lichen planus 
is unmistakable but less common, atypical variants, 
which include annular, atrophic, actinic, linear, bullous, 
follicular, pigmented and ulcerative types, can be a diag-
nostic challenge.
Diagnosis
A skin biopsy should be performed if there is diagnostic 
doubt. A careful drug history must be taken as, although 
the classical presentation of lichen planus is usually 
‘idiopathic’, the main differential is a drug-induced 
lichenoid reaction (see below). Other differential diag-
noses include psoriasis, pityriasis rosea, pity­riasis 
lichenoides chronica and secondary syphilis. Screening 
for underlying disease, such as hepatitis, must be 
considered.
Management
The condition is usually self-limiting, although rarely, 
particularly with oral lichen planus, it may persist for 
years. Treatment is symptomatic and potent local corti-
costeroids (topical, with occlusion or by injection for 
hypertrophic disease, or as oral rinse for oral involve-
ment) may help the intense itch; short courses of 
systemic corticosteroids are sometimes required for 
extensive disease. UVB, PUVA or UVA1 can be beneficial 
and, for recalcitrant disease, retinoids or immunosup-
pressants such as ciclosporin may be needed. A low but 
significant risk of malignant transformation exists with 
persistent oral and genital disease, so active treatment, 
surveillance and smoking cessation are important.
Fig. 28.33  Lichen planus. Violaceous papules on the flexural aspect of 
forearm, arising at a site of minor linear trauma (Köbner phenomenon). 
Acute and chronic urticaria
• Autoimmune: due to antibodies that cross-link the IgE 
receptor on mast cells
• Allergens: in foods, medications and inhalants
• Drugs: (see Box 28.44, p. 1304)
• Contact: e.g. latex, animal saliva
• Physical: e.g. heat, cold, pressure, sun, sweat, water
• Infection: e.g. intestinal parasites
• Others: e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), pregnancy
• Idiopathic: Chronic spontaneous urticaria and angioedema
Urticarial vasculitis
• Hepatitis B
• SLE
28.31  Causes of urticaria
• Idiopathic
Bullous diseases
28
1291
•	 complement C3 and C4 levels: if these are low due to 
complement consumption, C1 esterase inhibitor 
activity should be measured
•	 skin biopsy: if urticarial vasculitis is suspected
•	 challenge tests: to confirm physical urticarias.
Management
Removal or treatment of any trigger is essential, although 
this may not be identified in the majority of cases. Urti-
caria may be precipitated by aspirin, NSAIDs, codeine 
and opioids, and it is advisable to suggest alternatives 
such as paracetamol. In chronic urticaria, non-sedating 
antihistamines, such as fexofenadine, loratadine or ceti-
rizine, are usually beneficial. If, after 2 weeks, there is 
lack of response, an alternative non-sedating antihista-
mine should be used and an H2-blocker, such as cimeti-
dine or ranitidine, is often added. Mast cell stabilisers or 
leukotriene receptor antagonists, such as montelukast, 
may be added for more recalcitrant disease. For chronic 
urticaria, narrowband UVB phototherapy is valuable. 
Systemic corticosteroids are widely prescribed for urti-
caria, but often need to be used at high doses and are 
only appropriate for occasional short courses. Patients 
with a history of life-threatening anaphylaxis, as in 
peanut or wasp sting allergy, should carry a self-
administered adrenaline (epinephrine) injection kit. The 
management of anaphylaxis and hereditary angioedema 
is discussed on pages 92 and 94.
BULLOUS DISEASES
Blistering can occur at any level in the skin and, as 
such, there are a variety of different presentations, 
depending on the underlying defect and level of involve-
ment. Our knowledge of the molecular basis of many 
blistering disorders has considerably advanced as we 
come to understand the processes of cutaneous cell 
urticaria) is the most common chronic urticaria and has 
an autoimmune pathogenesis in some cases.
Investigations
Investigations should be guided by the history and pos-
sible causes but are often negative, particularly in 
acute urticaria. Some or all of the following may be 
appropriate:
•	 full blood count: eosinophilia in parasitic infection or 
drug cause
•	 erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or plasma 
viscosity: elevated in vasculitis
•	 urea and electrolytes, thyroid and liver function tests, 
iron studies: may reveal an underlying systemic 
disorder
•	 total IgE and specific IgE to possible allergens: e.g. 
shellfish, peanut, house dust mite
•	 antinuclear factor: positive in systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) and often positive in urticarial 
vasculitis
Fig. 28.34  Urticaria. Erythema, reflecting dilated dermal vessels, and 
oedema (with upper dermal oedema obscuring the erythema centrally) are 
evident. Note the absence of epidermal changes. 
Fig. 28.35  Pathogenesis of urticaria. Mast cell degranulation occurs in a variety of ways. (1) Type I hypersensitivity causes degranulation. 
(2) Spontaneous mast cell degranulation in chronic urticaria. (3) Chemical mast cell degranulation. (4) Autoimmunity, with IgE antibodies directed  
against IgE receptors or IgE itself. Histamine and the leukotrienes are especially relevant mediators in urticaria. Heparin release is probably not a  
major factor in urticaria, but plays a role in the osteoporosis frequent in the mastocytoses (conditions of excess mast cells). 
Histamine
Inflammatory mediators
 
• prostaglandins
 
• leukotrienes
 
• chemotactic cytokines
 
   for eosinophils and
 
   neutrophils
Heparin
5-hydroxytryptamine
Proteases
Aspirin
NSAIDs
Morphine
Codeine
Benzoic acid
Mast cell
Granules
High-affinity IgE receptor (FcεRI)
Antigen
Autoantibody to FcεRI and IgE
Increased
capillary
permeability
Key
IgE
4
3
2
1
Skin disease
28
1292
attention to fluid balance and monitoring for infection. 
Urethral and ocular involvement is common and must 
be looked for and treated symptomatically, as ocular 
and urethral scarring in survivors can be problematic. 
Sepsis and multi-organ failure are major risks. Systemic 
corticosteroids are contraindicated, as they are associ-
ated with increased mortality. Intravenous immuno­
globulins have been studied but there is no good 
evidence for improved outcomes (Box 28.34).
Immunobullous diseases
The age of the patient may be informative in suspected 
immunobullous disease (Box 28.35). The key investiga-
tion is an elliptical biopsy taken from the edge of a recent 
blister (Box 28.36). The sample is halved and one half 
put in formalin for subsequent histology, whilst the 
other is sent fresh for direct immunofluorescence. Serum 
should also be sent for indirect immunofluorescence in 
suspected immunobullous disease (p. 1255). Several of 
these blistering disorders are associated with underlying 
diseases, which should be considered. Many patients 
will require immunosuppression. Blister fluid should 
always be sent for culture to exclude viral or bacterial 
infection.
Bullous pemphigoid
Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is the most common immuno­
bullous disease and occurs worldwide. It is a disease of 
the elderly, with an average age of onset of 65 years; 
males and females are equally affected. A range of 
adhesion. Studies of the rare genetic blistering disorders, 
particularly epidermolysis bullosa, which present at 
birth (Box 28.32) have facilitated this. This section con-
centrates on primary blistering skin diseases.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a medical emer-
gency, as the extensive mucocutaneous blistering is 
associated with a high mortality rate. It is usually drug-
induced (see Box 28.44, p. 1304), particularly by anti­
convulsants, sulphonamides, sulphonylureas, NSAIDs, 
allopurinol 
and 
antiretroviral 
therapy. 
Usually 
1–4 weeks after drug commencement, the patient 
becomes systemically unwell and often pyrexial, and 
erythema and blistering develop, initially on the trunk 
but rapidly involving all skin. Sheets of blisters coalesce 
and denude, and the underlying skin is painful and 
erythematous (Fig. 28.36). Mucous membrane involve-
ment and blistering are usual. A disease severity score 
(Box 28.33) is used to predict outcome. The main dif-
ferential diagnosis is SSSS (p. 1276), although the diag-
nosis is usually obvious in an adult patient with a culprit 
drug. Skin snip allows early diagnosis and is preferred 
to full-thickness skin biopsy in the acute stage.
Identification and discontinuation of the causative 
drug are essential. Intensive care in a dedicated derma-
tology ward or intensive care or burns unit is of 
paramount importance. Treatment is supportive, 
with regular sterile dressings and emollients, careful 
Type
Mode of 
inheritance
Level of 
blister*
Abnormality
Simple
Autosomal 
dominant
Epidermal 
basal cell
Keratins 5 
and 14
Junctional
Autosomal 
recessive
Lamina lucida
Laminin-5 
and α6 β4 
integrin
Dystrophic
Autosomal 
dominant and 
recessive
Dermis below 
lamina densa
Collagen VII
*See Fig. 28.1, p. 1253.
28.32  Classification of epidermolysis bullosa
Fig. 28.36  Toxic epidermolytic necrolysis. Note the extensive 
erythema, oedema and epidermal loss secondary to carbamazepine. 
‘The treatment of TEN involves stopping likely drug causes and 
supportive management. Although it is sometimes used, there is 
no good evidence of benefit from IVIg. Randomised studies of 
such interventions are needed.’
• Huang YC, et al. Br J Dermatol 2012; 167:424–432.
For further information: 
 www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews
28.34  Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) for 
toxic epidermal necrolysis
Factor
• Age > 40 yrs
• Heart rate > 120 beats/min
• Cancer or haematological malignancy
• Involved body surface area > 10%
• Blood urea > 10 mmol/L (28 mg/dL)
• Serum bicarbonate < 20 mmol/L (20 meq/L)
• Blood glucose ≥ 14 mmol/L (252 mg/dL)
Mortality rates
• 0–1 factor present = 3%
• 2 factors = 12%
• 3 factors = 35%
• 4 factors = 58%
• ≥ 5 factors = 90%
28.33  Disease severity score for toxic epidermal 
necrolysis (TEN): SCORTEN
Bastuji-Garin S, et al. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115:149–153.
Bullous diseases
28
1293
autoantibodies develop, the best characterised being 
antibodies BP-230 and BP-180, directed against the 
hemi-desmosomal BP antigens, BPAg-1 (intracellular) 
and BPAg-2 (transmembranous type XVII collagen), 
respectively. Antibody–antigen binding initiates com-
plement activation and inflammation, hemi-desmosomal 
damage and consequent subepidermal blistering.
Disease
Age
Pemphigus vulgaris
40–60 yrs
Pemphigus foliaceus
Any age (endemic form, e.g. 
in parts of Brazil and South 
Africa, from teenage years on)
Bullous pemphigoid
60s and over
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Young, associated with 
coeliac disease
Linear IgA disease
Any age
Pemphigoid gestationis
Pregnant females
Epidermolysis bullosa 
acquisita
Any age
Bullous lupus erythematosus
Young black female
28.35  Age of onset in immunobullous 
skin disorders
Clinical features and diagnosis
There is often a lengthy prodrome of an itchy, urticated, 
erythematous rash prior to the development of tense 
bullae (Fig. 28.37A). Milia may develop due to base­
ment membrane disruption. Mucosal involvement is 
uncommon. Histology shows subepidermal blistering 
with an eosinophil-rich inflammatory infiltrate. Direct 
immunofluorescence demonstrates the presence of IgG 
and C3 at the basement membrane (Fig. 28.37B). Indirect 
immunofluorescence may show positive titres of cir­
culating anti-epidermal antibodies. Distinction from 
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita requires immunofluo-
rescence studies using the patient’s serum on salt-split 
skin. In BP, the immunoreactants localise to the epider-
mal side (hemi-desmosome) of split skin, whereas in 
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita they localise to the base 
of the split (type VII collagen/anchoring fibrils).
Management
Very potent topical steroids to all sites may be sufficient 
in frail elderly patients (Box 28.37). Tetracyclines, such 
as doxycycline, have an important role and may limit 
the use of systemic corticosteroids. However, most 
require systemic corticosteroids, often combined with 
azathioprine. There is evidence to support the use of 
intravenous immunoglobulin as a steroid-sparing 
therapy in BP. The condition often burns out over a few 
years.
Disease
Site of blisters
Nature of blisters
Mucous 
membrane 
involvement
Antigen
Circulating antibody 
(indirect IF)
Fixed 
antibody 
(direct IF)
Pemphigus 
vulgaris
Trunk, head
Flaccid, fragile, 
many erosions
100%
Desmoglein-1 and 3 
(120 kD)
IgG
IgG, C3 
intercellular 
(epidermal)
Pemphigus 
foliaceus
Trunk
Often not present, 
multiple erosions, 
may mimic 
dermatitis
No
Desmoglein-1
IgG
IgG, C3 
intercellular 
(epidermal)
Bullous 
pemphigoid
Trunk, flexures 
and limbs
Tense, milia as 
resolve
Occasional
BP-230 and 180
IgG (70%)
IgG, C3 at 
BMZ
Dermatitis 
herpetiformis
Elbows, lower 
back, buttocks
Excoriated and 
often not present
No
Unknown
Anti-endomysial and 
tissue 
transglutaminase
Granular IgA 
in papillary 
dermis
Linear IgA 
disease
Widespread
Tense, often 
annular 
configuration, 
‘string of beads’
Frequent
Unknown
50% have low titres 
of circulating 
antibody
Linear IgA 
at BMZ
Pemphigoid 
gestationis
Periumbilical 
and limbs
Tense, milia as 
resolve
Rare
Collagen XVII (part of 
hemi-desmosome, 
BP-180)
Circulating antibodies 
to BP-180 (type XVII 
collagen) (and 
BP-230)
C3 at BMZ
Epidermolysis 
bullosa 
acquisita
Widespread
Tense, scarring, 
milia
Common 
(50%)
Type VII collagen
IgG (anti-type VII 
collagen)
IgG at BMZ
Bullous lupus 
erythematosus
Widespread
Tense
Rare
Type VII collagen
Anti-type VII collagen
IgG, IgA, 
IgM at BMZ
(BMZ = basement membrane zone; IF = immunofluorescence)
28.36  Clinical and investigation findings in the immunobullous disorders
Skin disease
28
1294
Pemphigus
Pemphigus is less common than BP and patients are 
usually younger. Typically, IgG1 and IgG4 autoantibod-
ies, directed against desmogleins-1 and 3, develop, 
resulting in intra-epidermal blistering. Secondary causes 
are drugs (e.g. penicillamine or captopril) and under­
lying malignancy (‘paraneoplastic pemphigus’). Pem-
phigus foliaceus is a very superficial form, in which 
antibodies are directed against desmoglein-1 only and 
affect just the most superficial epidermis.
Clinical features and diagnosis
Skin and mucosae are usually involved, although 
disease may be restricted to mucosae only, which may 
be severely affected. Due to the higher level of split 
within the epidermis, the blisters are flaccid, easily rup-
tured and often not seen intact. Erosions are common 
and the Nikolsky sign is positive. The trunk is usually 
affected. The condition is associated with significant 
morbidity and mortality. Histology shows intra-
epidermal blistering and acantholysis, with positive 
direct immunofluorescence. The titres of circulating epi-
dermal autoantibodies can also be used to monitor 
disease activity. Investigations should screen for associ-
ated autoimmune disease or malignancy if paraneoplas-
tic pemphigus is suspected.
Management
Pemphigus is more difficult to control than BP and 
high-dose systemic corticosteroids are usually required. 
Azathioprine, 
cyclophosphamide 
and 
intravenous 
immunoglobulins may be used as steroid-sparing 
agents. Often, long-term treatment is required to prevent 
relapse.
Fig. 28.37  Bullous pemphigoid. A Large, tense, unilocular blisters.  B Immunofluorescence on salt-split skin, showing a subepidermal blister and 
linear IgG and C3 deposition at the basement membrane zone. 
A
B
Epidermis
Split
Dermis
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is an autoimmune blister-
ing disorder that is strongly associated with gluten intol-
erance. Fewer than 10% of individuals with coeliac 
disease develop DH, although almost all patients with 
DH have evidence of partial villous atrophy on investi-
gation, even if asymptomatic (p. 881). The pathogenesis 
is unknown.
Intact vesicles or blisters are often not seen, as the 
condition is so pruritic that excoriations on extensor 
surfaces of arms, knees, buttocks, shoulders and scalp 
may be the only signs.
Subepidermal vesiculation in the dermal papillae and 
a neutrophil- and eosinophil-rich infiltrate is seen histo-
logically. Direct immunofluorescence shows granular 
IgA in the papillary dermis. Anti-endomysial antibodies 
and tissue transglutaminase should be assessed, and 
jejunal biopsy undertaken if indicated. A gluten-free diet 
may suffice but, if not, the condition is usually highly 
responsive to dapsone.
Linear IgA disease
This occurs in children (chronic bullous disease of child-
hood) and adults, and is usually self-limiting, although 
it can be active for a few years. Drugs, notably vanco-
mycin, are a secondary cause. Blisters can arise on ery-
thematous, urticated or otherwise normal-looking skin 
and often form an annular configuration at the edge of 
the lesion: ‘clusters of jewels’ (herpetiform) and ‘string 
of beads’ (annular/polycyclic). Mucosal involvement 
is common and ophthalmology input important, as 
long-term scarring is a risk. Linear IgA is seen at the 
basement membrane on direct immunofluorescence and 
localises to either roof or floor of salt-split skin. Dapsone, 
sulfa­pyridine, prednisolone, colchicine or intravenous 
immunoglobulin may be effective.
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
This chronic blistering disease affects skin and mucosae, 
and may be difficult to distinguish from other immuno­
bullous blistering diseases. It is caused by an IgG 
antibody to type VII collagen, which provokes subepi-
dermal blistering and a mixed inflammatory infiltrate. 
Blisters often follow trauma, and milia develop. The 
condition may be associated with inflammatory bowel 
disease, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple myeloma and 
‘Very potent topical corticosteroids are effective. However, in 
extensive disease, applications by patients or carers may be 
difficult. If systemic corticosteroids are needed, there is generally 
no advantage in using doses greater than 0.75 mg/kg/day of 
prednisolone.’
• Kirtschig G, et al. Interventions for bullous pemphigoid. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, 2010, issue 10. Art. no.: CD002292.
28.37  Treatment of bullous pemphigoid
Pigmentation disorders
28
1295
body orifices (Fig. 28.38). The hair of the scalp, beard, 
eyebrows and lashes may also depigment. Segmental 
vitiligo is restricted to one part of the body but not neces-
sarily a dermatome. The patches of depigmentation are 
sharply defined, and in Caucasians may be surrounded 
by hyperpigmentation. Spotty perifollicular pigment 
may be seen within the depigmentation and is often the 
first sign of repigmentation. Sensation in the depig-
mented patches is normal (unlike in tuberculoid leprosy, 
p. 347). Wood’s light examination enhances the contrast 
between pigmented and non-pigmented skin. The 
course is unpredictable but most patches remain static 
or enlarge; a few repigment spontaneously.
Management
Protecting the patches from excessive sun exposure with 
clothing or sunscreen may be helpful to avoid sunburn. 
Camouflage cosmetics may be beneficial, particularly 
in those with dark skin, as can potent topical cortico­
steroids. Phototherapy with narrowband UVB or PUVA 
can be used. Narrowband UVB is the most effective 
repigmentary treatment available for generalised viti­
ligo, but even very prolonged courses often do not 
produce a satisfactory outcome. The absence of leuco­
trichia (white hairs in the area of vitiligo) and a tri-
chrome pattern (three colours – normal skin colour, 
hypopigmentation and depigmentation) are good prog-
nostic features. Viti­ligo on the face, trunk and proximal 
limbs is more likely to respond than that on hands and 
feet. Autologous melanocyte transfer, using a range of 
techniques including split-skin grafts and blister roof 
grafts, is sometimes used on dermabraded recipient skin.
The impact of vitiligo differs markedly between 
populations. In the Indian subcontinent, the effects 
are more readily discernible than in pale-skinned indi-
viduals in northern Europe. Depigmentation is also 
seen in Hansen’s disease (leprosy), which means that 
individuals with vitiligo are often stigmatised.
Oculocutaneous albinism
Albinism results from a range of genetic abnormalities 
that lead to reduced melanin biosynthesis in the skin 
and eyes; the number of melanocytes is normal (in con-
trast to vitiligo). Albinism is usually inherited as an 
autosomal recessive trait and there are several different 
types and presentations.
Type 1 albinism is due to a defect in the tyrosinase 
gene, whose product is rate-limiting in the production 
of melanin. Affected individuals have an almost com-
plete absence of pigment in the skin and hair at birth, 
with consequent pale skin and white hair, and failure of 
melanin production in the iris and retina. Patients have 
photophobia, poor vision not correctable with refrac-
tion, rotatory nystagmus, and an alternating strabismus 
associated with abnormalities in the decussation of 
nerve fibres in the optic tract.
A second form of albinism is due to a defect in the P 
gene, which encodes an ion channel protein in the 
melanosome. Patients may have gross reduction of 
melanin in the skin and in the eyes, but may be more 
mildly affected than type 1 albinos. Establishing the 
subtype of albinism requires genetic analysis, as there is 
considerable phenotypic heterogeneity.
Oculocutaneous albinos are at grossly increased risk 
of sunburn and skin cancer. In equatorial regions, many 
lymphoma. It is difficult to treat, as it often does not 
respond to immunosuppressants.
Porphyria cutanea tarda  
and pseudoporphyria
These conditions may also cause blistering (see Boxes 
28.9 and 28.44, pp. 1260 and 1304).
PIGMENTATION DISORDERS
Decreased pigmentation
Disorders causing hypopigmentation and/or depig-
mentation include:
•	 vitiligo
•	 albinism
•	 pityriasis alba: depigmented areas on the face, 
particularly in children, with or without scale and 
usually considered to be eczematous
•	 pityriasis versicolor (p. 1280): hypopigmentation or, 
less commonly, hyperpigmentation can occur
•	 idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis: multiple small 
areas of depigmentation arising in chronically 
sun-exposed skin
•	 rarely, phenylketonuria (p. 449) and hypopituitarism.
Vitiligo
Vitiligo is an acquired condition affecting 1% of the 
population worldwide. Focal loss of melanocytes results 
in the development of patches of hypopigmentation. A 
positive family history of vitiligo is relatively common 
in those with extensive disease, and this type is also 
associated with other autoimmune diseases. Trauma 
and sunburn may (through the Köbner phenomenon) 
precipitate the appearance of vitiligo. The pathogenesis 
is unclear and, whilst melanocytes may be the target of 
a cell-mediated autoimmune attack, it is not known why 
only focal areas are affected.
Clinical features
Generalised vitiligo is often symmetrical and involves 
hands, wrists, knees and neck, as well as areas around 
Fig. 28.38  Vitiligo.  Symmetrical localised patches of depigmented skin. 
Skin disease
28
1296
HAIR DISORDERS
These can be subdivided into loss of hair (alopecia, 
Box 28.39) or excess hair (hirsutism or hypertrichosis), 
and alopecia into localised/diffuse and scarring/ 
non-scarring. Common examples are described below. 
Examples of inflammatory scarring (lichen planus, 
discoid lupus) and non-scarring (tinea capitis, psoriasis, 
seborrhoeic eczema) alopecia are mentioned elsewhere.
Alopecia areata
The usual presentation of this common autoimmune 
disorder is as well-defined, localised, non-inflammatory, 
non-scarring patches of alopecia, usually on the scalp 
(Fig. 28.39). Pathognomonic ‘exclamation mark’ hairs 
are seen (broken hairs, tapering towards the scalp) 
during active hair loss. A diffuse pattern can uncom-
monly occur on the scalp. Eyebrows, eyelashes, beard 
and body hair can be affected. Alopecia totalis describes 
complete loss of scalp hair, and alopecia universalis is 
complete loss of all hair. Nail pitting may occur (p. 1298). 
Spontaneous regrowth is usual for small patches of alo-
pecia but the prognosis is less good for larger patches, 
more extensive involvement, early onset and an associa-
tion with atopy. In addition to atopy, alopecia areata is 
associated with other autoimmune diseases, particularly 
thyroid disease, and with Down’s syndrome.
Androgenetic alopecia
Male-pattern baldness is physiological in men over 
20 years old, although it can also occur in teenagers. It 
is also found in women, particularly post-menopause. 
Characteristically, this involves bitemporal recession 
initially and subsequent involvement of the crown 
(‘male pattern’), although it is often diffuse in women.
die from SCC or, more rarely, melanoma in early adult 
life. Interestingly, they may develop pigmented melano-
cytic naevi and freckle in response to sun exposure.
Management
Strict photoprotection (p. 1261), with sun avoidance 
(including occupational exposure), clothing, hats and 
sunscreens, is important. Early diagnosis and treatment 
of skin tumours is essential.
Increased pigmentation
•	 Diffuse hyperpigmentation: most commonly due 
to hypermelanosis but other pigments may be 
deposited in the skin, e.g. orange discoloration with 
carotenaemia and bronze with haemochromatosis 
(p. 972).
•	 Endocrine pigmentation: may occur in several 
conditions. Melasma (chloasma) describes discrete 
patches of facial pigmentation that occur in 
pregnancy and in some women taking oral 
contraceptives. The mechanism for this localised 
increased hormonal sensitivity is unknown. Diffuse 
pigmentation, sometimes worse in the skin creases, 
may be a feature of Addison’s disease (p. 777), 
Cushing’s syndrome (p. 773), Nelson’s syndrome  
(p. 776) and chronic renal failure due to increased 
levels of pituitary melanotrophic peptides, including 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH, p. 776).
•	 Photoexposed site hyperpigmentation: occurs in some of 
the porphyrias and can be drug-induced.
•	 Drug-induced pigmentation (Box 28.38): may be 
diffuse or localised. It is not always due to 
hypermelanosis but sometimes is caused by 
deposition of the drug or a metabolite.
•	 Focal hypermelanosis: seen in lesions such as freckles 
and lentigines, characterised by focal areas of 
increased pigmentation.
Establishing the cause is important. Photoprotection 
may minimise the risk of increasing pigmentation. 
Topical hydroquinone preparations can be used for skin 
lightening in some types of hyperpigmentation, although 
caution is required, particularly in darker skin types.
Drug
Appearance
Amiodarone
Photo-exposed sites, slate-grey
Arsenic
Diffuse bronze pigmentation
Raindrop depigmentation
Bleomycin
Usually flexural, brown
Busulfan
Diffuse brown
Chloroquine
Photo-exposed sites, blue-grey
Clofazimine
Red
Mepacrine
Yellow
Minocycline
Temples, shins, gingiva, sclera, scar sites, 
slate-grey
Phenothiazines
Photo-exposed sites, slate-grey
Psoralens
Photo-exposed sites, brown
28.38  Drug-induced pigmentation
Localised
Diffuse
Non-scarring
Tinea capitis
Alopecia areata
Androgenetic alopecia
Traumatic (trichotillomania, 
traction, cosmetic)
Syphilis
Androgenetic alopecia
Telogen effluvium
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Hypopituitarism
Diabetes mellitus
HIV disease
Nutritional (especially iron) 
deficiency
Liver disease
Post-partum
Alopecia areata
Syphilis
Drug-induced, e.g. 
chemotherapy, retinoids
Scarring
Idiopathic
Developmental defects
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Herpes zoster
Pseudopelade
Tinea capitis/kerion
Morphoea (en coup de sabre)
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Radiotherapy
Folliculitis decalvans
Lichen planopilaris
28.39  Classification and causes of alopecia
Nail disorders
28
1297
Hirsutism
Hirsutism is the growth of terminal hair in a male 
pattern in a female (p. 763). The cause of most cases is 
unknown and, while it may occur in hyperandrogenism, 
Cushing’s syndrome and polycystic ovary syndrome, 
only a small minority of patients have a demonstrable 
hormonal abnormality. Psychological distress is often 
significant and oral contraceptives containing an anti-
androgen (e.g. cyproterone acetate), laser therapy or 
topical eflornithine may be beneficial.
NAIL DISORDERS
The nails can be affected by both local and systemic 
disease. The nail apparatus consists of the nail matrix 
and the nail plate, which arises from the matrix and lies 
on the nail bed (Fig. 28.40). The cells of the matrix and, 
to a lesser extent the bed, produce the keratinous plate.
Important information may be obtained from nail 
fold examination, including dilated capillaries and 
ragged cuticles in connective tissue disease (Fig. 28.41) 
and the boggy inflammation of paronychia. The latter 
commonly occurs chronically in individuals undertak-
ing wet work, in those with diabetes or poor peripheral 
circulation, and subsequent to increased cosmetic nail 
procedures and vigorous manicuring.
Common nail changes and disorders
Normal variants
Longitudinal ridging and beading of the nail plate occur 
with age. White transverse patches (striate leuconychia) 
are often caused by airspaces within the plate.
Effects of trauma
•	 Nail biting/picking is a very common habit. 
Repetitive proximal nail fold trauma (often thumb 
nail) results in transverse ridging and central 
furrowing of the nail.
•	 Chronic trauma from poorly-fitting shoes and sport 
can cause thickening and disordered growth of the 
nail (onychogryphosis) and subsequent ingrowing 
toenails.
Investigations and management
Important investigations include full blood count, renal 
and liver function tests, iron studies, thyroid function, 
autoantibody screen and syphilis serology, as several 
systemic diseases, particularly iron deficiency and 
hypothyroidism, can cause diffuse non-scarring alo-
pecia. Hair pull tests may help to establish the ratio 
of anagen to telogen hairs but require expertise for 
interpretation. Scrapings and pluckings are sent for 
mycology if there is localised inflammation. Scalp 
biopsy and direct immunofluorescence of a scarring 
alopecia may confirm a diagnosis of lichen planus or 
discoid lupus erythematosus, but expert interpretation 
is needed.
The impact of alopecia on quality of life must not be 
underestimated, and psychological support is required 
as treatment is difficult. It is important to establish 
realistic expectations. Underlying conditions must be 
treated. Alopecia areata may respond to topical or 
intralesional corticosteroids. Some males with andro­
genetic alopecia may be helped by systemic finasteride. 
Topical minoxidil can be used in males and females 
with androgenetic alopecia but, if an effect is obtained, 
treatment must be continued and is expensive. In 
females, anti-androgen therapy, such as cyproterone 
acetate, can be used. Wigs are often appropriate for 
extensive alopecia. Scalp surgery and autologous hair 
transplants are expensive but can be used for androge-
netic alopecia.
Hypertrichosis
Hypertrichosis is a generalised or localised increase in 
hair and may be congenital or acquired. It can be primary 
or secondary: for example, to drugs such as ciclosporin, 
minoxidil or diazoxide, malignancy or eating disorders. 
Laser therapy or eflornithine, which inhibits ornithine 
decarboxylase and arrests hair growth whilst it is being 
used, may be helpful. When the hypertrichosis follows 
a male pattern, it is called hirsutism.
Fig. 28.39  Alopecia areata. 
Fig. 28.40  The nail plate and bed. Arrows indicate the direction of 
nail growth. 
Hyponychium
Nail bed
Nail plate
Matrix
Proximal nail fold
Cuticle
Distal phalanx
Skin disease
28
1298
•	 Splinter haemorrhages are fine, linear, dark brown 
longitudinal streaks in the plate (see Fig. 18.93,  
p. 627). They are usually subsequent to trauma, 
especially if distal. Uncommonly, they can occur  
in nail psoriasis and are a hallmark of infective 
endocarditis (p. 625).
•	 Subungual haematoma is red, purple or grey–brown 
discoloration of the nail plate, usually of the big toe 
(Fig. 28.42). These haematomas are usually due to 
trauma, although a history of this may not be clear. 
The main differential is subungual melanoma, 
although rapid onset, lack of nail-fold involvement 
and proximal clearing as the nail grows are clues to 
the diagnosis of haematoma. If there is diagnostic 
doubt, a biopsy may be needed.
The nails in common skin diseases
•	 Dermatophyte infection/onychomycosis: this is 
described on page 1280.
•	 Psoriasis: nail involvement is common (see Fig. 
28.32B, p. 1287).
•	 Eczema: nails may be shiny due to rubbing skin. 
Fine pitting can occur. If there is periungual 
eczema, the nail may become dystrophic, with 
thickening and transverse ridging. Paronychia is 
common.
•	 Lichen planus: there may be longitudinal ridging and 
thinning of the nail, giving a sandpaper texture 
(trachyonychia), erythematous streaks 
(erythronychia), subungual hyperkeratosis, 
pigmentation and, in severe cases, pterygium and a 
destructive nail dystrophy.
•	 Alopecia areata: nail plate pitting and trachyonychia 
can occur.
Nail changes in systemic disease
The nails may be affected in many systemic diseases and 
important examples are detailed below:
•	 Beau’s lines: horizontal ridges/indentations in nail 
plate occur simultaneously in all nails (Fig. 28.43B). 
They typically follow a systemic illness and are 
thought to be due to temporary growth arrest of 
cells in the nail matrix; they subsequently migrate 
out as the nail grows. Normal nail growth is 
approximately 0.1 mm/day for fingers and 
0.05 mm/day for toes, so the timing of the systemic 
upset can usually be estimated by the position of 
the Beau’s lines.
•	 Koilonychia: this concave or spoon-shaped nail plate 
deformity is due to iron deficiency (Fig. 28.43C).
•	 Clubbing: in the early stages, the angle between the 
proximal nail and nail fold is lost. In its more 
established form, there may be swelling of the distal 
digits (Figs 28.43D and E) or toe. Causes include 
bronchogenic carcinoma, asbestosis (especially with 
mesothelioma), suppurative or fibrosing lung 
disease, cyanotic congenital heart disease, infective 
endocarditis, inflammatory bowel disease, biliary 
cirrhosis and thyrotoxicosis; rarely, clubbing can be 
familial or idiopathic.
•	 Nail discoloration: whitening may occur in 
hypoalbuminaemia. ‘Half-and-half’ nails (white 
proximally and red/brown distally) may be found 
in renal failure. Drugs (e.g. antimalarials) 
occasionally discolour nails.
Fig. 28.42  Subungual haematoma. 
Fig. 28.43  The nail in systemic disease.  A Normal nail.  B Beau’s 
line.  C Koilonychia.  D and  E Digital clubbing. 
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 28.41  Dermatomyositis.  A Photoaggravation.  B Note the 
prominent periungual involvement. Erythema, dilated and tortuous 
capillaries in the proximal nail fold, and ragged cuticles are features of 
connective tissue disease. 
A
B
Skin disease in general medicine
28
1299
(particularly renal). Identification and removal or treat-
ment of the cause is important but often difficult.
Neutrophilic dermatoses
These include pyoderma gangrenosum, Sweet’s acute 
febrile neutrophilic dermatosis and the neutrophilic der-
matosis of rheumatoid disease, and are characterised by 
intense inflammation, mainly consisting of neutrophils, 
around dermal blood vessels. There can be damage to 
vessels (‘vasculopathy’) but usually no frank vasculitis.
Pyoderma gangrenosum
The initial lesion of pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is 
usually a painful, tender, inflamed nodule or pustule, 
which breaks down centrally and rapidly progresses to 
an ulcer with an indurated, undermined purplish or 
pustular edge (Fig. 28.44). Lesions may be single or mul-
tiple and are classified as ulcerative, pustular, bullous or 
vegetative. PG usually occurs in adults and, although it 
may occur in isolation, is usually associated with under-
lying disease, particularly inflammatory bowel disease, 
inflammatory arthritis, blood dyscrasias, immunodefi-
ciencies and HIV infection. Investigation should be 
made with these associations in mind. The diagnosis is 
largely clinical, as histology is not specific. Analgesia, 
treatment of secondary bacterial infection and support-
ive dressings are important. Very potent topical cortico­
steroids or calcineurin inhibitors may be beneficial. 
Systemic treatment with tetracyclines, systemic steroids, 
dapsone, ciclosporin or other immunosuppressants is 
often required. Once healing has taken place, recur-
rences are typically only intermittent.
The nail in congenital disease
Nails can be affected in congenital diseases, such as 
pachyonychia congenita, a rare, usually autosomal dom-
inant, condition caused by mutations in differentiation-
specific keratin genes 6A, 6B, 16 and 17. This results in 
palmoplantar keratoderma and gross nail discoloration 
and thickening, due to subungual hyperkeratosis, 
from birth.
SKIN DISEASE IN GENERAL MEDICINE
Many skin conditions present to other medical special-
ties. These are listed in Box 28.40 and the most common 
of those not discussed elsewhere are detailed below.
Primary skin problems
• Cellulitis
• Vasculitis
• Leg ulcers
• Pressure sores
Skin involvement in multisystem disease
• Genetic (e.g. 
neurofibromatosis and 
tuberous sclerosis)
• Xanthomas
• Amyloidosis
• Porphyria
• Sarcoidosis
• SLE
• Systemic sclerosis
Non-specific and variable skin reactions to systemic disease
• Urticaria
• Erythema multiforme
• Annular erythemas
• Erythema nodosum
• Pyoderma gangrenosum
• Sweet’s syndrome
• Generalised pruritus
Skin conditions associated with malignancy
• Dermatomyositis
• Generalised pruritus
• Acanthosis nigricans
• Superficial thrombophlebitis
Skin problems associated with specific medical disorders
• Liver: generalised pruritus, pigmentation, spider naevi, 
palmar erythema, nail clubbing
• Kidney: generalised pruritus, uraemic frost, pigmentation
• Diabetes mellitus: necrobiosis lipoidica, diabetic dermopathy
• Cutaneous Crohn’s disease
Skin problems secondary to treatment of systemic disease
• Drug eruptions
Miscellaneous
• Granuloma annulare
• Morphoea
28.40  Skin problems in general medicine
Fig. 28.44  Pyoderma gangrenosum. This young patient had Crohn’s 
disease. Note the cribriform pattern of re-epithelialisation, which is 
characteristic of this condition. 
Conditions involving  
cutaneous vasculature
Vasculitis
Vasculitis usually presents as palpable purpura (see 
Fig. 25.42 and p. 1115). Causes include drugs, infection, 
connective tissue disease, malignancy and Henoch–
Schönlein purpura. The diagnosis is confirmed by skin 
biopsy, with histology and immunofluorescence exami-
nation. Investigation should seek systemic involvement 
Pressure sores
Localised, prolonged, pressure-induced ischaemia can 
lead to the development of pressure sores, which can 
occur in up to 30% of the hospitalised elderly. They are 
Skin disease
28
1300
Ro/SS-A antigen. A diagnosis of cutaneous lupus is 
confirmed by histopathology and direct immunofluores-
cence. SLE is a serious multisystem disorder and cutane-
ous manifestations include photosensitivity with malar 
(butterfly) rash, Raynaud’s phenomenon, chilblains, 
livedo reticularis and vasculitis. Investigations and man-
agement of SLE are outlined elsewhere on page 1111. 
The possibility of drug-induced lupus should always be 
considered (see Boxes 25.84, p. 1113; 28.43, p. 1303; and 
28.44, p. 1304). Cutaneous lupus may respond to topical 
corticosteroids or immunosuppressants. Antimalarials 
and photoprotection are important in the management 
of cutaneous lupus, and systemic immunosuppression 
may be required for resistant disease. Paradoxically, 
low-dose UVA1 phototherapy can sometimes be effec-
tive for lupus.
Systemic sclerosis
Systemic sclerosis is an autoimmune multisystem 
disease that usually presents in middle age and is char-
acterised by progressive cutaneous and connective 
tissue sclerosis, vascular abnormalities and associated 
autoantibodies (p. 1112). The earliest feature is usually 
Raynaud’s phenomenon, followed by progressive skin 
tightening and oedema. Constricted mouth opening and 
perioral radial furrows, with matted telangiectasiae and 
pigmentary change, are common. Fixed flexion deformi-
ties of the hands, ulceration, calcification, scarring and 
gangrene of digits may develop. Dilated nail-fold capil-
laries and ragged cuticles are the norm. Investigation 
and management are described on page 1113.
Morphoea
Morphoea is a localised cutaneous form of scleroderma 
that can affect any site at any age. It usually presents 
as a thickened violaceous plaque, which may become 
hyper- or hypopigmented. Plaques can become general-
ised. Linear forms exist and, if in the scalp, there will be 
scarring hair loss (en coup de sabre). There is no sys-
temic involvement. Topical corticosteroids or immuno-
suppressants or phototherapy, particularly PUVA or 
UVA1, can be effective, and systemic immunosuppres-
sion may be used for resistant extensive disease.
Dermatomyositis
This is a rare multisystem disease, predominantly affect-
ing skin, muscles and blood vessels (p. 1114). The cause 
is unknown. There may be an autoimmune mechanism 
in childhood cases, whereas in adults there is often an 
underlying malignancy. Dermatomyositis typically 
presents between 40 and 60 years and is more common 
in females. In juvenile patients, calcinosis often occurs. 
The typical cutaneous features are of a violaceous ‘helio-
trope’ erythema periorbitally and involving the upper 
eyelids. There may be more extensive involvement, with 
violaceous erythema on the upper trunk and limbs, 
linear erythematous streaks on the back of hands and 
fingers, and papules over the knuckles (Gottron’s 
papules). Tortuous dilated nail-fold capillaries, often 
best seen with a dermatoscope, and ragged cuticles 
are usually evident. Photoaggravation of the cutaneous 
features is often prominent (see Fig. 28.41, p. 1298). 
Tenderness and proximal muscle weakness are indica-
tive of an inflammatory proximal myopathy. Other 
associated with considerable morbidity, mortality and 
expense to health services. The main risk factors are 
immobility, poor nutrition, local tissue hypoxia – for 
example, with anaemia, peripheral vascular disease, dia-
betes, sepsis and skin atrophy – or barrier impairment, 
such as in eczema.
A localised area of erythema develops at sites of bony 
prominences (particularly sacrum, greater trochanter, 
ischial and calcaneal tuberosities, and lateral malleolus). 
This progresses to a blister and then erosion, which will 
develop into a deep necrotic ulcer, usually colonised by 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa if pressure is not alleviated.
Prevention is key and involves identification of at-risk 
patients and regular repositioning and use of pressure-
relieving mattresses. Predisposing factors, such as 
anaemia and poor nutrition, should be corrected. Once 
established, significant infection must be treated and 
necrotic tissue debrided. Dressings encourage granula-
tion and surgical intervention may be needed.
Connective tissue disease
Lupus erythematosus
The 
autoimmune 
disorder 
lupus 
erythematosus 
(p. 1109) can be subdivided into systemic lupus ery-
thematosus (SLE) and cutaneous lupus, which includes 
discoid lupus (DLE) and subacute cutaneous lupus ery-
thematosus (SCLE). DLE typically presents as scaly red 
plaques, with follicular plugging, usually on photo-
exposed sites of the face, head and neck, which resolve 
with scarring and pigmentary change. If the scalp is 
involved, scarring alopecia occurs (Fig. 28.45). Most 
patients with DLE do not develop SLE. Patients with 
SCLE may have extensive cutaneous involvement, 
usually aggravated by sun exposure, with an annular, 
polycyclic or papulosquamous eruption. Systemic 
involvement is uncommon and the prognosis usually 
good. There is a strong association with antibodies to 
Fig. 28.45  Scarring inflammatory alopecia. This patient had 
systemic lupus erythematosus and additional cutaneous features of 
scarring inflammatory discoid lupus erythematosus. 
Skin disease in general medicine
28
1301
infectious and genetic factors have been proposed. It 
is usually a multisystem disease (p. 709), with skin 
lesions in about one-third of patients. Cutaneous fea-
tures can occur in isolation and include violaceous 
infiltrated dermal plaques and nodules, which can affect 
any site but particularly digits and nose (lupus pernio), 
more generalised hyper-/hypopigmented or annular 
papules and plaques, infiltrative changes in scars and 
erythema nodosum (see Fig. 19.60. p. 710). It is more 
common and often more severe in black Africans and 
African–Americans. Investigation and management are 
described on page 711. Cutaneous disease may respond 
to topical or intralesional steroids, cryotherapy, UVA1, 
laser or PDT (p. 1269). Systemic disease usually requires 
systemic corticosteroids and/or other immunosuppres-
sants. Responses to anti-TNF biological therapies are 
reported.
Cutaneous Crohn’s disease
Cutaneous Crohn’s disease (p. 897) is rare but may 
present as perianal and peristomal infiltrative plaques, 
lymphoedema, sinuses or fistulae, and oral granuloma-
tous disease. These changes are termed ‘metastatic’ 
Crohn’s and histology shows non-caseating granulo-
mas. Reactive skin changes can also occur (e.g. erythema 
nodosum and pyoderma gangrenosum, pp. 1299 and 
1303). Treatment is of the underlying disease (p. 902).
Metabolic disease
Porphyrias
The porphyrias (described on p. 458) are a diverse group 
of diseases, each due to insufficient activity of an enzyme 
in the porphyrin–haem biosynthetic pathway. Those 
that cause skin features do so because porphyrins in the 
skin absorb visible light. The most common skin presen-
tations are photoexposed site blistering and fragility, 
and pain on daylight exposure.
Photoexposed site blistering and fragility
Acquired porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the most 
common porphyria to cause these symptoms (and, in 
most parts of the world, the most common of all the 
porphyrias). PCT is due to a chronic liver disease (e.g. 
alcohol, hepatitis C), in combination with liver iron over-
load. Recognition is important, as the underlying liver 
disease is usually only diagnosed on investigation of the 
skin presentation. Typical features are increased skin 
fragility, blistering erosions, hypertrichosis and milia 
occurring on light-exposed areas, such as the backs of 
the hands (Fig. 28.47). Other features may include facial 
hypertrichosis, hyperpigmentation and morphoea-like 
changes. Other porphyrias that can cause similar skin 
features include variegate porphyria and hereditary 
coproporphyria. It is important not to miss these, as 
acute neurovisceral attacks (which never occur in PCT) 
are possible, often triggered by drugs (p. 1303). Pseudo­
porphyria usually presents like PCT but is most fre-
quently caused by a drug (commonly naproxen; see Box 
28.44, p. 1304) or by sunbed use. ‘Uraemic porphyria’ in 
renal failure presents like PCT but is caused by raised 
porphyrins due to impaired elimination rather than an 
enzyme defect.
systems, such as the respiratory tract, may be involved. 
Investigations include creatine kinase levels and search-
ing for an underlying malignancy (p. 1115). Treatment 
usually requires high-dose corticosteroids and/or other 
immunosuppressants.
Granulomatous disease
Granuloma annulare
This is common and may be reactive, although a trigger 
is usually not apparent. The hallmark is the presence of 
dermal granulomas, which are usually palisading and 
associated with alteration of dermal collagen (necrobio-
sis). The condition is generally asymptomatic and may 
present as an isolated dermal lesion with a raised 
papular annular edge or be more generalised. An asso-
ciation between generalised disease and diabetes has 
been proposed but not confirmed. Lesions often resolve 
spontaneously. Intralesional steroids or cryotherapy 
can be used for localised disease, and UVB or UVA1 
phototherapy or PUVA for generalised disease.
Necrobiosis lipoidica
This condition has some histological features in common 
with granuloma annulare, although necrobiosis pre-
dominates. The lesion has a characteristic yellow, waxy, 
atrophic appearance, often with violaceous edge (Fig. 
28.46). Underlying blood vessels are easily seen because 
of tissue atrophy. Necrobiosis lipoidica typically appears 
on the shins and is prone to ulceration after trauma. 
There is a strong association with diabetes: most patients 
with necrobiosis lipoidica have or develop diabetes, 
although less than 1% of diabetic patients develop 
necrobiosis lipoidica. Treatment is difficult and includes 
potent topical or intralesional steroids, PUVA or UVA1 
phototherapy and systemic immunosuppression.
Fig. 28.46  Necrobiosis lipoidica. Atrophic yellow plaques with 
violaceous edges, on the shins of a patient with diabetes mellitus. 
Sarcoidosis
This condition is characterised by the presence of non-
caseating granulomas. The cause is unknown, although 
Skin disease
28
1302
Pain on daylight exposure
Erythropoietic protoporphyria is a rare inherited por-
phyria but is important to consider. The presentation is 
usually in early childhood, although the diagnosis is 
often delayed, in part because physical signs are often 
minimal despite the prominence of symptoms on 
sunlight exposure. Erythropoietic protoporphyria is 
due to ferrochelatase deficiency, which leads to accumu-
lation of lipid-soluble protoporphyrins in the skin. 
Multiple pigment gallstones, anaemia (usually only 
problematic if it is misdiagnosed as being caused by iron 
deficiency) and, rarely, severe liver disease can occur.
Abnormal deposition disorders
Xanthomas
Deposits of fatty material in the skin, subcutaneous fat 
and tendons may be the first clue to primary or second-
ary hyperlipidaemia (see p. 453 and Fig. 16.15).
Amyloidosis
Cutaneous amyloid may present as periocular plaques 
in primary systemic amyloidosis (p. 86) and amyloid 
associated with multiple myeloma, but is uncommon in 
systemic amyloidosis secondary to rheumatoid arthritis 
or other chronic inflammatory diseases. Amyloid infil-
tration of blood vessels may manifest as ‘pinch purpura’ 
following skin trauma. Macular amyloid is more 
common in darker skin types and appears as pruritic 
grey/brown macules or patches, usually on the back. 
Potent topical steroids can be beneficial, although it is 
often treatment-resistant.
Genetic disorders
Neurofibromatosis
This is described in detail on page 1215.
Tuberous sclerosis
This is an autosomal dominant condition, with two 
genetic loci identified: TSC-1 (chromosome 9), encoding 
hamartin, and TSC-2 (chromosome 16), encoding 
tuberin. The hallmark is of hamartomas in many 
systems. The classic triad of clinical features comprises 
learning disability, epilepsy and skin lesions but there is 
marked heterogeneity in clinical features. Skin changes 
include pale oval (ash leaf) macules that occur in early 
childhood; yellowish/pink papules in the mid-face 
(angiofibromas, ‘adenoma sebaceum’), occurring in ado-
lescence; periungual and subungual fibromas; and con-
nective tissue naevi (shagreen patches, often on lower 
back). Gum hyperplasia, retinal phakomas (fibrous 
overgrowths), renal, lung and heart tumours, cerebral 
gliomas and calcified basal ganglia may also occur.
Reactive disorders
Erythema multiforme
Erythema multiforme has characteristic clinical and his-
tological features and can be triggered by a variety 
of factors (Box 28.41); a cause is not always identified. 
The disease is a reaction pattern and likely to have an 
immunological basis. Lesions are multiple, erythema-
tous, annular, targetoid ‘bull’s eyes’ (Fig. 28.48) and may 
blister. Stevens–Johnson syndrome (pp. 1264 and 1302) 
is a severe form of erythema multiforme with marked 
Fig. 28.47  Porphyria cutanea tarda. Skin fragility, blistering, scarring, 
milia and hypertrichosis on the back of hands and fingers in a patient with 
hepatitis C. 
Infections
• Viral, e.g. herpes simplex, orf, infectious mononucleosis, 
hepatitis B, HIV
• Mycoplasma and other bacterial infections
Drugs
• e.g. Sulphonamides, penicillins, barbiturates and 
carbamazepine
Systemic disease
• Sarcoidosis, malignancy, SLE
Other
• Radiotherapy, pregnancy
28.41  Provoking factors in erythema multiforme
Fig. 28.48  Erythema multiforme in a young woman. Herpes 
simplex virus infection was the trigger. 
Skin disease in general medicine
28
1303
thyroid disease, and malignancy, particularly haemato-
logical. An underlying trigger must be sought and 
removed/treated. Topical steroids or phototherapy may 
be helpful for chronic disease.
Acanthosis nigricans
Hyperkeratosis and pigmentation are typical and 
affected sites have a velvety texture. The flexures, espe-
cially axillae and, in dark-skinned people, sides of 
neck, are involved (pp. 271, 272, 798). There are several 
types, all associated with insulin resistance. Most often, 
acanthosis nigricans is found in conjunction with obesity 
and regresses with weight loss. It can be associated 
with malignancy, usually adenocarcinoma (particularly 
gastric), when it is usually more extensive and pruritic, 
and can involve mucous membranes.
Drug eruptions
Virtually all drugs may have cutaneous adverse 
effects (Fig. 28.49) and this should be considered in the 
blistering, mucosal involvement (mouth, eyes and geni-
tals) and systemic upset.
Identification and removal/treatment of any trigger 
are essential. Analgesia and topical steroids may provide 
symptomatic relief. Supportive care is required in 
Stevens–Johnson syndrome, including ophthalmology 
input. Systemic corticosteroids may increase risk of 
infection and a role for intravenous immunoglobulins is 
controversial.
Erythema nodosum
This is characterised histologically by a septal pannicu-
litis of subcutaneous fat (see Fig. 19.60, p. 710). An iden-
tified trigger is often present (Box 28.42). Lesions are 
typically painful, indurated violaceous nodules on the 
shins and lower legs. Systemic upset, arthralgias and 
fever are common. Spontaneous resolution occurs over 
a month or so, leaving bruise-like marks. Any under­
lying cause should be identified and removed or treated. 
Bed rest, leg elevation and oral NSAIDs may offer symp-
tomatic relief. Systemic corticosteroids are uncommonly 
required and must be avoided in infection. Dapsone 
and potassium iodide have been effective for stubborn 
disease.
Infections
• Bacteria, e.g. streptococci, mycobacteria, Brucella, 
Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, Chlamydia
• Viruses, e.g. hepatitis B and infectious mononucleosis
• Fungi
Drugs
• e.g. Sulphonamides, sulphonylureas, oral contraceptives
Systemic disease
• e.g. Sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, malignancy
28.42  Provoking factors in erythema nodosum
Fig. 28.49  Drug eruption. Always think about possible drug causes of 
any rash. This was doxycycline-induced photosensitivity in a farmer. 
Non-immunological (non-allergic)
All are predictable.
• Striae due to corticosteroids (see Fig. 28.8, p. 1265)
• Asteatosis with statins
• Candidal infections with antibiotics
• Worsening of psoriasis with lithium, β-blockers, anti-
malarials, NSAIDs
• Urticaria with aspirin due to mast cell degranulation
• Bradykinin-mediated angioedema due to ACE inhibitors
• Doxycycline photosensitivity
• Dapsone haemolysis
Immunological (allergic)
• Immediate IgE-mediated hypersensitivity (type I): penicillin-
induced urticaria and anaphylaxis
• Antibody-mediated (type II): penicillin-induced haemolysis
• Immune complex-mediated (type III): drug-induced serum 
sickness or vasculitis
• Delayed hypersensitivity (type IV): drug-induced erythema 
multiforme, lichenoid or pemphigus-like reaction; drug-
induced lupus, e.g. thiazide
28.43  Types of drug eruption
Acquired reactive  
perforating dermatosis
The hallmark of this condition is transepidermal elimi-
nation of dermal material, particularly collagen and 
elastic tissue. It presents as keratotic papules, particu-
larly in patients with diabetes and chronic renal disease. 
Treatment with topical steroids, retinoids, PUVA or 
UVA1 therapy may help. There are other related perfo-
rating dermopathies, with characteristic histology.
Annular erythemas
This group of chronic, poorly defined, annular, ery-
thematous and often scaly eruptions can be further sub-
divided and may be secondary to an identifiable cause. 
Erythema chronicum migrans can be associated with 
Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi) (p. 334). Erythema 
marginatum can occur in rheumatic fever (p. 614) or 
Still’s disease (p. 1104). Erythema gyra­tum repens typi-
cally presents as concentric circles of erythema and scale 
with an advancing edge and is usu­ally associated with 
underlying malignancy. Erythema annulare centrifugum 
presents with expanding, scaly, erythematous rings, 
with central fading. A trigger may not be apparent but 
possible associations include fungal infection, drugs, 
autoimmune or endocrine diseases, such as lupus or 
Skin disease
28
1304
Reaction pattern
Clinical features
Examples of causative drugs
Exanthematous
Erythema, maculopapular
Antibiotics (especially ampicillin), anticonvulsants, gold, 
penicillamine, NSAIDs, carbimazole, biological therapies,  
e.g. adalimumab
Urticaria and 
angioedema
Sometimes accompanied by angioedema
Salicylates, opiates, NSAIDs, antibiotics, dextran
Angioedema alone
ACE inhibitors
Lichenoid
Violaceous, lichen planus-like, 
dyspigmentation
Gold, penicillamine, antimalarials, thiazides, NSAIDs, 
β-blockers, ACE inhibitors, sulphonamides, lithium, 
sulphonylurea, proton pump inhibitors, quinine, 
antituberculous, dyes in colour developers
Purpura and 
vasculitis
Palpable purpura and necrosis
Allopurinol, antibiotics, ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs, aspirin, 
anticonvulsants, diuretics, oral contraceptives
Erythema 
multiforme
Target-like lesions and bullae on extensor 
aspects of limbs
See Box 28.41, p. 1302
Erythema nodosum
Tender, painful, dusky, erythematous 
nodules on shins
See Box 28.42, p. 1303
Exfoliative 
dermatitis
May be erythroderma
Allopurinol, carbamazepine, barbiturates, penicillins, PAS, 
isoniazid, gold, lithium, penicillamine, ACE inhibitors
Toxic epidermal 
necrolysis
Rapid evolution, extensive blistering, 
erythema, necrolysis, mucosal involvement
Anticonvulsants, antibiotics, especially sulphonamides, 
NSAIDs, terbinafine, sulphonylureas, antiretrovirals, allopurinol
Photosensitivity 
(p. 1260)
Photo-exposed site rash, may be sunburn-
like, exfoliation, lichenoid
Thiazides, amiodarone, quinine, NSAIDs, tetracyclines, 
fluoroquinolones, phenothiazines, sulphonamides, retinoids, 
psoralens
Drug-induced lupus
Photosensitivity, discoid lesions, urticarial or 
erythema multiforme-like. May have positive 
lupus serology and anti-histone antibodies
Allopurinol, thiazides, ACE inhibitors, PAS, anticonvulsants, 
β-blockers, gold, hydralazine, minocycline, penicillamine, 
lithium
Psoriasiform rash
Rash like psoriasis
See Box 28.28 (p. 1286)
DRESS
Facial oedema, fever, extensive rash, 
lymphadenopathy, eosinophilia and systemic 
involvement, e.g. hepatitis
Anticonvulsants, trimethoprim, minocycline, allopurinol, 
dapsone, terbinafine
AGEP/toxic 
pustuloderma
Rapid onset of sterile, non-follicular pustules 
on erythematous base
Ampicillin/amoxicillin, erythromycin, quinolones, 
sulphonamides, terbinafine, diltiazem, hydroxychloroquine
Acneiform 
eruptions
Rash resembles acne
Lithium, anticonvulsants, oral contraceptives, androgenic  
or glucocorticoid steroids, antituberculous drugs, EGFR-
antagonists, e.g. cetuximab
Pigmentation
See Box 28.38 (p. 1296)
Bullous eruptions
Often at pressure sites and may be other 
features, e.g. purpura, milia
Barbiturates, penicillamine
Pseudoporphyria
May be indistinguishable from porphyria 
cutanea tarda clinically
NSAIDS, tetracyclines, retinoids, furosemide, nalidixic acid
Exacerbation of 
acute hepatic 
porphyrias
See page 1301
Always check all drugs for safety of use in porphyrias against 
standard guidelines
Drug-induced 
immunobullous 
disease
May be like pemphigoid, pemphigus, 
dermatomyositis, scleroderma, epidermolysis 
bullosa acquisita
Penicillamine, ACE inhibitors, vancomycin
Fixed drug 
eruptions
Round/oval, erythema, oedema ± bullae
Same site every time drug is given
Pigmentation on resolution
Tetracyclines, sulphonamides, penicillins, quinine, NSAIDs, 
barbiturates, anticonvulsants
Hair loss
Diffuse
Cytotoxic agents, oral retinoids, anticoagulants, 
anticonvulsants, antithyroid drugs, lithium, oral 
contraceptives, infliximab
Hypertrichosis
Excessive hair growth in non-androgenic 
distribution
Diazoxide, minoxidil, ciclosporin
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; AGEP = acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis; DRESS = drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; 
EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PAS = para-aminosalicylic acid)
28.44  Clinical patterns of drug eruptions
Further information and acknowledgements
28
1305
differential diagnosis of most presentations of skin 
disease. Drugs can exert their adverse effects via several 
mechanisms, which can be broadly subdivided into non-
immunological and immunological (Box 28.43).
Clinical features
Cutaneous drug reactions typically present in specific 
patterns (Box 28.44). Non-immunologically mediated 
reactions can theoretically occur in anyone given suffi-
cient exposure to drug, although idiosyncratic factors, 
such as genetic predisposition, may render some more 
susceptible. There is limited information on genetic 
determinants of drug responses and adverse effects, 
although advances have been made, e.g. with azathio-
prine (p. 1268). Immunologically mediated cutaneous 
drug eruptions typically commence within days to 
weeks of starting the drug. Detailed history-taking relat-
ing to prescribed and non-prescribed medications is 
essential and there may be other clues (Box 28.45).
Investigations and management
The suspected drug must be stopped. If drug-induced 
photosensitivity is considered, the patient should be 
phototested whilst on the drug to confirm the diagnosis; 
testing should be repeated after drug withdrawal to 
confirm resolution of photosensitivity (p. 1255). An 
eosinophilia and abnormalities in liver function tests 
may occur in adverse drug reactions and, for example, 
• Past history of reaction to suspected drug
• Introduction of suspected drug a few days to weeks before 
onset of rash
• Recent prescription of a drug commonly associated with 
rashes (e.g. penicillin, sulphonamide, thiazide, allopurinol)
• Symmetrical eruption that fits with a well-recognised pattern, 
caused by a current drug
• Resolution of rash following drug cessation
28.45  Diagnostic clues to drug eruptions
specific IgE to penicillin may be raised in penicillin-
induced rash but, otherwise, specific investigations are 
not available. Rechallenge with drug is not usually 
undertaken unless the reaction is mild, as this can be 
risky. Drug withdrawal may not be straightforward and 
substitute drugs may be required. Antihistamines and/
or topical or systemic corticosteroids may provide sup-
portive management, depending on the type of cutane-
ous reaction. The management of anaphylaxis is 
described on page 92.
Further information and 
acknowledgements
Books and journal articles
Burns T, Breachnach S, Cox N, Griffiths C (eds). Rook’s 
textbook of dermatology, 8th edn. Oxford: Wiley–
Blackwell; 2010.
Goldsmith LA, Fitzpatrick TB. Fitzpatrick’s dermatology in 
general medicine, 8th edn. New York: McGraw–Hill 
Professional; 2012.
Websites
www.bad.org.uk Guidelines and patient information for many 
skin diseases.
www.nice.org.uk Guidelines for skin malignancy, atopic eczema, 
psoriasis and photodynamic therapy.
www.sign.ac.uk No. 72: Cutaneous melanoma (Feb 2004; review 
report 2012). No. 120: Management of chronic venous leg 
ulcers (Aug 2010). No. 121: Diagnosis and management of 
psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis in adults (Oct 2010). No. 125: 
Management of atopic eczema in primary care (Mar 2011).
Figure acknowledgements
Fig. 28.18A Savin JA, Dahl M, Hunter JAA. Clinical 
dermatology. 3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell; 2002.
This page intentionally left blank
1307
29 
Notes on the International System of Units 
(SI units) 1308
Laboratory reference ranges in adults 1308
Urea and electrolytes in venous blood 1308
Analytes in arterial blood 1308
Hormones in venous blood 1309
Other common analytes in venous blood 1310
Common analytes in urine 1311
Analytes in cerebrospinal fluid 1311
Analytes in faeces 1311
Haematological values 1312
Laboratory  
reference ranges
S.W. Walker
Laboratory reference ranges 
29
1308
NOTES ON THE INTERNATIONAL 
SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS)
Système International (SI) units are a specific subset of 
the metre–kilogram–second system of units and were 
agreed upon as the everyday currency for commercial 
and scientific work in 1960, following a series of inter-
national conferences organised by the International 
Bureau of Weights and Measures. SI units have been 
adopted widely in clinical laboratories but non-SI units 
are still used in many countries. For that reason, values 
in both units are given for common measurements 
throughout this textbook and commonly used non-SI 
units are shown in this chapter. However, the SI unit 
system is recommended.
Examples of basic SI units
Length
metre (m)
Mass
kilogram (kg)
Amount of substance
mole (mol)
Energy
joule (J)
Pressure
pascal (Pa)
Volume
The basic SI unit of volume is 
the cubic metre (1000 litres). 
For convenience, however, the 
litre (L) is used as the unit of 
volume in laboratory work.
Examples of decimal multiples and 
submultiples of SI units
Factor
Name
Prefix
106
mega-
M
103
kilo-
k
10−1
deci-
d
10−2
centi-
c
10−3
milli-
m
10−6
micro-
µ
10−9
nano-
n
10−12
pico-
p
10−15
femto-
f
Exceptions to the use of SI units
By convention, blood pressure is excluded from the SI 
unit system and is measured in mmHg (millimetres of 
mercury) rather than pascals.
Mass concentrations (e.g. g/L, µg/L) are used in pref-
erence to molar concentrations for all protein measure-
ments and for substances which do not have a sufficiently 
well-defined composition.
Some enzymes and hormones are measured by ‘bio-
assay’, in which the activity in the sample is compared 
with the activity (rather than the mass) of a standard 
sample that is provided from a central source. For these 
assays, results are given in standardised ‘units’, or ‘inter-
national units’, which depend upon the activity in the 
standard sample and may not be readily converted to 
mass units.
LABORATORY REFERENCE RANGES  
IN ADULTS
Reference ranges are largely those used in the Depart-
ments of Clinical Biochemistry and Haematology, 
Lothian 
Health 
University 
Hospitals 
Division, 
Edinburgh, UK. Values are shown in both SI units and, 
where appropriate, non-SI units. Many reference ranges 
vary between laboratories, depending on the assay 
method used and on other factors; this is especially the 
case for enzyme assays. The origin of reference ranges 
and the interpretation of ‘abnormal’ results are dis-
cussed on pages 4–6. No details are given here of the 
collection requirements, which may be critical to obtain-
ing a meaningful result. Unless otherwise stated, refer-
ence ranges shown apply to adults; values in children 
may be different.
Many analytes can be measured in either serum (the 
supernatant of clotted blood) or plasma (the supernatant 
of anticoagulated blood). A specific requirement for one 
or the other may depend on a kit manufacturer’s recom-
mendations. In other instances, the distinction is critical 
(e.g. plasma is required for measurement of fibrinogen, 
since it is largely absent from serum; serum is required 
for electrophoresis to detect paraproteins because 
fibrinogen migrates as a discrete band in the zone of 
interest).
Reference range
Analysis
SI units
Non-SI units
Sodium
135–145 mmol/L
135–145 meq/L
Potassium*
3.6–5.0 mmol/L
3.6–5.0 meq/L
Chloride
95–107 mmol/L
95–107 meq/L
Urea
2.5–6.6 mmol/L
15–40 mg/dL
Creatinine
60–120 µmol/L
0.68–1.36 mg/dL
*Serum values are, on average, 0.3 mmol/L higher than plasma.
29.1  Urea and electrolytes in venous blood
Reference range
Analysis
SI units
Non-SI units
Bicarbonate
21–29 mmol/L
21–29 meq/L
Hydrogen ion
37–45 nmol/L
pH 7.35–7.43
PaCO2
4.5–6.0 kPa
34–45 mmHg
PaO2
12–15 kPa
90–113 mmHg
Oxygen saturation
> 97%
29.2  Analytes in arterial blood
Laboratory reference ranges in adults 
29
1309
Reference range
Hormone
SI units
Non-SI units
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
(ACTH) (plasma)
1.5–11.2 pmol/L (0700–1000 hrs)
7–51 ng/L
Aldosterone
Supine (at least 30 mins)
30–440 pmol/L
1.09–15.9 ng/dL
Erect (at least 1 hr)
110–860 pmol/L
3.97–31.0 ng/dL
Cortisol
Dynamic tests are required – see Ch. 20
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Male
1.0–10.0 U/L
0.2–2.2 ng/mL
Female
3.0–10.0 U/L (early follicular)
0.7–2.2 ng/mL
> 30 U/L (post-menopausal)
> 6.7 ng/mL
Gastrin (plasma, fasting)
< 120 ng/L
< 120 pg/mL
Growth hormone (GH)
Dynamic tests are usually required – see Ch. 20
< 0.5 µg/L excludes acromegaly (if IGF1 in reference range)
> 6 µg/L excludes GH deficiency
–
Insulin
Highly variable and interpretable only in relation to plasma glucose and body habitus
Luteinising hormone (LH)
Male
1.0–9.0 U/L
0.11–1.0 µg/L
Female
2.0–9.0 U/L (early follicular)
0.2–1.0 µg/L
> 20 U/L (post-menopausal)
> 2.2 µg/L
17β-Oestradiol
Male
< 160 pmol/L
< 43 pg/mL
Female: early follicular
75–140 pmol/L
20–38 pg/mL
post-menopausal
< 150 pmol/L
< 41 pg/mL
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
1.6–7.5 pmol/L
16–75 pg/mL
Progesterone (in luteal phase in women)
Consistent with ovulation
> 30 nmol/L
> 9.3 ng/mL
Probable ovulatory cycle
15–30 nmol/L
4.7–9.3 ng/mL
Anovulatory cycle
< 10 nmol/L
< 3 ng/mL
Prolactin (PRL)
25–630 mU/L
–
Renin concentration
Supine (at least 30 mins)
5–40 mU/L
–
Sitting (at least 15 mins)
5–45 mU/L
–
Erect (at least 1 hr)
16–63 mU/L
–
Testosterone
Male
10–30 nmol/L
2.9–8.6 ng/mL
Female
0.3–1.9 nmol/L
0.1–0.9 ng/mL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
0.2–4.5 mU/L
–
Thyroxine (free), (free T4)
9–21 pmol/L
700–1632 pg/dL
Triiodothyronine (free), (free T3)
2.6–6.2 pmol/L
160–400 pg/dL
Notes
1.	 A number of hormones are unstable and collection details are critical to obtaining a meaningful result. Refer to local laboratory handbook.
2.	 Values in the table are only a guideline; hormone levels can often only be meaningfully understood in relation to factors such as sex (e.g. testosterone),  
age (e.g. FSH in women), pregnancy (e.g. thyroid function tests, prolactin), time of day (e.g. cortisol) or regulatory factors (e.g. insulin and glucose,  
PTH and [Ca2+]).
3.	 Reference ranges may be critically method-dependent.
(IGF1 = insulin-like growth factor 1)
29.3  Hormones in venous blood
Laboratory reference ranges 
29
1310
Reference range
Analyte
SI units
Non-SI units
α1-antitrypsin
1.1–2.1 g/L
110–210 mg/dL
Alanine 
aminotransferase 
(ALT)
10–50 U/L
–
Albumin
35–50 g/L
3.5–5.0 g/dL
Alkaline 
phosphatase
40–125 U/L
–
Amylase
< 100 U/L
–
Aspartate 
aminotransferase 
(AST)
10–45 U/L
–
Bilirubin (total)
3–16 µmol/L
0.18–0.94 mg/dL
Calcium (total)
2.1–2.6 mmol/L
4.2–5.2 meq/L
or 8.5–10.5 mg/dL
Carboxy­
haemoglobin
0.1–3.0%
–
Caeruloplasmin
0.16–0.47 g/L
16–47 mg/dL
Cholesterol 
(total)
Ideal level varies according to 
cardiovascular risk (see cardiovascular 
risk chart, p. 582), so reference ranges 
can be misleading. The following values 
were described by the European 
Atherosclerosis Society:
Mild increase
5.2–6.5 mmol/L
200–250 mg/dL
Moderate increase
6.5–7.8 mmol/L
250–300 mg/dL
Severe increase
> 7.8 mmol/L
> 300 mg/dL
HDL-cholesterol
Ideal level varies according to 
cardiovascular risk, so reference ranges 
can be misleading. According to the 
National Cholesterol Education Programme 
Adult Treatment Panel III (ATPIII), a low 
HDL-cholesterol is:
Low
< 1.0 mmol/L
< 40 mg/dL
Complement
C3
0.73–1.4 g/L
–
C4
0.12–0.3 g/L
–
Total haemolytic 
complement
0.086–0.410 g/L
–
Copper
10–22 µmol/L
64–140 µg/dL
C-reactive 
protein (CRP)
< 5 mg/L
Highly sensitive CRP assays also exist 
which measure lower values and may be 
useful in estimating cardiovascular risk
Creatine kinase (CK; total)
Male
55–170 U/L
–
Female
30–135 U/L
–
Creatine kinase 
MB isoenzyme
< 6% of total CK
–
Ethanol
Not normally detectable
Marked 
intoxication
65–87 mmol/L
300–400 mg/dL
Stupor
87–109 mmol/L
400–500 mg/dL
Coma
> 109 mmol/L
> 500 mg/dL
Reference range
Analyte
SI units
Non-SI units
Gamma-glutamyl 
transferase (GGT)
Male 10–55 U/L
Female 5–35 U/L
–
Glucose (fasting)
3.6–5.8 mmol/L
65–104 mg/dL
See p. 808 for definitions of impaired 
glucose tolerance and diabetes mellitus, 
and p. 783 for definition of hypoglycaemia
Glycated 
haemoglobin 
(HbA1c)
4.0–6.0%
20–42 mmol/mol Hb
–
See p. 808 for diagnosis of diabetes 
mellitus
Immunoglobulins (Ig)
IgA
0.8–4.5 g/L
–
IgE
0–250 kU/L
–
IgG
6.0–15.0 g/L
–
IgM
0.35–2.90 g/L
–
Lactate
0.6–2.4 mmol/L
5.40–21.6 mg/dL
Lactate 
dehydrogenase 
(LDH; total)
125–220 U/L
–
Lead
< 0.5 µmol/L
< 10 µg/dL
Magnesium
0.75–1.0 mmol/L
1.5–2.0 meq/L
or 1.82–2.43 mg/dL
Osmolality
280–296 mmol/kg
–
Osmolarity
280–296 mosm/L
–
Phosphate 
(fasting)
0.8–1.4 mmol/L
2.48–4.34 mg/dL
Protein (total)
60–80 g/L
6–8 g/dL
Triglycerides 
(fasting)
0.6–1.7 mmol/L
53–150 mg/dL
Troponins
Values consistent with myocardial 
infarction are crucially dependent upon 
which troponin is measured (I or T) and on 
the method employed. Interpret in context 
of clinical presentation. See p. 535
Tryptase
0–135 mg/L
–
Urate
Male
0.12–0.42 mmol/L
2.0–7.0 mg/dL
Female
0.12–0.36 mmol/L
2.0–6.0 mg/dL
Vitamin D, 25(OH)D
Normal
> 50 nmol/L
> 20 ng/mL
Deficiency
< 14 nmol/L
< 5.6 ng/mL
Inadequate stores
< 25 nmol/L
< 10 ng/mL
Zinc
10–18 µmol/L
65–118 µg/dL
29.4  Other common analytes in venous blood
Laboratory reference ranges in adults 
29
1311
Analyte
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Albumin
Definitions of microalbuminuria are given on p. 476
Proteinuria is defined below
Calcium (normal diet)
Up to 7.5 mmol/24 hrs
Up to 15 meq/24 hrs
or 300 mg/24 hrs
Copper
< 0.6 µmol/24 hrs
< 38 µg/24 hrs
Cortisol
20–180 nmol/24 hrs
7.2–65 µg/24 hrs
Creatinine
Male
6.3–23 mmol/24 hrs
712–2600 mg/24 hrs
Female
4.1–15 mmol/24 hrs
463–1695 mg/24 hrs
5-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid (5-HIAA)
10–42 µmol/24 hrs
1.9–8.1 mg/24 hrs
Metadrenalines
Normetadrenaline
0.4–3.4 µmol/24 hrs
73–620 µg/24 hrs
Metadrenaline
0.3–1.7 µmol/24 hrs
59–335 µg/24 hrs
Oxalate
0.04–0.49 mmol/24 hrs
3.6–44 mg/24 hrs
Phosphate
15–50 mmol/24 hrs
465–1548 mg/24 hrs
Potassium*
25–100 mmol/24 hrs
25–100 meq/24 hrs
Protein
< 0.3 g/L
< 0.03 g/dL
Sodium*
100–200 mmol/24 hrs
100–200 meq/24 hrs
Urate
1.2–3.0 mmol/24 hrs
202–504 mg/24 hrs
Urea
170–600 mmol/24 hrs
10.2–36.0 g/24 hrs
Zinc
3–21 µmol/24 hrs
195–1365 µg/24 hrs
*The urinary output of electrolytes such as sodium and potassium is normally a reflection of dietary intake. This can vary widely. The values quoted are 
appropriate to a ‘Western’ diet.
29.5  Common analytes in urine
Reference range
Analyte
SI units
Non-SI units
Calprotectin
< 50 µg/g
–
Elastase
> 200 µg/g
–
29.7  Analytes in faeces
Reference range
Analysis
SI units
Non–SI units
Cells
< 5 × 106 cells/L 
(all mononuclear)
< 5 cells/mm3
Glucose1
2.3–4.5 mmol/L
41–81 mg/dL
IgG index2
< 0.65
–
Total protein
0.14–0.45 g/L
0.014–0.045 g/dL
1Interpret in relation to plasma glucose. Values in CSF are typically 
approximately two-thirds of plasma levels.
2A crude index of increase in IgG attributable to intrathecal synthesis.
29.6  Analytes in cerebrospinal fluid
Laboratory reference ranges 
29
1312
Reference range
Analysis
SI units
Non-SI units
Bleeding time (Ivy)
< 8 mins
–
Blood volume
Male
65–85 mL/kg
–
Female
60–80 mL/kg
–
Coagulation screen
Prothrombin time (PT)
10.5–13.5 secs
–
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
26–36 secs
–
D-dimers
Interpret in relation to clinical presentation
< 230 ng/mL
–
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Higher values in older patients are not necessarily abnormal
Adult male
0–10 mm/hr
–
Adult female
3–15 mm/hr
–
Ferritin
Male (and post-menopausal female)
20–300 µg/L
20–300 ng/mL
Female (pre-menopausal)
15–200 µg/L
15–200 ng/mL
Fibrinogen
1.5–4.0 g/L
0.15–0.4 g/dL
Folate
Serum
2.8–20 µg/L
2.8–20 ng/mL
Red cell
120–500 µg/L
120–500 ng/mL
Haemoglobin
Male
130–180 g/L
13–18 g/dL
Female
115–165 g/L
11.5–16.5 g/dL
Haptoglobin
0.4–2.4 g/L
0.04–0.24 g/dL
Iron
Male
14–32 µmol/L
78–178 µg/dL
Female
10–28 µmol/L
56–157 µg/dL
Leucocytes (adults)
4.0–11.0 × 109/L
4.0–11.0 × 103/mm3
Differential white cell count
Neutrophil granulocytes
2.0–7.5 × 109/L
2.0–7.5 × 103/mm3
Lymphocytes
1.5–4.0 × 109/L
1.5–4.0 × 103/mm3
Monocytes
0.2–0.8 × 109/L
0.2–0.8 × 103/mm3
Eosinophil granulocytes
0.04–0.4 × 109/L
0.04–0.4 × 103/mm3
Basophil granulocytes
0.01–0.1 × 109/L
0.01–0.1 × 103/mm3
Mean cell haemoglobin (MCH)
27–32 pg
–
Mean cell volume (MCV)
78–98 fl
–
Packed cell volume (PCV) or haematocrit
Male
0.40–0.54
–
Female
0.37–0.47
–
Platelets
150–350 × 109/L
150–350 × 103/mm3
Red cell count
Male
4.5–6.5 × 1012/L
4.5–6.5 × 106/mm3
Female
3.8–5.8 × 1012/L
3.8–5.8 × 106/mm3
Red cell lifespan
Mean
120 days
–
Half-life (51Cr)
25–35 days
–
Reticulocytes (adults)
25–85 × 109/L
25–85 × 103/mm3
Transferrin
2.0–4.0 g/L
0.2–0.4 g/dL
Transferrin saturation
Male
25–56%
–
Female
14–51%
–
Vitamin B12
Normal
> 210 ng/L
–
Intermediate
180–200 ng/L
–
Low
< 180 ng/L
–
29.8  Haematological values
Index
Page numbers followed by an ‘f’ indicate index entries that relate to a figure; numbers followed by a ‘b’ indicate entries that relate to a box.
A
AAA see Abdominal aortic 
aneurysms
Abacavir, 407b
adverse reactions, 409
pharmacodynamics, 25b
Abatacept, 1103, 1103b
Abbey pain scale, 285
Abciximab
myocardial infarction, 594
platelet inhibition, 594, 997
Abdomen
examination
blood disorders, 990f
cancer, 261b
cardiovascular disease, 526f
gastrointestinal disease, 838f
liver and biliary disease, 923
renal/urinary tract disease, 
462f–463f
palpation, 839b
percussion, 839b
swelling see Ascites
Abdominal aortic aneurysms 
(AAA), 604–605, 605b
Abdominal examination, 839b
Abdominal pain, 285b, 861–863
acute, 861–863, 861b, 862f
assessment, 863b
chronic/recurrent, 863, 863b
constant, 863
diabetic ketoacidosis, 812, 812b
irritable bowel syndrome, 
907–908
liver abscess, 956–957, 970
lower abdomen, 418
management, 861–863
older people, 862b
pancreatitis
acute, 890–891
chronic, 892–893
peptic ulcer, perforated, 862–863
Abdominal tuberculosis, 691, 888
Abducens (6th cranial) nerve
damage to, 1171b
tests, 1139b
Abetalipoproteinaemia, 886, 1199b
Abnormal perception, 234, 1167
ABO blood groups, 1013–1014, 
1014b
ABPA see Allergic 
bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis
ABPI see Ankle:brachial pressure 
index
Abscess
anorectal, 919
cerebral, 1208–1209, 1208f
collar-stud, 690–691
definition, 1251b
infective endocarditis, 625–629
intra-abdominal, 200b
liver, 956–957, 970
amoebic, 368, 957
pyogenic, 956, 956b
lung, 109f, 297f
pancreatic, 297f
perinephric, 512
pulmonary, 687
spinal epidural, 1209
Absence seizures, 1181
Absidia, 384
Absorption, 21–22
gastrointestinal tract, 21,  
841–843
interactions, 28
parenteral, 21
tests, 851b
topical, 21–22
see also Malabsorption
ABVD regimen, Hodgkin’s disease, 
1043
Acamprosate, 254
Acanthocytes, 463b
Acanthosis, 1283
Acanthosis nigricans, 271b, 272, 
799b, 1303
Acarbose, 822b, 823
Accessory (11th cranial) nerve, tests, 
1139b
Acclimatisation
to altitude, 107
to heat, 106
Accommodation, sheltered, 249
ACCORD trial, 827–828
ACD see Anaemia, of chronic 
disease
ACE (angiotensin-converting 
enzyme), 432
ACE inhibitors
adverse reactions, 26b, 176b
angioedema, 93b
cough, 611–612
hyperkalaemia, 440
skin reactions
aortic regurgitation
atherosclerosis prevention,  
583b
chronic renal failure, 487–488
contraindication, cirrhosis,  
971b
diabetic cardiovascular disease, 
828
diabetic nephropathy, 828
drug interactions, 28b
effect on renal function, 36b, 502, 
522, 522b
heart failure, 551, 551b
dosages, 552b
site of action, 552f
hypertension, 611, 613b
microalbuminuria in type 1 
diabetes, 831
mitral regurgitation, 619–620
myocardial infarction, 599
pregnancy, 37b
Acetaldehyde metabolism, 957
Acetazolamide, 434–435
altitude illness, 107
epilepsy, 1184b
idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension, 1218
Acetyl-CoA, 957
Acetylcholine, 841
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE),  
1227f
poisoning, 209b
Acetylcysteine, 212, 709
Achalasia of oesophagus, 868–869, 
869f
AChE see Acetylcholinesterase
Achilles tendinitis, 1107–1108
Achilles tendon xanthoma, 454f
Achlorhydria, 877f, 882b
Achondroplasia, 58
inheritance, 59
Aciclovir
herpesvirus infections, 161–162, 
161b, 318b, 326
bone marrow transplant 
patients, 1017b
chickenpox/shingles, 317b
genital, 424–425
HIV/AIDS, 397
oral hairy leukoplakia, 398
viral encephalitis, 1206
nephrotoxicity, 522b
in pregnancy, 154b
Acid-base balance, 443–444, 444f
critically ill patients, 187
disorders, 443–447, 660b
mixed, 447
presenting problems, 444–447, 
445b
renal control, 444
Acidosis
lactic, 445
diabetics, 823
poisoning, 209b
metabolic, 445–446, 445b
acute kidney injury, 482
chronic renal failure, 485
critically ill patients, 180f–181f, 
187
diabetic ketoacidosis, 812
differential diagnosis, 658b
hypothermia, 104–105
malaria, 357b
near-drowning, 108
poisoning, 209b
renal tubular, 446, 446b
respiratory, 445b, 447
Acids, poisoning, 210, 210b
Acinetobacter spp., 136f
Acinus, 646, 647f, 924f
Acitretin
psoriasis, 1267
psoriatic arthritis, 1109
Acne, 1281–1283, 1281b, 1281f
conglobata, 1281–1282
cystic, 1282f
excoriée, 1282
fulminans, 1282
secondary, 1282
vulgaris, 1281–1283
Acneiform eruptions, 1304b
Acoustic neuroma, 1215–1216
Acrochordon, 1275
Acrocyanosis, 88b, 1030–1031
Acrodermatitis chronica atrophica, 
335
Acrodermatitis enteropathica, 
131–132
Acromegaly, 790b, 792–793, 793f
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1133
ACTH see Adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone
Actin, 48
Actinic dermatitis, chronic, 1261f
Actinic keratosis, 1266, 1271, 1271f
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, 
626
Actinomadura, 382
Actinomyces spp., 137f
Actinomyces israelii, 341
Actinomycetes, 135, 341
Actinomycetoma, 341
Action potential, 1141
Activated partial thromboplastin 
time (APTT), 999–1000, 
1000b
reference values, 1312b
Activated protein C (APC), 185
Activities of daily living (ADL), 167
Barthel Index, 177, 177b
Acupuncture, pain management, 
288, 288f
Acute abdomen, 861–863, 862f
Acute confusional states, older 
people, 473b
Acute coronary syndrome, 589–600
chest pain, 543
complications, 596–598
management, 542f
see also Angina, unstable; 
Myocardial infarction
Acute intermittent porphyria, 460b
Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN), 
502–503, 502b
Acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP), 
708b
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 197–198, 
197b, 478–483
causes, 479f
clinical features, 479–481, 
480b–481b
criteria, 481b
differential diagnosis, 481b
interstitial, 502–503, 502b
investigations, 480b
malaria, 357b
management, 482, 482b
non-oliguric, 502–503
older people, 483b
pathophysiology, 479–483
post-renal, 481
pre-renal, 479
pregnancy, 521
recovery, 483
1313
Index
1314
renal, 479–481
renal replacement therapy, 483, 
491
screening tests, 468
Acute limb ischaemia, 603, 603b
Acute lung injury (ALI), 192
Acute mountain sickness (AMS), 
107
Acute phase proteins, 82
Acute phase response, 138
ferritin levels in, 1023
musculoskeletal disease, 1092
retroperitoneal fibrosis, 511
rheumatic disease, 1089
Acute Physiology Assessment and 
Chronic Health Evaluation 
(APACHE II), 204
Acute renal failure (ARF) see Acute 
kidney injury
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS), 192, 192b
definition, 193b
drug-induced, 714b
mechanical ventilation, 196b
near-drowning victims, 108
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN), 185
drug-induced, 522b
Adalimumab
inflammatory bowel disease, 
903b, 905b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1103b
skin reactions, 1268
Adams-Stokes attacks, 572
Adapalene, 1266
Adaptive immunity, 76–78
ADCC see Antibody-dependent 
cellular cytotoxicity
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive 
Examination-Revised 
(ACE-R), 234
Addison’s disease, 777b
Adefovir, hepatitis B, 953
Adefovir dipivoxil, 161b, 162
Adenine, 42, 43f
Adenocarcinoma
ampullary/periampullary, 895
bronchial, 700b
oesophagus, 870f–871f
pancreatic, 895
prostate, 517
renal, 515–516, 516f
small intestine, 889
of unknown origin, 282
Adenoma
adrenal, 772b
Conn’s syndrome, 781f
Cushing’s syndrome, 773b, 774
bronchial, 701b, 704b
colorectal, 849b, 910
familial adenomatous polyposis, 
911–912
hepatic, 970
parathyroid, 769
periampullary, 888
pituitary, 790b
sebaceum, 1302
small intestine, 888
toxic, thyroid, 754
Adenomatosis of gallbladder, 988
Adenosine, 568, 575b–576b, 576
Adenosine diphosphate see ADP
Adenosine monophosphate, cyclic 
(cAMP), 47f
Adenosine triphosphate see ATP
Adenosquamous carcinoma of lung, 
704b
Adenoviruses
diarrhoea, 328
respiratory infection, 674b,  
688b
ADH see Antidiuretic hormone
Adhesion factors, 185
Adhesion molecules, 79
ADHR see Autosomal dominant 
hypophosphataemic rickets
Adipocytes, 802
Adipokines, 115–116, 805
Adiponectin, 115–116, 823
Adjustment disorders, 232, 242
depressive, 235
prevalence, 232b
ADL see Activities of daily living
Adolescents
allergy, 93b
congenital heart disease, 635b
cystic fibrosis, 681b
diabetes mellitus, 818, 818b
haematological malignancy, 
1035b
infections, 313, 313b
inflammatory bowel disease, 906b
juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 
1104b
renal disease, 521, 521b
ADP (adenosine diphosphate), 45f
ADP receptor inhibitors, 1019b
Adrenal crisis, 779b
Adrenal glands, 771–782
diseases
classification, 772b
presenting problems, 773–780
functional anatomy and 
physiology, 771–773, 771f
incidental mass (incidentaloma), 
779–780
older people, 779b
Adrenal hyperplasia, congenital, 
763b, 782
Adrenal insufficiency, 777–779, 
777b–778b
Adrenal tumours
Cushing’s syndrome, 776
see also Phaeochromocytoma
Adrenalectomy, 781
Cushing’s syndrome/disease, 776
Adrenaline
anaphylaxis, 91–92, 92b
angioedema, 92b
circulatory effects, 191b
urticaria, 1290
Adrenarche, 773
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH)
Cushing’s syndrome, 271b
deficiency, hypopituitarism, 777b, 
787b
ectopic ACTH syndrome, 776
ectopic production, 271b
excess, 777b–778b
reference values, venous blood, 
1309b
stimulation test (tetracosactide 
test; short Synacthen test), 
778b
Adrenoleucodystrophy, 1199b
Adriamycin see Doxorubicin
Adult polycystic kidney disease 
(PKD), 505–507, 506b, 506f
Advance directives, 171, 291
Advanced life support (ALS), 
558–559, 559f
Adverse drug reactions, 24–28, 26b
classification, 25–27, 27b
older people, 175–176, 176b
pharmacovigilance, 27–28
prevalence, 24–27
risk factors, 26b
TREND analysis, 27b
see also individual drugs
Aedes spp.
Chikungunya virus, 329
dengue, 322
yellow fever, 323
AEDs (antiepilepsy drugs) see 
Anticonvulsants
AF see Atrial fibrillation
Affective (mood) disorders
bipolar, 243–245
organic, 235b
Affinity, 18
Affluence, health consequences, 
101–102, 101b
AFP (α-fetoprotein)
hepatocellular carcinoma, 967
as tumour marker, 78, 270b
African tick bite fever, 350, 351b
African trypanosomiasis (sleeping 
sickness), 309b, 358–360, 359f
Afterload, 183
heart failure, 550–551
reduction, 191
Age/ageing, 165–177
atherosclerosis and, 602b
biological, 167
biology, 168–169
chronological, 167
diabetes and, 806b, 828b
physiological changes, 169–170, 
169f
syndrome of premature ageing 
see Werner’s syndrome
see also Older people
Agglutination, cold, 1030–1031
Agglutination test, 142
leishmaniasis, 363–364
leptospirosis, 338
microscopic, 338
sporotrichosis, 383
trypanosomiasis, 359
tularaemia, 340
Aggrecan, 1062–1063
Aggressive behaviour, 237–238, 237f
Agitation, terminal, 290
Agnosia, 1167
Agonists, 18
Agoraphobia, 243
Agranulocytosis, 694b, 749
AHR see Airway hyper-reactivity
AIDS see HIV infection/AIDS
Aids and appliances, 
musculoskeletal disease, 
1080
AIN see Acute interstitial nephritis
AIP see Acute interstitial 
pneumonia
Air travel, 107–108
Airflow obstruction, 653f
assessment in COPD, 675
Airway hyper-reactivity (AHR), 
667f
Airways, 646f
asthma, 667f
assessment, 669
defences, 648–649, 648f
maintenance, critically ill 
patients, 188–189
obstruction, 270b
reactive dysfunction syndrome, 
716
sleep apnoea, 726–727
stroke patients, 1243b
upper airway disease, 725–728
Akathisia, 248, 1187–1188
AKI see Acute kidney injury
Akinesia, 1196b
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 
928, 1310b
Albendazole
cysticercosis, 380
helminthic infections, 162, 
370–372, 375
filariases, 373
hydatid disease, 381
microsporidiosis, 399b
Albers-Schöberg disease, 1131
Albinism
inheritance, 1295
oculocutaneous, 1295–1296
Albright’s hereditary 
osteodystrophy, 1091b
Albumin, 1011
AKI, 480b
plasma, liver function test, 928
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1310b
urinary, 1311b
see also Hypoalbuminaemia
Albumin solutions, 482b
ascites, 940
Albuminuria, diabetes mellitus, 831, 
831b
Alcohol, 100
abstinence from, 20b
amount in average drink, 957b
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
and, 581
cardiomyopathy and
dependence, 252–254, 252b
diabetics, 821
dietary, energy provided by,  
110
drug interactions, 28b
heart muscle disease and
liver disease and, 957–959
mortality, 100f
pharmacokinetics and, 24b
poisoning, 209b
thiamin deficiency and, 124–126
see also Ethanol
Alcohol misuse, 100, 100f, 240, 
252–254
aetiology, 252–254
diagnosis, 253
effects, 253, 253b
liver disease see Alcoholic liver 
disease
management, 253–254
maternal, 253b
pancreatitis, 892–893
prevalence, 232b
prognosis, 253–254
Alcohol withdrawal, 20b, 253b
management, 253–254
Alcoholic fatty liver disease 
(AFLD), 931–932
Alcoholic liver disease, 957–959
clinical features, 958, 958b
liver function tests, 930b
older people, 980b
pathophysiology, 957–959, 958b, 
958f
Aldosterone, 772
deficiency, 442
plasma potassium and, 435, 
439–440
reference range, 1309b
resistance, 442
see also Hyperaldosteronism
Alendronate
dosage regimen, 35b
osteoporosis, 1123, 1123b
Alfacalcidol (1,25- 
hydroxycholecalciferol), 
770–771
Alfentanil, 287
Alginates, 867
Algodystrophy, 1130
ALI see Acute lung injury
Alimentary tract, 837–920
see also Gastrointestinal tract
Alkaline phosphatase
liver function test, 928–929
placental, as tumour marker, 268, 
270b
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
sclerosing cholangitis, 966
serum
Paget’s disease, 1129
rickets/osteomalacia, 1127
Alkalis, poisoning, 210b
Alkalosis, 768b
hypokalemic, Cushing’s 
syndrome
metabolic, 445b, 446–447, 447f
respiratory, 445b, 447
Alkaptonuria, 475b
Alkylating agents, 746
Alleles, 51–53
Allelic heterogeneity, 59
Allergens, 90
asthma, 667f
contact eczema, 1283–1284
Index
1315
Allergic alveolitis, extrinsic see 
Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis
Allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis (ABPA), 697, 
697b
Allergic contact eczema, 1284–1285, 
1285f
Allergic rhinitis, 725
Allergy, 89–94, 90b
clinical assessment, 90
food, 888
hygiene hypothesis, 89
investigations, 90
challenge test, 90
patch tests, 1255, 1285
skin prick tests, 90
management, 90–91
pathology, 89
in pregnancy, 94b
presenting problems, 90–93
spiders, 225b
susceptibility to, 89
Allodynia, 1092–1093
fibromyalgia, 1092–1093
Allopurinol
acute leukaemia patients, 1037b, 
1038
drug interactions, 28b
gout, 1089
hepatotoxicity, 36b, 971
pharmacodynamics, 25b
renal stone prevention, 509–510, 
509b
skin reactions, 1292
Alopecia, 1296b
androgenetic, 1296
drug-induced, 1304b
scarring inflammatory, 1300f
Alopecia areata, 1296–1297, 1297f
nails in, 1297f, 1298
Alpha heavy chain disease, 889
Alpha particles, 102b
Alpha-blockers
benign prostatic hypertrophy, 613b
hypertension, 612, 613b
phaeochromocytoma, 782
α-fetoprotein (AFP)
hepatocellular carcinoma, 967
as tumour marker, 268, 270b
α-glucosidase inhibitors, 822b, 823
α-thalassaemia, 1034–1035
α-tocopherol see Vitamin E
α1-antichymotrypsin, 82
α1-antitrypsin, 82
faecal clearance, 886
liver disease, 930b
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
α1-antitrypsin deficiency, 974, 974f
inheritance, 58b
Alport’s syndrome, 502, 502f
ALS see Advanced life support
ALT see Alanine aminotransferase
Alteplase, 595
Alternaria, 671
Alternative medicine, 15
Altitude, effects/illness, 106–108, 
106f
Aluminium
osteomalacia, 1126b
poisoning, 223
Aluminium hydroxide
diarrhoea, 884
phosphorus deficiency, 130
renal osteodystrophy, 488
Alveolar macrophages, 385, 711
Alveolar microlithiasis, 715b
Alveolar proteinosis, 715b
Alveolitis, 338, 712
extrinsic see Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis
fibrosing, 543b, 1070b
cryptogenic see Pulmonary 
fibrosis, idiopathic systemic 
sclerosis
non-eosinophilic, drug-induced, 
714b
Alzheimer’s disease, 250b, 251–252, 
251f
familial, 251–252
see also Dementia
Amanita phalloides poisoning, 308
Amantadine, 161b, 162
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
Parkinson’s disease, 1197
Amastigotes, leishmaniasis, 363f
Amaurosis fugax, 1008
AmBisome, 364
Amelanotic melanoma, 269
Amenorrhoea, secondary, 759–760, 
759b
American Psychiatric Association 
(DSM-IV) (4th ed), 232
American trypanosomiasis  
(Chagas disease), 309b, 
360–361
Amikacin
actinomycetoma, 341
nocardiosis, 341
Amiloride, 435, 940
diabetes insipidus, 795
mineralocorticoid excess, 781
Amino acids, 114b
essential, 114b
metabolism, 926
disorders of, 449
Aminoglycosides, 151b, 156–157
adverse reactions, 157
brucellosis, 333
dosages, 157, 157f
effect of renal insufficiency
mechanism of action, 150b
nephrotoxicity, 36b
pharmacokinetics, 156–157
in pregnancy, 154b
Aminopenicillins, 154b, 155
Aminophylline
asthma, 672, 672f
COPD, 678
Aminosalicylates, inflammatory 
bowel disease, 860, 903b
Aminotransferases (transaminases), 
928
acute liver failure, 934
hypothermia, 104–105
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, 
961
plasma
liver function test, 928
reference range, 1310b
viral hepatitis, 951f
Amiodarone
adverse reactions
hyperpigmentation, 1296b
pulmonary fibrosis, 714
arrhythmias, 575b, 576
atrial fibrillation, 565–566
atrial flutter, 564
tachyarrhythmias, 570
causing thyroid dysfunction, 
742–743
heart failure, 553
hepatotoxicity, 971b
structure, 745b
thyrotoxicosis, 742–743, 752
Amitriptyline, 244b
fibromyalgia, 1094
headache, 1176
herpes zoster, 319, 397
irritable bowel syndrome,  
909
migraine prevention, 1177
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
musculoskeletal pain, 1072
neuropathic pain, 285b, 288b, 
833b
non-ulcer dyspepsia, 877
pain management, 288b
post-herpetic neuralgia, 397
psychiatric disorder, 244b
sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Amlodipine
angina, 587b
unstable, 594
hypertension, 612
Ammonia, 464
hepatic encephalopathy, 942
Ammonium chloride, 446
Amnesia, 1161–1162
persistent, 1162
post-ictal, 1158b
transient global, 1161–1162
Amniocentesis, 63b
Amodiaquine, malaria, 356
Amoebiasis, 367–368, 368f
incubation period, 145b, 310b
Amoebic liver abscess, 368, 957
Amoeboma, 368, 368f
Amoxicillin, 154b
diphtheria, 346
gonorrhoea, 422b
Helicobacter pylori eradication, 
874
listeriosis, 339
Lyme disease, 335
pneumonia, 685b
skin reactions, infectious 
mononucleosis, 321, 321f
urinary tract infection, 513b
Amphetamines, misuse, 218
Amphotericin/amphotericin B, 160, 
160b
aspergillosis, 698–699
blastomycosis, 386
candidiasis, 383
coccidioidomycosis, 386
cryptococcal infections, 
HIV-related, 403
fusariosis, 384
histoplasmosis, 385–386
leishmaniasis, 364–365, 367
lipid formulations, 160
mucormycosis, 699
mycetoma, 382
nephrotoxicity, 446b, 522b
neutropenic sepsis, 274
P. marneffei infection, 385
sporotrichosis, 383
systemic fungal infections, 698
Ampicillin, 151b, 154b
cerebral abscess, 1208b
drug interactions, 155
enteric fever, 340
infective endocarditis, 628b
listeriosis, 339
liver abscess, 956
meningitis, 1204b
skin reactions, 321, 1304b
infectious mononucleosis, 321, 
321f
Ampulla of Vater, carcinoma, 986
AMS see Acute mountain sickness
Amsacrine, acute leukaemia,  
1037b
Amygdala, 1142–1143
Amylase, 842f, 844b
pancreatic, 112–113
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
salivary, 72
serum
hypothermia, 104–105
pancreatitis, 239b, 891
Amylin, 846b
Amyloid A, serum, 82
Amyloid angiopathy, 250b, 1239b
Amyloid deposition, type 2 
diabetes, 806
Amyloid in plaques, Alzheimer’s 
disease, 251–252
Amyloidosis, 86, 86b
heart disease, 86
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099–1100
skin lesions, 1302
Amylose, 112–113
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
1200b–1201b
Amyotrophy
diabetic, 832
neuralgic, 1223b, 1226
ANA see Antinuclear antibody
Anabolic steroids, 970
Anaemia(s), 991–992, 1001–1011, 
1021–1035, 1021f
after gastric resection, 845–846
ancylostomiasis, 310
aplastic, 1028, 1032, 1048, 1048b
causes, 1001b
of chronic disease (ACD), 1023, 
1023b
clinical assessment, 1001–1002
haemolytic, 1026–1031, 1026b, 
1027f
alloimmune, 1031
autoimmune, 1029–1031
microangiopathic, 1031
non-immune, 1031
HIV infection/AIDS, 404–405
investigation, 1002, 1002f–1003f
iron deficiency, 1001–1002, 
1021–1023
alimentary tract disorders,  
867
ancylostomiasis, 310
leucoerythroblastic, 1048–1049
leukaemia patients, 1038
macrocytic, 1002
malaria, 357b
megaloblastic, 1024–1026
microcytic, 1002
normocytic, normochromic, 929
older people, 1034b
pernicious, 1025
refractory, 1041b
renal failure
acute
chronic, 485b, 488
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099–1100
sickle-cell, 1032–1034, 1033f
sideroblastic
signs and symptoms, 991b
Anaesthesia
diabetics, 819f
leprosy, 348
Anagrelide, 1049
Anakinra, 1103, 1103b
Anal canal, 845f
Anal cancer, HIV-related, 405
Anal fissure, 919
Analgesia
bone metastases, 275
cholecystitis, 984
critically ill patients, 202–203
low back pain, 1073
musculoskeletal disorders, 
1078–1080
myocardial infarction, 593–594
osteoarthritis, 1085
palliative care, 286–288
pancreatic cancer, 895
pancreatitis, 894
pleural pain, 685
post-herpetic neuralgia, 397
renal colic, 509
Analgesic headache, 1176
Analgesic ladder (WHO), 286–287, 
287f
Analgesics
adjuvant, 288, 288b
poisoning, 212–213
see also specific drugs
Anaphylactic shock, 190
urticaria, 1290
Anaphylactoid reactions, 92, 92b
antivenom, 230
Anaphylaxis, 87, 421
causes, 92b
clinical signs, 91–92, 91f
gastrointestinal, 888
horse serum, 346
iatrogenic, 27b, 92b
management, 92, 92b
Anaplasma phagocytophila, 334
Index
1316
ANCAs (antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies), 1068, 1118
Ancylostoma caninum, 375–376
Ancylostoma duodenale, 312b, 369, 
370f
life cycle, 370f
Ancylostomiasis (hookworm), 
369–370, 370f
Andersen-Tawil syndrome, 1230b
Andersen’s disease, 450b
Androgen receptor antagonists, 
765b
Androgen replacement therapy, 
761b, 763b, 779
polycystic ovarian syndrome, 
764b
Androgens
adrenal, 773, 778
excess, 763b
insufficiency, 778b
excess, hirsutism, 763b
exogenous, 763b
older women, 766b
tumours secreting, 763–764
Anergy, 86–87
Aneuploidy, 62, 849
Aneurysms
aortic, 603–605, 604f
abdominal, 604–605, 605b
pain, 604
syphilitic, 604
thoracic, 604
saccular (berry), 506, 632
ventricular, 597–598
see also Microaneurysms
Angelman’s syndrome, 46, 54b, 56b
Angina
aortic stenosis, 620
at rest, 596–597
crescendo, 589
pain, 540
decubitus, 540
nocturnal, 586
older people, 595b
pain, 583–584
post-infarct, 597
precipitating factors, 584b
Prinzmetal’s, 589
stable, 583–589
clinical features, 583–589, 583b
invasive treatment, 587–589
investigations, 541–543, 541f
management, 585, 585b, 586f
with normal coronary arteries, 
589
prognosis, 589
risk stratification, 584b
unstable, 589–600
clinical features, 583b, 590–593, 
590b
pain, 590
risk stratification, 591, 591f
treatment, 594
variant, 589
warm-up, 583–584
Angina equivalent, 544
Angiodysplasia, 856
Angioedema, 93, 93f
ACE-inhibitor associated, 93b
drug-induced, 1304b
hereditary, 93b, 93f, 94
idiopathic, 93b
laryngeal obstruction, 93
types of, 93b
urticaria, 1290
Angiogenesis, 264, 264f–265f
Angiography
arteriovenous malformation, 
1242b
bronchial artery, 659f
coronary, 218, 538–539, 538f
CT, 469, 537, 537f
digital subtraction, 601–602
hepatobiliary disease, 931, 
967–968
intra-arterial, 1236f
magnetic resonance, 946
mesenteric, 856, 861, 889, 910
nervous system, 1149, 1149b
pulmonary, 723
CT, pulmonary embolism, 651, 
722
renal, 610b
visceral, 856
Angiomatosis, bacillary, 349, 352b
Angioplasty
angina, 744–745
coronary, 587f, 595b, 595f
renal artery stenosis, 495
stroke, 1244–1246
Angiosarcoma, 1131b
Angiostrongylus cantonensis, 309b
Angiotensin II, 772
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
effect on renal function, 487b
heart failure, 551–552, 552b
hypertension, 611–612, 613b
microalbuminuria in diabetes, 
831
renal failure, 487–488
Angiotensin-converting enzyme see 
ACE
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors see ACE inhibitors
Angular cheilitis, HIV/AIDS, 398
Angular stomatitis, 128, 838f, 
899–900
Anhedonia, 234
Anidulafungin, 160b
Anion gap
acidosis, 445, 445b
poisoning, 209b
Anismus, 917
Ankle:brachial pressure index 
(ABPI), 1262
Ankle pain, 1076
Ankylosing spondylitis, 1091b, 
1105–1107
clinical features, 1105, 1105b
HLA associations, 1105
inflammatory bowel disease and, 
902f
Annulus fibrosus, 529–530
Anogenital warts, 425–426
Anophthalmia, 59
Anorectal disorders, 918–919
Anorectal motility tests, 850
Anorexia
cancer patients, 271b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1095
Anorexia nervosa, 255–256, 256b
osteoporosis, 1121
Anosmia, 759
Anosognosia, 252
ANP see Atrial natriuretic peptide
Anserine bursitis, 1076b
Antacids
bile reflux, 851
drug interactions, 28
sodium content, 940b
Antagonists, 18–19
Antalgic gait, 172b
Anterior tibial compartment 
syndrome, 1135
Anthracyclines, 280b
Anthrax, 309b, 346–347
bioterrorism, 145
cutaneous, 346
gastrointestinal, 346
immunisation, 149b
incubation period, 145b, 310b
inhalational, 347
Anthropometry, 114–115
Anti-androgen therapy, 765b
Anti-anxiety drugs, 241b
Anti-arrhythmic drugs, 573–577
adverse reactions, 575b, 1005b
classification, 573–577, 574b
by site of action, 574f
dosages, 575b
principles of use, 575b–576b
see also individual drugs
Anti-B-cell therapy, 1103b
Anti-cancer drugs see 
Chemotherapy
Anti-CCP antibodies, 239b, 708
Anti-centromere antibodies, 1068b
Anti-comedogenic agents, 1266
Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide 
antibodies (ACPA), 1067
Anti-D, 1014
Anti-DNA antibodies, 1067
Anti-epilepsy drugs (AEDs) see 
Anticonvulsants
Anti-herpesvirus agents, 161–162, 
161b
Anti-histone antibodies, 1062–1063
Anti-IL1 therapy, 1103b
Anti-IL6 therapy, 1103b
Anti-inflammatory drugs
asthma, 667–668
osteoarthritis, 1085
see also individual drugs
Anti-Jo-1 antibodies, 1068b
Anti-La antibodies, 1068b
Anti-LKM antibodies, 962
Anti-oestrogens, 129–130, 278
Anti-ribonucleoprotein antibody, 
1068b
Anti-RNA polymerase, 1068b
Anti-Ro antibody, 1068b
Anti-Smith antibody, 1068b
Anti-smooth muscle antibodies, 
962b
Anti-T-cell induction agents, 96b
Anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG), 96b
Anti-TNF therapy
ankylosing spondylitis, 1107
inflammatory bowel disease, 
903b, 905b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1102–1103, 
1103b
Anti-topoisomerase I antibody, 
1068b
Antibiotic therapy
acne, 1282
acute leukaemia, 1038
adverse reactions, 26b
cerebral abscess, 1208–1209
cholecystitis, 984
choledocholithiasis, 985
cystic fibrosis, 681
diabetic foot ulcers, 834–835
diarrhoea associated with, 138b, 
308
gastroenteritis/acute diarrhoea, 
307–308
Helicobacter pylori eradication, 874
hepatotoxicity, 971b
infective endocarditis, 628, 628b
inflammatory bowel disease, 
902–905, 903b
meningitis, 1204b
osteomyelitis, 1095–1096
pneumonia
community-acquired, 685
hospital-acquired, 686
suppurative/aspirational, 687
prophylactic
infective endocarditis
pancreatitis, 892
spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis, 941
respiratory tract infections
bronchiectasis, 679
COPD, 677
cystic fibrosis, 681
pneumonia see pneumonia, 
above
sepsis, 201, 201b
septic arthritis, 1094–1095, 1095b
skin disorders in systemic 
sclerosis, 1113
staphylococcal infections see 
individual infections
travellers’ diarrhoea, 311b
urinary tract infection, 513b
vesico-ureteric reflux, 505b
Antibiotics
adverse reactions, 1005b
aminoglycosides, 151b, 156–157
beta-lactam, 154–156, 154b, 155f
drug interactions, 26b
folate antagonists, 158
glycopeptides, 157–158
ketolides, 156
lincosamides, 156
macrolides, 151b, 156
nitroimidazoles, 158
prophylactic see individual 
conditions
quinolones, 157, 157b
skin reactions, 321, 321f
sodium content, 940b
Antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity (ADCC), 75
Antibody/antibodies, 77b
deficiencies, 78b, 80–82, 81b, 81f
detection, 141–142, 141f
see also Autoantibodies
Anticardiolipin antibodies, 1055, 
1242b
Anticholinergics
adverse reactions, 176b
bladder dysfunction, 1175b
COPD, 677–678
Parkinson’s disease, 1197
poisoning, 213b
Anticholinesterases
Alzheimer’s disease, 251
myasthenia gravis, 1226–1227
neurotoxic envenoming, 230
α1-Antichymotrypsin, 82
Anticoagulants/anticoagulation, 
1018–1021
adverse reactions, 26b
angina, unstable, 594, 594b
atrial fibrillation, stroke 
prevention, 567b
coagulation screening, 1000b, 
1312b
drug interactions, 1020
indications, 1018b
mechanism of action, 1019b
monitoring, 1000–1001
myocardial infarction, 594, 594b
obliterative cardiomyopathy
older people, 724b
oral, in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
poisoning, 224b
pregnancy, 1022b
prosthetic heart valves and, 629b
pulmonary embolism, 723
risk assessment, 1020b
rodenticides, 224b
stroke patients, 1245b
valvular heart disease, 620b
venous thromboembolism, 723, 
1010–1011
see also specific anticoagulants
Anticodons, 44–45
Anticonvulsants
epilepsy, 1183–1184
choice of drug, 1183b–1184b
withdrawal, 1184
pain management, 288b
poisoning, 224b
skin reactions, 1304b
use in pregnancy, 66
Antidepressants, 241b, 244, 244b
adverse reactions, 176b, 1005b
alcohol withdrawal, 254
anxiety disorder, 243
dosage regimen, 35b
irritable bowel syndrome, 909
medically unexplained somatic 
symptoms, 247b
older people, 36b, 176b
poisoning, 213–214
tricyclic, 241b, 244, 244b
irritable bowel syndrome, 909
neuropathic pain, 288b
poisoning, 209b, 213–214
sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Index
1317
Antidiabetic drugs, oral see Oral 
hypoglycaemics
Antidiarrhoeal drugs, 308
inflammatory bowel disease, 903b
irritable bowel syndrome, 908f
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH; 
arginine vasopressin; 
vasopressin), 432, 438
diabetes insipidus, 794–795
ectopic production, 271b
inappropriate secretion, 438b
cancer patients, 271b
Antiemetics
chemotherapy, 277
myocardial infarction, 546
palliative care, 290b
receptor site activity, 290b
staphylococcal food poisoning, 341
Antifreeze poisoning, 222–223
Antifungal agents, 159–160, 160b, 
1267
Antigen processing and 
presentation, 78
Antiglobulin (Coombs) test, 1030f
Antihistamines, 90, 1267
allergic rhinitis, 725
eczema, 1285b
food allergy, 888
labyrinthitis, 1186
pruritus, 1260
urticaria, 1291
Antihypertensive drugs, 611–612
adverse reactions, 1005b
benefit, 610b
choice, 612
influence of comorbidity, 613b
chronic renal failure, 487, 488b
combinations, 612f
dosage regimen, 35b
effect of old age, 36b, 610b
renal artery stenosis, 495
stroke prevention, 1246f
Antimalarials, 163, 356–357, 1268
adverse reactions, 1005b
poisoning, 215
prophylactic, 153b
see also individual drugs
Antimetabolites, 263f
Antimicrobial agents
combination therapy, 150–151
development of refined and new 
agents
mechanisms of action, 150–154, 
150b
pharmacokinetics/
pharmacodynamics, 152–154, 
153f
in pregnancy, 154b
resistance to, 151–152, 152f
selection, 151b
susceptibility testing, 143, 143f
therapeutic drug monitoring, 154
see also Antibiotics
Antimicrobial therapy, 151b
duration of, 152, 153b
in old age, 154b
principles, 149–154, 150f
prophylactic, 152, 153b
see also Antibiotic therapy
Antimitochondrial antibodies, 962b, 
963
Antimonials, leishmaniasis, 364
Antimotility agents, 308
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies (ANCAs), 520, 
1068, 1118
Antinuclear antibody (ANA)
liver disease, 962b
musculoskeletal disease, 
1067–1068, 1067b
renal disease, 468
Antioxidants, 82, 648
Antiparasitic agents, 162–164
Antiphospholipid antibodies, 1068
Antiphospholipid (antibody) 
syndrome, 1055, 1055b
Antiplatelet therapy, 1019b
angina, 585
unstable, 594, 594b
myocardial infarction, 594, 594b
obliterative cardiomyopathy, 638
peri-operative, 600
pre-eclampsia, 521
stroke prevention, 1245b
Antiproteinases, 648
Antipsychotics (neuroleptics), 241b
adverse reactions, 26b, 249b
poisoning, 216
schizophrenia, 249b
terminal agitation, 290
Antiretroviral therapy, 161b, 
407–410, 407b
choice of regimen, 407–408
complications, 408–409
criteria for starting, 408, 408b
monitoring efficacy, 408
pregnancy, 314b
resistance, 408
see also individual drugs
Antirheumatic drugs
rheumatoid arthritis, 1100–1103
slow-acting (DMARDs) see 
Disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs
Antisecretory agents, 308
Antiseptics, 1266
Antisocial (psychopathic) 
personality disorder, 255
Antithrombin, 185
deficiency, 1054
Antithymocyte globulin
aplastic anaemia, 1048
graft versus host disease, 1018
Antithyroid drugs
adverse reactions, 749, 1005b
Graves’ disease, 748b, 749
in pregnancy, 748b, 749–750
skin reactions, 749
Antitoxin, diphtheria, 346
Antitrypsin
liver function tests, 930b
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Antituberculous drugs, 693–694
adverse reactions, 694b
HIV/AIDS patients, 406–407
Antivenins
scorpion, 230
snake, 230
spider, 230
Antivenom, 230
Antiviral agents, 161, 161b, 1267
see also Antiretroviral drugs
Anuria, 471–472
Anxiety/anxiety disorders, 242–243
alcohol and, 253
classification, 243b
differential diagnosis, 235b
generalised, 243
hyperventilation
management, 243
in palliative care patients, 290
panic disorder, 243
phobic, 243
presyncope see Presyncope
prevalence, 232b
stroke patients, 1243b
symptoms, 234–235, 235b
Aorta
ascending
dilatation, 535f
syphilis, 420
coarctation, incidence, 630b
diseases, 603–607, 604f
Aortic aneurysms, 603–605, 604f
abdominal, 604–605, 605b
pain, 604
syphilitic, 604
thoracic, 604
Aortic dissection, 604f, 605–607, 
605b, 606f
pain, 541, 606
Aortic regurgitation, 527b, 623–624, 
623b, 623f
clinical features, 623–624, 623b
investigations, 624, 624b
chest X-ray, 535f
Aortic stenosis, 527b, 620–623, 621f
congenital, 620
Doppler echocardiography, 536f
heart murmurs, 562b, 621
incidence, 630b
investigations, 621, 621b
older people, 622b
Aortic valve
balloon valvuloplasty, 621–623
disease, 620–624
replacement, 621–624
Aortitis, 604
syphilis, 604
APACHE II, 204
Apatite crystals, deposition, 1091
APD see Automated peritoneal 
dialysis
APECED see Autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-
candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy
Aphasia see Dysphasia
Aphonia, 728
Aphthous ulceration, 863–864, 864b
Apixaban, indications, 1018b
Aplasia cutis, 749–750
Aplastic anaemia, 1048, 1048b
secondary, 1048
Aplastic crisis, 1028, 1032
Apnoea, sleep, 726–727
Apo A1 deficiency, 455–456, 456b
Apo A1 Milano, 455–456, 456b
Apocrine glands, 1254
Apolipoproteins, 450, 451f
Apomorphine, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197b
Apoptosis, 50, 262
Apoptotic bodies, 50
Appendicitis, acute, 861
Apraxia, 1167
constructional, 923f
gait, 172b, 1168
Apronectomy, 120
APS see Autoimmune 
polyendocrine syndromes
APTT see Activated partial 
thromboplastin time
Aquaporins, 48
Ara-C see Cytarabine
Arachidonic acid, 138, 667
Arachis oil enemas, 917, 917b
Arachnoiditis, 1073
Arboviruses, 309b, 1205
ARDS see Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome
ARF (acute renal failure) see Renal 
failure, acute
Argentinian haemorrhagic fever, 
325b
Arginine, 114b
Arginine vasopressin see 
Antidiuretic hormone
Argyll Robertson pupils, 1172b
Arms, claudication, 602
Aromatase inhibitors
cancer treatment, 280
osteoporosis and, 1132b
Arrhythmias, 562–579, 583b
breathlessness, 544
during dialysis, 492b
electrophysiology, 539
heart failure, 546b, 549
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
637–638
hypothermia, 104f
mitral valve prolapse, 618
myocardial infarction, 596, 596b, 
598
palpitation, 243, 556–557, 556b, 
556f
(pre-)syncope, 555
sudden death, 557–560, 557b, 
583b
treatment
drugs, 573–577
non-drug therapy, 577–579
see also specific arrhythmias
Arsenic
hyperpigmentation from, 1296b
poisoning, 223, 223b
Artemether, malaria, 356
Artemisinin, 163, 354
Arterial blood gases, 653–654, 654f
analysis, 1308b
asthma, 671–672
critically ill patients, 187–188
pneumonia, 684b
pulmonary embolism, 721b, 722
respiratory failure, 192b, 664b
venous thromboembolism
Arterial disease
hepatic, 975
leg ulceration, 1263
limbs
lower, 1263
upper, 602
peripheral, 600–603, 600b
Arterial gas embolism, 109
Arterial pressure waveform, 187
Arterial pulse
distinction from venous pulse, 
527b
examination, 527b
Arterialisation, 491
Arteries, great, transposition, 630b, 
635b
Arteriography
coronary, 585
renal, 470
Arteritis
giant cell, 1117–1118
Takayasu’s, 1116
Artesunate, malaria, 356
Arthritis
chronic (‘pyrophosphate’), 1086b
crico-arytenoid, 712b
crystal-induced, 1086–1092
drug-induced, 1132b
enteropathic, 1109
HIV-related, 404
juvenile idiopathic, 1103–1104, 
1104b
Lyme disease, 334–336, 1209
monoarthritis
acute, 1069, 1069b
chronic inflammatory, 1068
mutilans, 1108
oligoarthritis, 1104, 1104b
osteoarthritis, 1081–1086
for detailed entry see 
Osteoarthritis
polyarthritis see Polyarthritis
psoriatic, 1104b, 1108–1109, 1109f
erosions, 1109
reactive, 1107–1108, 1107b
rheumatic fever, 615
rheumatoid, 1096–1103
for detailed entry see 
Rheumatoid arthritis
septic, 1094–1095
synovial fluid analysis, 1094
SLE, 1110
viral, 1095
Arthrodesis, 1080b
Arthropathy
haemophilic
psoriasis, 1288
reactive, sexually acquired, 423
Arthroplasty
excision, 1080b
joint replacement, 1080b
Asbestos-related disease, 714b, 
717b, 718–719
diffuse pleural thickening, 718, 
718f
pleural plaques, 714b, 718, 718f
pleurisy, 718
Index
1318
Asbestosis, 718–719
Ascariasis, 312b
Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm), 
312b, 371, 984
Aschoff nodules, 614
Ascites, 270b, 923b, 938–941
appearance, 939b
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 976
causes, 939–941, 939b, 939f
cirrhosis, 944
heart failure, 549f
oedema, 478
pancreatic, 891, 891b
portal hypertension, 945
renal failure, 940
serum-ascites albumin gradient 
(SAAG), 939
Ascorbic acid see Vitamin C
Ash leaf macules, 1302f
Asherman’s syndrome, 759
L-Asparaginase, acute leukaemia, 
1037b
Aspartate, 114b
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 
928
myocardial infarction, 593f
Aspergilloma, 697–698, 698f
Aspergillosis, 383
acute leukaemia patients, 1038
bronchopulmonary, 697–699
allergic, 697, 697b
chronic/subacute, 699
classification, 697b
invasive, 698–699, 698b
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
Aspergillus spp., 78b, 79, 382f
cystic fibrosis, 681
endocarditis, 626
immunocompromised patients, 
302
Aspergillus clavatus, 697
Aspergillus flavus, 266b, 697
Aspergillus fumigatus
immunocompromised patient, 
688b
respiratory infections, 697, 697f, 
719b
Aspergillus niger, 697
Aspergillus terreus, 697
Asphyxia/asphyxiation
laryngeal obstruction, 728, 728b
self-harm, 238–239
Aspiration pneumonia, 687
malaria, 357b
Aspirin
adverse reactions, 26b
angina, 585
unstable, 594b
arthritis, rheumatic fever, 615
asthma association, 667
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
prevention, 583b
atrial fibrillation, stroke 
prevention, 567
coronary artery bypass grafting, 
588
coronary heart disease, 
myocardial infarction, 594
dosage regimen, 35b
drug interactions, 28b
hypertension, 613
Kawasaki disease, 1116
microalbuminuria in diabetes, 
831b
myeloproliferative disorders, 
1049
myocardial infarction, 599
pericarditis, 597
peripheral vascular disease
platelet inhibition, 1050
poisoning, 212–213
pre-eclampsia prevention
rheumatic fever, 615
stroke patients, 1244
AST see Aspartate aminotransferase
Asteatotic eczema, 1285
Asterixis (flapping tremor), 923b
Asthma, 666–673
acute severe, 658b, 671b
management, 671–673, 672b, 
672f
prognosis, 673
atopic, 669
brittle, 671
clinical features, 667–668
cough-variant, 667
diagnosis, 668–669, 668b–669b
drug-induced, 667–668, 714b
epidemiology, 666–673
exacerbations, 671–673
exercise-induced, 668f
and gastro-oesophageal reflux 
disease, 866b
investigations, 669
management, 669, 669b, 670f
nocturnal, 667, 669b
occupational, 666–667, 669, 
715–716, 715b
management, 669
peak flow readings, 716f
older people, 677b
pathophysiology, 666–667
pregnancy, 671b
prevalence, 666f
respiratory function 
abnormalities, 653b
Astrocytes, 1140–1141
Astrocytoma, 911–912, 1151f
Astroviruses, 327
Asystole, 558
Ataxia telangiectasia, 267b, 1199b
gene test, 267
Ataxia(s), 1198–1199
acquired, 1199b
cerebellar, 272, 1229b
episodic, 1199b
Friedreich’s, 1199b
genetics/inheritance, 56b
hereditary, 1198–1199, 1199b
sensory, 1209b
spinocerebellar, 1199b
stroke, 1237
Ataxic gait, 172b, 1168
Atazanavir, 407b
Atenolol, 575b
angina, 594
drug interactions, 28b
hypertension, 612
Atheroembolic renal disease, 469b, 
496
Atheroembolism, 469b, 496f, 602
Atherosclerosis, 452–453, 579–583
chronic renal failure
diabetics, 826–827
heart transplant recipients
older people, 602b
pathophysiology, 579–583
prevention, 581–583, 582b–583b
renal artery stenosis and, 494
risk factors, 581, 582f
stages, 580f
Athetosis, 1166
Athletes, sudden death, 638
Athlete’s foot, 1279–1280
Atlantoaxial subluxation, 
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
Atmospheric pollution, 102
ATN see Acute tubular necrosis
Atomic absorption, 428b
Atopic asthma, 669
Atopic eczema, 1283–1284,  
1284f
complications, 1284b
diagnosis, 1284b
management, 1286
pruritus, 1284
rash, 1257b, 1284b
Atopy, 90, 666–667
see also Allergy
Atorvastatin, 598
Atovaquone
malaria, 163, 356
ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
myocardial contraction, 530
serum, bone disease, 1066b
ATP synthase, 46b
Atria, 528, 528f
Atrial ectopic beats, 564, 564f
Atrial fibrillation (AF), 564–567,  
565f
causes, 565b
hypertension, 609
lone, 565
management, 565–567
mechanisms, 565f
mitral valve disease, 616
myocardial infarction, 596
older people, 566b
paroxysmal, 565–566
permanent, 566
persistent, 566
pre-excited, 568
stroke risk, 567b
thromboembolism prevention, 
566–567
thyrotoxicosis, 742
Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome, 568–569, 568f
Atrial filling pressure, 182
Atrial flutter, 564, 564f
Atrial myxoma, 639
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 
432
Atrial septal defect, 632–633, 633f
closure devices, 633f
incidence, 630b
Atrial tachyarrhythmias, 564–567
Atrial tachycardia, 564
Atrioventricular (AV) block, 
571–573, 571f–572f, 572b
chronic, 573
myocardial infarction, 572–573
Atrioventricular (AV) dissociation, 
570f
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 
529–530, 529f
re-entry tachycardia, 567–569, 
568f
Atrophy, skin, definition, 1251b
Atropine
acute cholinergic syndrome, 221
arrhythmias, 575b, 576–577
AV block, 572
carbamate poisoning, 222
cardiotoxic drug poisoning, 
214–215
organophosphorus poisoning, 
221
Attributable fraction, 99b
Audit see Clinical audit
Auerbach’s plexus, 845
Aura, 1158b
migraine, 1156b
seizures/epilepsy, 1158b
Auscultation
heart, 527b
heart murmurs, 560–562, 561b
respiratory disease, 261b, 683
Austin Flint murmur, 623–624
Australian tick typhus, 351b
Autoantibodies, 88
chronic liver disease, 962b
musculoskeletal disease, 
1067–1068
primary biliary cirrhosis, 963
thyroid, 741b
Autoimmune disease, 86–88, 87b
classification, 87, 88b
gastritis, 871–872
haemolytic anaemia, 1029–1031
investigations, 88
liver, 961–966
physiology and pathology,  
86–87
polyendocrine syndrome, 770
predisposing factors, 87, 87b
pregnancy, 94b, 521
thyroid, 747–751
Autoimmune hepatitis, 962–963, 
962b
immunosuppression in, 963b
immunosuppressive therapy, 
962–963
liver function tests, 930b
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome, 80
Autoimmune polyendocrine 
syndromes (APS), 795–796, 
796b
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-
candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy (APECED), 796, 
796b
Automated peritoneal dialysis 
(APD), 492
Autonomic dysfunction, 
somatoform, 232b, 246
Autonomic nervous system, 
844–845, 1144
diabetics, 832, 832b–833b
tests of cardiovascular autonomic 
function, 833b
Autonomy, respect for, 10–11
Autophagy, 46–47, 262
Autosomal dominant 
hypophosphataemic rickets 
(ADHR), 1126b
Autosomal dominant inheritance, 
51–53
Autosomal dominant polycystic 
kidney disease (PKD), 62b
Autosomal recessive inheritance, 53
Autosomes, 42
AV see Atrioventricular
Avian influenza, 320
Axial spondyloarthritis, 1106b
Axons
neuropathy, 1224
peripheral nerve, 1140–1141
Azapropazone, 1079b
Azathioprine, 96b, 1268
adverse reactions, 1268
autoimmune haemolysis, 1030
autoimmune hepatitis, 962–963
biliary cirrhosis, 964
drug interactions, 28b
eczema, 1286
hepatotoxicity, 971b
inflammatory bowel disease, 903b
interstitial lung disease, 709
myasthenia gravis, 1227b
myositis, 1115
organ transplant patients, 96b, 
553
rheumatic disease, 1101b
SLE, 1112
Azelaic acid, 1266, 1283
Azithromycin, 151b
bacillary angiomatosis, HIV/
AIDS patients, 398
cystic fibrosis, 681b
enteric fever, 340
Mycobacterium avium complex, 
407
STIs
chlamydial infection, 353, 423b
syphilis, 421
trachoma, 353
Azoles, 159–160
Aztreonam, 151b, 154b, 155f
B
B lymphocytes (B cells), 77
combined B/T lymphocyte 
deficiencies, 80, 81f
gastrointestinal system, 843–844
leukaemia
chronic lymphocytic, 1040
hairy cell, 1041
lymphoma, 879–880, 1272
and primary antibody 
deficiencies, 81f
Babesia microti, 304b
Babesiosis, 309b, 358
Index
1319
Bacillary angiomatosis, 349, 352b
Bacillary dysentery, 345
Bacille Calmette-Guérin see BCG
Bacillus spp., 136f
Bacillus anthracis, 346
Bacillus cereus, food poisoning, 306, 
341, 341f
Back, examination, cardiovascular 
disease, 526f
Back pain, 1072–1073
ankylosing spondylitis, 1105
prevalence, 1060b
red flags, 1073b
triage, 1072f
see also Low back pain
Baclofen, multiple sclerosis, 1192b
Bactec system, tuberculosis 
diagnosis, 693
Bacteraemia, 303
definition, 184b
homeless people, 352
Bacteria, 135, 136f
endogenous commensal, 72
identification, 136b
toxins, diseases caused by, 138b, 
1209–1211
Bacterial infections, 329–353
and cancer, 266b
gastrointestinal, 341–345
HIV/AIDS patients, 398–399, 
400b, 401
immune deficiency and, 78b
nervous system, 347, 1202–1204, 
1202b
respiratory, 345–347
sexually transmitted, 419–423
skin, soft tissue and bone, 
329–333, 1275–1278
systemic, 333–341
see also specific infections
Bacteriophages, 134–135
Bacteriuria
asymptomatic, 513
catheter-related, 513
treatment in pregnancy, 520b
Bacteroides spp., 136f–137f, 151b
Bacteroides fragilis, 687
Bacteroides melaninogenicus, 687
Bad news, giving, 4
Baker’s (popliteal) cyst, 1076b, 1098
rupture, 1098
Balance
disorders of, 1167–1168
see also Dizziness; Vertigo
Balanitis, 415
anaerobic, 416b
circinate, 416b, 1108
plasma cell (of Zoon), 416b
Balanoposthitis, 415
Balkan nephropathy, 503–504
Ballism, 1166
Balloon dilatation, 510–511, 587f
Balloon tamponade, variceal 
bleeding, 928, 947f
Balloon valvuloplasty
aortic valve, 621–623
mitral valve, 618, 618b
Balsalazide, 903b
Balsam of Peru, 1285b
Bamboo spine, 1105–1106, 1107f
Bambuterol, COPD, 675
Bandages, compression, leg ulcers, 
1263
Banding, variceal bleeding, 928
Barbiturates, 217b
misuse, 254
skin reactions, 1304b
withdrawal symptoms, 20b
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 49
Bare lymphocyte syndrome, 80
Bariatric surgery, 119–120, 119b, 
120f
Baritosis, 718
Barium studies
constipation, 861
diverticulosis, 916
gastrointestinal disease, 847b
gastrointestinal tuberculosis, 691
inflammatory bowel disease, 
901–902
oesophageal disorders, 705b, 850, 
869f
pharyngeal pouch, 868
Barotrauma, 109
Barrett’s (columnar lined) 
oesophagus, 866–867
carcinoma and, 866–867
Barthel Index of Activities of Daily 
Living, 177, 177b
Bartonella henselae, 352, 398
Bartonella quintana, 352, 398
Bartonellosis, 352–353, 352b
Bartter’s syndrome, 441, 510
Basal cell carcinoma, 1270–1271, 
1270b, 1270f
Basal cell papilloma, 1274, 1274f
Basal ganglia, 1143
Basal metabolic rate (BMR), 110, 
111f
in overnutrition, 112
Basement membrane, skin, 1252, 
1253f
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP) 
crystal deposition, 
1091–1092, 1091b
Basic life support (BLS), 558, 558f
Basophilia, 1004b
Basophilic stippling, 999f
Basophils, 75, 995, 1004f
count, 1312b
Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis 
Disease Activity Index, 1105, 
1106b
Batten’s disease, 46–47
Battery acid poisoning, 868
Bayes’ theorem, 6b
BCG (bacille Calmette-Guérin)
intravesical, bladder cancer, 517
leprosy, 350
tuberculosis, 696
BCP see Basic calcium phosphate
BCR see Breakpoint cluster region
Beau’s lines, 1298, 1298f
Becker muscular dystrophy, 1228b
Becker’s disease, 1230b
Beckwith-Wiederman syndrome, 
54b
Beclometasone, 21–22, 670f
Behaviour
assessment in psychiatric 
disorders, 233
disturbed and aggressive, 
237–238, 237f
older people, 238b
Behaviour therapy, 241
Behavioural rating scale for pain, 
285
Behçet’s syndrome, 1119, 1119b
Beighton score, modified, 1134b
Bejel, 333, 333b
Beliefs, abnormal, 234
Bell’s palsy, 1163
Bence Jones protein, 477–478
Bence Jones proteinuria, 477–478, 
1046
Bendroflumethiazide, 795
Beneficence, 11
Benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo, 1186, 1186f
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 
472, 514–515
incontinence and, 473
Benserazide, 1196
Benzamides, substituted, 249b
Benzathine penicillin
prophylactic, 615–616
syphilis, 421
Benzbromarone, 1071
Benzene, 266b, 1035b
Benzisoxazole, 249b
Benznidazole, trypanosomiasis, 163, 
360–361
Benzocaine, allergy, 1285b
Benzodiazepines, 241b
adverse reactions, 26b, 176b
alcohol withdrawal, 253–254
anxiety disorder, 241b, 243
delirium, 174–175
drug interactions, 28b
misuse, 217
overdose, 217
palliative care, 289
respiratory depression, 237–238
stress reactions, 242
terminal agitation, 677
withdrawal symptoms, 20b, 254b
Benzoyl peroxide, 1266
Benzylpenicillin, 154b, 155f
anthrax, 347
cerebral abscess, 1208b
infective endocarditis, 628, 628b
meningitis, 1204b
neurosyphilis, 1209
procaine see Procaine penicillin
rheumatic fever, 615
soft tissue infections, 1267
streptococcal infection, 331
tetanus, 1210b
Bereavement, 233
Beri-beri, 128
Bernard-Soulier syndrome, 1050
Bernoulli equation, modified, 
536–537
Berry aneurysms, 506, 632
Berylliosis, 717, 717b
Beta particles, 102–103, 102b
Beta-adrenoceptor agonists, 241b
anaphylaxis, 92b
asthma, 669–671
COPD, 675
Beta-blockers (beta-adrenoceptor 
antagonists)
adverse reactions, 26b, 176b
angina, 586
unstable, 594
anxiety disorders, 243
arrhythmias, 574–576
atrial fibrillation, 565–566
atrial flutter, 564
tachyarrhythmias, 570
ventricular tachycardia, 570
asthma association, 667–668
atherosclerosis prevention, 583
cardiomyopathy, 638
essential tremor, 1199
heart failure, 552, 552b
site of action, 552f
hypertension, 612, 613b
Marfan’s syndrome, 604
mitral stenosis, 618
myocardial infarction, 599,  
599b
phaeochromocytoma, 782
poisoning, 214
skin reactions, 1304b
thyrotoxicosis, 741–742
variceal bleeding, 946
β-carotene, porphyria management, 
460
Beta-lactam antibiotics, 154–156, 
154b, 155f
adverse reactions, 154–155
drug interactions, 155
mechanism of action, 150b
pharmacokinetics, 154–155
β-oxidation, 971
β-thalassaemia, 1034, 1034b
Betamethasone, 1265b
Bevacizumab, 279
Bezold-Jarisch reflex, 555–556
Bi-level positive airway pressure 
(BIPAP), 194, 195f
Bicarbonate
acid-base balance, 187
acid-base disorders, 430b, 660b
diabetic ketoacidosis, 814
arterial blood, 1308b
see also Sodium bicarbonate
Biguanides, 216, 821–823
Bile, 927
lithogenic, 982b
reflux, 875
Bile acid sequestering resins, 434
Bile acid tests, 851b
Bile ducts
dilatation, 360
flukes, 378
stones, 983b
pancreatitis, 890
vanishing bile duct syndrome
Bile salts, 842f
malabsorption, 884
Bilevel positive airway pressure see 
BIPAP
Bilharziasis see Schistosomiasis
Biliary cirrhosis
investigations, 964
primary, 963–965, 963f
AMA-negative, 964–965
liver function tests, 930b
older people, 980b
overlap syndromes, 964–965
secondary, 981
Biliary colic, 982
Biliary disease, 980–988
autoimmune, 961–966
clinical examination, 922f
extrahepatic, 981
intrahepatic, 980–981
investigation, 928–932
see also Liver disease
Biliary sludge, 982
Biliary system, functional anatomy, 
926
Biliary tract diseases, HIV-related, 
400
Biliary transport proteins, 927f
Bilirubin
alcoholic liver disease, 959
excretion, 927f
liver function test, 928
metabolism, 927
plasma
acute liver failure, 934b
jaundice, 936
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
viral hepatitis, 948–949
see also Hyperbilirubinemia
Bilirubinuria, 475b
Bioavailability, 21
Biochemical investigations, 428–429, 
428b
bone disease, 1066–1067
liver disease, 928–929
Biochemical markers
cancer, 269, 270b
myocardial damage, 593, 593f
Biofeedback, faecal incontinence, 
918
Biological therapies, 15
cancer, 278–279
psoriasis, 1289b
psychiatric disorders, 240–241
rheumatoid arthritis, 1102–1103
skin disease, 1268
Biomarkers
cardiac, 593, 593f
tumours, 269, 270b
Biopsy
bone, 1068, 1127
bone marrow, 1000f
brain, 1155
cancer diagnosis, 276
gastrointestinal tract, 850b
inflammatory bowel disease, 
900
small bowel biopsy, coeliac 
disease, 881
kidney, 471, 471b, 503f
liver, 931–932, 931b, 961
lung
bronchial carcinoma, 702
interstitial disease, 706–707
Index
1320
lymph node, 1042f
muscle, 1068, 1115f, 1154
neurological disease, 1154–1155
pleural, 661
tuberculosis, 401
prostate, 518
pyrexia of unknown origin,  
299b
sentinel lymph node, 1274
skin, 1255, 1268
synovial, 1068
temporal artery, 1068
transbronchial, 688
trephine, 1000f
Bioterrorism, 145
Biotin, 129
deficiency, 129
dietary sources, 125b
RNI, 125b
BIPAP/BiPAP see Bi-level positive 
airway pressure
Biphosphonates see 
Bisphosphonates
Bipolar disorder, 243–245
Birch oral allergy syndrome, 94
Bird fancier’s lung, 719b
Bisacodyl, 917b
Bismuth, 308, 874
Bisoprolol, 575b
angina, 586
arrhythmias, 576
hypertension, 612
Bisphosphonates
adverse reactions, 1124b
biliary cirrhosis, 964
bone metastases, 275, 275b
hypercalcaemia, 273, 769–770
multiple myeloma, 1047
osteomalacia and, 1126b
osteoporosis, 1123–1124
Paget’s disease, 1129
Bites
snake, 225b
spider, 225b
Bithionol, 162
Bitot’s spots, 127
Black urine, 1026–1027
Blackheads see Comedones
Blackouts, 1157–1159, 1158f
alcoholic, 253
older people, 172
Blackwater fever, 356f, 1031
Bladder, 466
atonic, 1175b
dysfunction, 1174
flaccid, 1174
hypertonic, 1175b
incomplete emptying, 514–515
multiple sclerosis, 1192
overactive (spastic), 1174
stones, 507
tumours, 516–517, 517f
incidence, 262f
ultrasound, 468–469
Bladder neck
dyssynergia, 1174
obstruction, 377, 472
incontinence and, 473
Blalock-Taussig shunt, 635
Blast cells, 992f
Blast crisis, 1039–1040
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 386
Blastomycosis, 386
Blatchford score, 854b
Bleach, poisoning, 224b
Bleeding, 991–992, 1006–1007
chronic renal failure, 485
examination/investigation,  
991b
gastrointestinal, 853–857
endoscopic therapy, 852b, 855
iron deficiency, 1021–1023
NSAIDs and, 1021–1022
spontaneous, malaria, 357b
variceal see Variceal bleeding
see also Haemorrhage
Bleeding disorders, 1049–1054
acquired, 1054
congenital, 1054
investigation, 999–1000
Bleeding time, 1000, 1312b
Bleomycin
Hodgkin’s disease, 1043
hyperpigmentation from, 1296b
Blind loop syndrome, 882–883,  
882b
Blindness
leprosy, 348–349
night, 127
river blindness, 374–375
vitamin A deficiency
see also Vision, loss
Blistering, 1301
Blisters, 1258, 1258b
at birth, 1291–1292
definition, 1251b
Blocks and gaps, 11
Blood, 992–997
arterial
analysis, 1308b
asthma, 671–672
respiratory failure, 664b
venous thromboembolism
components, 1012b
culture, 140f, 141, 303–304, 303b
donation/processing/storage, 
1011–1012, 1013f
oxygenation, 182–183
Blood cells, 994–996
formation, 992–994, 992f–993f
see also Platelets; Red cells; White 
cells
Blood count, 998, 998b
AKI, 480b
gastrointestinal bleeding, 855
hepatobiliary disease, 929
multiple myeloma, 1047b
musculoskeletal disease, 1066
pregnancy, 1022b
see also Platelets; Red cells; White 
cells
Blood diseases/disorders, 989–1056
clinical examination, 990f, 991b
genetic, 995, 1051
HIV infection/AIDS, 404–405
investigation, 998–1001
malignancies, 1035–1048
older people, 1047b
presenting problems, 1001–1011
pruritus, 1259b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099–1100
SLE, 1111
see also individual disorders
Blood film examination, 998, 999b, 
999f
Blood flow
cardiovascular system, 528f, 
530–531
Doppler echocardiography, 
536–537, 536f
resistance to, 530
liver, 924f, 925–926
Blood gases see Arterial blood gases
Blood group antigens, 994, 1013
Blood groups
ABO, 1013–1014, 1014b
rhesus D, 1014, 1014b
Blood pool imaging, ventricular 
function assessment, 539
Blood pressure
cardiovascular disease and
chronic renal failure, 488b
control
chronic renal failure
diabetes, 811
critically ill patients, 185
endocrine disease, 734f
measurement, 608, 608b
ambulatory, 608
home, 608
respiration effects, 532b
stroke patients, 1243b
target levels, 611b
see also Hypertension
Blood products, 1011–1012, 1012b
virus transmission
Blood tests, 1006, 1153, 1312b
abdominal pain, 861
diabetes mellitus, 807–808
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 855
hepatobiliary disease, 929
inflammatory bowel disease, 901
malabsorption, 858
musculoskeletal disease, 1066–1068
neurological disease, 1153
older people, 1001b
pneumonia, 579
renal disease, 468
stroke, 1236
see also Haematological values
Blood transfusion
adverse reactions, 1012–1015
acute reactions, 1016f
infection transmission, 
1014–1015
bedside procedures, 1015, 1015f
exchange
malaria, 357
megaloblastic anaemia, 1026
sickle-cell disease, 1033
gastrointestinal haemorrhage
haemolytic anaemia, 1026–1027
hereditary spherocytosis, 1028
immunological complications, 
1014
see also Blood groups
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 11
megaloblastic anaemia, 1026
pre-transfusion testing/
cross-matching, 1015
red cell incompatibility, 1012–1014
safe procedures, 1015
sickle-cell disease, 1033
Blood vessels
effects of hypertension, 608
imaging
cerebrovascular disease, 
1149–1150, 1235–1236
nervous disease, 1235–1236
see also Vascular
Blood volume, reference values, 
1312b
Blood-brain barrier, 1140–1141
Blood-stream infection, 300, 303
see also Bacteraemia
Bloom’s syndrome, 267b
BLS see Basic life support
‘Blue bloaters’, 674–675
Blue finger syndrome, 602
Blue naevus, 1275
BMD see Bone mineral density
BMI see Body mass index
BMR see Basal metabolic rate
BNP see Brain natriuretic peptide
Bocavirus, 328
Boceprevir, 161b, 162, 955
Body dysmorphic disorder, 246
Body lice, 1281
Body mass index (BMI), 114–115
and cardiovascular disease risk, 
116f
and diabetes risk, 116f
and obesity, 117, 117b
older people, 166f
and pancreatitis, 890b
undernutrition, 120b
Body packers/stuffers, 219, 219f
Body weight, pharmacokinetics 
and, 24b
Body-based therapy, 15
Boerhaave’s syndrome, 871
Bohr effect, 183
Boils, 809
Bolam test, 14
Bolivian haemorrhagic fever, 325b
Bone
age-related changes, 1121f
anatomy, 1060–1064
biopsy, 1068, 1127
cortical, 1060f
erosion, 1097f
fractures see Fractures
infection, 1094–1096
older people, 1094b
loss of mass, 1121f
see also Osteopenia
matrix, 1062
mineralisation, 1062
in osteoarthritis, 1081–1086
pain, 270b
remodelling, 1061f, 1062, 1062b
resorption, 1061, 1061f
primary biliary cirrhosis, 963
trabecular (cancellous), 1060f
woven, 1062
Bone age, 758
Bone densitometry
indications for, 1122b
osteoporosis, 1122b
Bone diseases, 1120–1131
biochemical abnormalities,  
1066b
diabetes, 833–834
metabolic
after gastric resection, 875
chronic renal failure, 486–488
coeliac disease, 881
inflammatory bowel disease, 
907
metastatic, 275
radionuclide scan, 275, 1065
scintigraphy, 1065
tuberculosis, 691–692
tumours
metastatic, 275, 275b, 1132
primary, 1131–1132, 1131b
see also individual conditions
Bone marrow
aplastic anaemia, 1048
biopsy, 1000f
pyrexia of unknown origin, 
298–299
examination, 998
fibrosis, 998
leukaemia, 1040
myelodysplastic syndrome, 1041
myelofibrosis, 1048
structure and function, 992f
tumours, 1131b
Bone marrow transplantation see 
Haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation
Bone mineral density (BMD), 
1065–1066
hyperparathyroidism, 769
measurements, 760
osteoporosis, 1122b
secondary amenorrhoea, 760
Bone pain, 285b
BOOP see Bronchiolitis obliterans 
organising pneumonia
Bordetella pertussis infection, 682
Bornholm’s disease, 541
Borrelia spp., 335b
infections, 334–336
relapsing fever, 336
Borrelia afzelii, 334, 335b
Borrelia burgdorferi, 334, 335b, 1303
Borrelia garinii, 334, 335b
Bortezomib, 1047
Bosentan, 1113
Botfly, 313f
Botulinum toxin, 1210
achalasia, 869
anal fissure, 919
biliary sphincter dysfunction, 900
dystonia, 1200
hemifacial spasm, 1200
Botulism, 138b, 1210–1211, 1211b
wound, 1210
Bouchard’s nodes, 1058f, 1069b, 
1082–1083
Bouginage, 848f, 867
Boutonneuse fever, 350, 351b
Index
1321
Boutonnière deformity of fingers, 
1098
Bovine serum albumin (BSA), 804
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
(BSE), 1015
Bowel
disturbance, 1174–1175
whole bowel irrigation, 210, 210b
see also Colon; Small intestine
Bowen’s disease, 1270b, 1272, 1272f
BPH see Benign prostatic 
hyperplasia
Brachial plexopathy, 1225–1226
Brachial plexus lesions, 1225–1226, 
1225b
Brachytherapy, 277–278
Bradford Hill criteria, 99
Bradycardia
sinus, 563, 563b
myocardial infarction, 596
Bradykinesia, 1145
Parkinson’s disease, 1163
Brain
arterial circulation, 1234f
biopsy, 1155
cerebral hemispheres, 1142–1143
effects of alcohol, 253
imaging, 1149–1150, 1150f
epilepsy, 1155
stroke, 1235–1236, 1235f–1236f, 
1241–1242
ischaemia, 199b, 572, 1046f
schizophrenia, 247–249
structure and function, 
psychiatric disorders, 233
tumours, 1213–1216, 1213b, 1214f
dementia, 250b
incidence, 262f
metastatic, 274, 274b
venous circulation, 1235f
see also specific regions, and entries 
under cerebral
Brain death, 1160b, 1161
Brain injury, 1218
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), 
432, 535
heart failure, 549
Brainstem, 1143–1144, 1143f
death, 203
encephalitis, 1206
lesions, 1148, 1148b, 1165
Breakpoint cluster region (BCR)
abl oncogene, 1039
Philadelphia chromosome, 1039
Breast cancer, 279–280
clinical features, 280
epidemiology, 267b
familial, 67
incidence, 262f
investigations, 280
older people, 271b
pathogenesis, 279–280
screening, 271b, 279, 762–763,  
912
sites of metastasis, 280
staging, 279b
survival rates, 279b
treatment, 280, 280b
hormonal, 280
local disease, 280
metastatic disease, 280
post-operative, 280
Breastfeeding
drugs and, 36–37, 37b
HIV/AIDS patients, 409–410
Breath tests, gastroenterology, 850
Breathing
control of, 647–648
divers, 109
ketoacidosis, 812, 812b
management, critically ill 
patients, 188–189
rescue (mouth-to-mouth), 558
sleep-disordered, 725–727
stroke patients, 1243b
see also Respiration
Breathlessness (dyspnoea)
acute, 656b
at rest, 655
severe, 657
bronchial carcinoma, 701
causes, 543b, 656b
and chest pain, 543–544, 657
chronic exertional, 655–657, 656b
COPD, 655
differential diagnosis, 655, 658b
heart disease, valvular, 616
modified MRC scale, 674b
palliative care, 289, 289b
paroxysmal nocturnal, 544
pathophysiology, 655, 656f
psychogenic, 657b–658b
respiratory disease, 655–657
Briquet’s syndrome, 236b, 245
British National Formulary, 33
Broca’s aphasia, 1169f
Broca’s area, 1146
Bromocriptine
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 
249
Parkinson’s disease, 1197b
pituitary adenoma, 1214
prolactinoma, 791b, 792
Bronchi
obstruction, 704–705
clinical and radiological 
manifestations, 650
see also Bronchial carcinoma
Bronchial artery, 647f
angiography, 659f
embolisation, 698
Bronchial carcinoma, 699–704
cell types, 700b
clinical features, 700–702, 700f, 
701b
extrapulmonary manifestations, 
702b
investigations, 702–703, 703f
large-cell, 700b
management, 703–704
metastases, 701
pathology, 699–700
prognosis, 704
radiological presentations, 
702–703, 702b, 702f
small-cell, 700b
management, 704
squamous cell, 703f
staging, 702–703
Bronchial gland
adenoma, 704b
carcinoma, 704b
Bronchiectasis, 678–679, 679f
aspergillosis, 697
causes, 678b
connective tissue disorders, 712
cystic fibrosis, 680–681
symptoms, 679b
Bronchiolitis, 328
obliterative, 666
connective tissue disorders, 
712
respiratory bronchiolitis-
interstitial lung disease 
(RB-ILD), 708b
Bronchiolitis obliterans organising 
pneumonia (BOOP), 708b
Bronchitis
acute, 654b, 659b
chronic, 653b, 673
see also Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
connective tissue disorders, 712
respiratory function 
abnormalities, 653b
Bronchoalveolar carcinoma, 704b
Bronchoalveolar lavage, 711
Bronchoconstriction, 677b
Bronchodilator therapy
asthma, 669–672
COPD, 675–676
Bronchopleural fistula, 728–729
Bronchopneumonia, 682
Bronchopulmonary segments, 646f
Bronchoscopy, 651–652
bronchial carcinoma, 702
cough, 655
haemoptysis, 659
interstitial lung disease, 708
management of ventilated/
intubated patient
mediastinal tumours, 706
Bronchospasm, pain, 541
Bronzed diabetes, 972
Brown-Séquard syndrome, 1165, 
1221
Bruce protocol for exercise tolerance 
testing, 534b
Brucella abortus, 333
Brucella canis, 333
Brucella melitensis, 333
Brucella suis, 333
Brucellosis, 309b, 333–334, 334f
incubation period, 145b, 310b
in pregnancy, 314b
treatment, 334b
Brudzinski’s sign, 1201
Brugada syndrome, 571
Brugia malayi, 312b, 372b, 372f, 713
Bruise, definition, 1251b
BSA see Bovine serum albumin
BSE see Bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy
Bubonic plague, 338
Buccal administration, 21
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 933–934, 
976
Budesonide (BUD), 903b
Buerger’s disease, 603–605
Buerger’s sign, 601b
Bulbar palsy, 1174, 1174b
motor neuron disease, 1174, 
1200b
Bulimia nervosa, 256, 256b
Bullae
definition, 1251b
pulmonary, 650b, 674
Bullous impetigo, 1258b, 1276
Bullous pemphigoid, 1292–1293, 
1293b, 1294f
Bumetanide
hypertension, 611
oedema, 478
Bundle branch blocks, 573, 573b
left, 573f
right, 573f
Bundle of His, 529–530, 529f
Bupropion, 101b, 213b
Burkholderia cenocepacia, 79
Burkholderia pseudomallei, 304b, 309b, 
340, 682–683
Burkitt’s lymphoma, 266b, 320
Burns
haemolysis and, 1031
sunburn, 1260f
Burrow, definition, 1251b
Bursae, 1063
Bursitis
hip, 1075b, 1075f
illopectineal, 1075b
ischiogluteal, 1075b
knee, 1076b
olecranon, 1075b, 1099f
subacromial, 1074b
subcalcaneal, 1076
trochanteric, 1075b, 1075f
Buruli ulcer, 333
Buschke-Loewenstein tumour, 425
Buspirone, 213b
Busulfan (busulphan)
hepatotoxicity, 971b
hyperpigmentation from, 1296b
Butterfly (malar) rash, 1110f
Button hole deformity of fingers, 
1098
Butyrophenones, 241b
schizophrenia, 249b
Byssinosis, 716, 719b
C
C-peptide, 783–784, 783f
C-reactive protein (CRP), 72, 84–85, 
84b
AKI, 480b
pancreatitis, 892
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
C1 inhibitor deficiency (hereditary 
angioedema), 94
acquired, 94
C4d staining, 95
Cabergoline
nephrotoxicity, 522b
Parkinson’s disease, 1197b
pituitary tumours, 1214
prolactinoma, 791b
CABG see Coronary artery bypass 
grafting
Cachexia, 124
cancer, 122f, 290
cardiac, 549
neuropathic, 832
CADASIL, 1176–1177
Cadherin-1, 265
Cadmium
lung disease and, 716
poisoning, 308
Caecum, carcinoma, 913–914
Caeruloplasmin, 1310b
Wilson’s disease, 974
Café au lait macules, 1216f
Caffeine, 129
cagA see Cytotoxin-associated gene
Calabar swelling, 373
Calcific periarthritis, 1091–1092, 
1091b, 1091f
Calcification
arterial, 537, 602b
ectopic, 486–487
metastatic, 449
musculoskeletal disease, 1064
renal, 507f
Calcimimetics, 488
Calcineurin inhibitors, 96b, 1266
Calcinosis
CREST syndrome, 1091b, 1112, 
1113f
nephrocalcinosis, 507, 522b
Calcipotriol, 1266
Calcitonin, 767
hypercalcaemia, 273
osteoporosis, 1125
Paget’s disease, 1129, 1130b
as tumour marker, 270b
Calcitonin-gene-related peptide 
(CGRP), 845
Calcitriol (1,25- 
dihydroxycholecalciferol), 
hypoparathyroidism, 766, 
770–771
Calcium, 130
absorption, 129
AKI, 480b
channelopathies, 1230b
deficiency, 130
dietary sources, 131b
excess, 130
homeostasis, PTH/vitamin D 
and, 49b
hyperparathyroidism, 769b
myocardial contraction, 530
osteomalacia, 1125–1128
osteoporosis, 1123b, 1124
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1310b
RNI, 131b
serum, bone disease, 1066b
see also Hypercalcaemia; 
Hypocalcaemia
Calcium antagonists (channel 
blockers)
adverse reactions, 26b
angina, 586–587
unstable, 594
Index
1322
arrhythmias, 536–537
hypertension, 612, 613b
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
638
mitral stenosis, 618
non-dihydropyridine, 
microalbuminuria in 
diabetes, 831
poisoning, 214–215
pulmonary hypertension, 725
Raynaud’s symptoms, 1113
Calcium carbonate, 488
Calcium gluconate
cardiotoxic drug poisoning, 
214–215
drug interactions, 28b
hypermagnesaemia, 448
Calcium oxalate
crystals, 222–223
stones, 507b
Calcium phosphate, stones, 507b
Calcium pyrophosphate crystals, 769
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate 
(CPPD) deposition, 
1086–1087, 1090–1091
Calcium therapy
hypoparathyroidism, 770–771
osteoporosis, 1124
rickets/osteomalacia, 1128
tetany, 768
Calcium and vitamin D 
supplements, 1124
Calculi (stones)
bile duct, 984–985
pancreatitis, 890
gallbladder see Gallstones
renal, 507–510, 507b
staghorn, 493b, 507
urinary tract, 507–510
see also Gallstones
Calicivirus, 949b
Calprotectin, faecal, 851b, 1311b
Cameron lesions, 867
cAMP (cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate), 47f
Campbell de Morgan spots, 1274
Campomelic dysplasia, 59
Campylobacter
diarrhoea, 306, 399
food poisoning, 306
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 342
Campylobacter jejuni, 342
Camurati-Engelmann disease, 1131
Cancer, 259–282, 266b
aetiology, 266–267
environmental, 266–267, 266b
genetic, 267
biochemical markers, 269, 270b
clinical assessment, 260f, 261b
dementia, 250b
emergency situations, 272–274, 
273b
familial, 59, 66–67
hallmarks of, 262–266
angiogenesis, 264, 264f–265f
evasion of growth suppressors, 
264
evasion of immune 
destruction, 266
genome instability/mutation, 
262–266
invasion and metastasis, 265, 
265f
replicative immortality, 264
reprogramming of energy 
metabolism, 265
resistance to cell death, 262
sustained proliferative 
signalling, 263
tumour-promoting 
inflammation, 265–266
histology, 268–269
cytogenetic analysis, 269
electron microscopy, 269
immunohistochemistry, 268
light microscopy, 268
HIV-related, 405, 405b
imaging, 269
incidence, 262f
inheritance, 267b
investigations, 268–269
local features, 270b
metastases, 265, 274–276
of unknown origin, 282
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1132, 1132b
neurological paraneoplastic 
syndromes, 271–272, 272b, 
1193, 1194b, 1216
obesity and, 115b
older people, 271b
pain management, 275
predisposition syndromes, 267b
presenting problems, 269–272, 
270b–271b, 1259b
renal effects, 519, 519b
screening
breast cancer, 271b, 279, 
762–763, 912
cervical cancer, 281
prostate cancer, 518
staging, TNM classification, 268b
treatment/management, 276–279
adjuvant, 276
biological, 278–279
chemoprevention, 276
chemotherapy, 276–277
hormonal, 278
immunotherapy, 278
late effects, 796
neoadjuvant, 276
older people
palliative, 276
radiotherapy, 277–278
surgical, 276
see also Chemotherapy; and 
specific cancers
Cancer antigen 19.9 (CA-19.9), 270b
Cancer antigen 125 (CA-125), 270b
Cancer cachexia syndrome, 122f, 290
Candesartan
heart failure, 552b
myocardial infarction, 599
Candida spp., 134, 137f, 304b, 381, 
383
acute leukaemia patients
endocarditis, 626
Candida albicans, 383, 1280
immunocompromised patients, 
398
Candida dubliniensis, 383
Candida glabrata, 383
Candida krusei, 383
Candida parapsilosis, 383
Candida tropicalis, 383
Candidiasis, 381, 416b, 1280
acute disseminated, 383
genital, 417b–418b
hepatosplenic (chronic 
disseminated), 383
HIV/AIDS patients, 398–399,  
399f
oesophageal, 868
HIV/AIDS, 399, 399f
oral, 864
HIV/AIDS, 398
pseudomembranous, 398
systemic, 383
Cannabis, 216–217
Cannula-related infection, 330, 330b
Capacity, lack of, 11
CAPD see Continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis
Capecitabine, 276, 915
Capillary leak syndrome, 323–324
Caplan’s syndrome, 712, 717
Capnocytophaga canimorsus, 304b
Capnography, 188, 188f
Capsaicin
herpes zoster, 319, 397
osteoarthritis, 1079–1080, 1085
topical, 397
Capsule endoscopy, 848, 849f
Capsulitis (frozen shoulder), 
1074–1075
Caput medusae, 945
Carbamate insecticides, 222
Carbamazepine
bipolar disorder
epilepsy, 1184b
hyponatraemia, 1185b
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
pain management, 285b, 1165
pharmacodynamics, 25b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
poisoning, 224b
status epilepticus, 1159b
trigeminal neuralgia, 1178
Carbapenems, 154b, 156
Carbaryl, 1281
Carbenoxolone, 441
Carbidopa, 1196
Carbimazole, 742–743, 748b, 749
pregnancy, 749–750
Carbohydrates, 112–113
diabetic diet, 820–821
dietary, 113b
energy provided by, 110
recommended intake, 114b
digestion, 842
effects of insulin
metabolism, 926
disorders of, 449–450, 1229b
see also Diabetes mellitus
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
arterial blood (PaCO2), 188, 660b, 
1308b
emissions, 102
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 209b, 
219–220
Carbonic acid/bicarbonate buffer 
system, 430–431, 444
Carbonic anhydrase, 131
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 
434–435
Carboplatin, 280–281
Carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb)
levels in carbon monoxide 
poisoning, 209b
reference range, 1310b
Carboxypenicillins, 154b, 155
Carbuncles, 1277, 1277f
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 
268, 270b
Carcinogenesis, multistep
Carcinoid syndrome, 784, 785b,  
889
pellagra, 128
valvular heart disease, 624
Carcinoid tumours
gastric, 880
lung, 704b
small intestine, 889, 889b
Carcinoma
ampulla of Vater, 986
anaplastic, thyroid, 755
basal cell, 270b, 1102–1103,  
1256
follicular, thyroid, 754
gallbladder, 985
gastric, 877–879, 878f
hepatocellular, 967–969
medullary, thyroid, 755
oesophagus, 870–871, 870b, 871f
papillary, thyroid, 754
squamous cell
oesophagus, 870b
skin, 1271, 1271f
see also sites of carcinoma
Card agglutination trypanosomiasis 
test (CATT), 359
Cardiac arrest, 557–560
aetiology, 557–560
management, 558–559
survivors, 559–560
Cardiac asthma, 543
Cardiac biomarkers, 535
Cardiac cachexia, 549
Cardiac catheterisation, 538–539
aortic regurgitation, 624b
aortic stenosis, 621b
mitral valve disease, 617, 619b
Cardiac glycosides see Digoxin
Cardiac output, 530
factors influencing, 547
heart failure, 546
measurement, 186–187
optimization of, 191
Cardiac pacemakers
code, 578b
permanent, 564, 578–579
rate-responsive, 578–579
sinoatrial disease, 564
temporary, 578, 578f
Cardiac (pericardial) tamponade, 
191, 532
see also Heart
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy 
(CRT), 579, 579b
Cardiac tamponade, 532, 545–546, 
545b, 640
Cardiobacterium hominis, 626
Cardiogenic shock, 190, 544–546, 
544f–545f
Cardiomegaly, 535
Cardiomyopathy, 636–638
arrhythmogenic right ventricular, 
638
dilated, 636–637
HIV-related, 405
hypertrophic, 637–638, 638b
obliterative, 638
restrictive, 638
types, 637f
Cardiopulmonary disorders, SLE, 
1111
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR), 204b
see also Basic life support
Cardiothoracic ratio, 535
Cardiovascular disorders, 525–641
chronic renal failure, 486
dyspnoea see Dyspnoea
genetic, 629–636, 629b–630b
hypertension see Hypertension
investigation, 532–539
lipids and see Atherosclerosis
New York Heart Association 
functional classification, 
539b
presenting problems, 539–562
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
risk factors, 581
obesity, 116f
syphilis, 420
therapeutic procedures, 577–579
Cardiovascular heart disease, risk 
prediction chart, 582f
Cardiovascular reflex tests, diabetes 
mellitus, 833b
Cardiovascular system, clinical 
examination, 526f
Cardioversion, 577
atrial fibrillation, 566
direct current (DC), arrhythmias, 
564
tachyarrhythmias, 570
Carditis, 614–615
Care see Health care
Carey Coombs murmur, 614–615
Carnitine-palmityl transferase (CPT) 
deficiency, 1229b
Caroli’s syndrome, 980–981
Carotene, 126
Carotid endarterectomy, 1244–1246, 
1246f
Carotid pulse, 104, 189
Carotid sinus hypersensitivity, 554f, 
556
Carotid sinus massage, 723
Carotid sinus syndrome, 556
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 1134
diabetes, 832
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
Index
1323
Carrion’s disease, 352, 352b
Cartilage
articular, 1062–1063, 1063f
calcification, 1064
erosion, 1064
osteoarthritis, 1084
Carvedilol, 946
arrhythmias, 574–576
hypertension, 612
Casal’s necklace, 128, 128f
Caspases, 50
Caspofungin, 160, 160b
acute leukaemia patients, 1001
aspergillosis, 698–699
Cassava, 892
Castleman’s disease, 298b, 326
Cat scratch disease, 352
Catalase, 47
Cataplexy, 1187
Cataract
diabetics, 830
‘snow-flake’, 830
Catatonia, 1166b
Catechol-O-methyl-transferase 
(COMT) inhibitors, 
Parkinson’s disease, 1197
Catecholamines, 772
drug interactions, 28b
Cathepsin K (CatK), 1061f
Catheter ablation therapy
arrhythmias, 577–578
tachyarrhythmias, 568–569
Catheters/catheterisation
bacteriuria, 513
bladder dysfunction, 1175b
cardiac, 538–539, 538f
aortic regurgitation, 624b
aortic stenosis, 621b
mitral valve disease, 617b, 619b
therapeutic procedures, 534
peripherally inserted central 
catheter, 124
pulmonary artery, critically ill 
patients, 185–186, 186f
therapeutic procedures, 577–579
urinary retention, 515
Cathinones, 218
CatK see Cathepsin K
CATT see Card agglutination 
trypanosomiasis test
Cauda equina claudication, 1221b
Cauda equina syndrome, 1073b
Caval filters, 724
Cawthorne-Cooksey exercises, 1186
CBT see Cognitive behaviour 
therapy
CCK see Cholecystokinin
CD4 cells, 74b, 78
HIV infection/AIDS, 392, 395b
CD8 cells, 78, 392
CDKs see Cyclin-dependent kinases
CEA see Carcinoembryonic antigen
Cefaclor, 156b
Cefalexin, 156b
urinary tract infection, 513b
Cefazolin, 156b
Cefepime, 151b, 156b
Cefixime, 156b
gonorrhoea, 422b
Cefotaxime, 151b, 156b
cerebral abscess, 1208b
meningitis, 1204b
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, 
941
Cefoxitin, 156b
Cefradine, 156b
Ceftaroline, 156b
Ceftazidime, 151b, 155f, 156b
bronchiectasis, 679
melioidosis, 340
Ceftobiprole, 156b
Ceftriaxone, 151b, 156b
leptospirosis, 338
meningitis, 1204b
nocardiosis, 341
pneumonia, 401
pyogenic meningitis, 1204b
STIs
congenital syphilis, 421
gonorrhoea, 422b
Whipple’s disease, 884
Cefuroxime, 151b, 155f, 156b
brucellosis, 335
cerebral abscess, 1208b
cholangitis, 985
cholecystitis, 984
empyema, 663
meningitis, 1204b
pancreatitis, 892
pneumonia, 685b, 686
prophylactic, 153b
septic arthritis, 1095b
urinary tract infection
Cefuroxime axetil, 335
Celecoxib, 1079b
Cell, 47f
cerebrospinal fluid analysis, 
1153–1154, 1154b, 1311b
death, 50
programmed (apoptosis), 50, 
262
division, 49–50
functional anatomy, 42–50
nervous system, 1140f
senescence, 50
Cell adhesion molecules, 264f, 
531–532
Cell biology, 42–50
Cell cycle, 263, 263f
checkpoints, 49
regulation, 263
stimulation, 263
Cell differentiation, 49–50
Cell migration, 49–50
Cell (plasma) membrane, 47–48
receptors, 48–49
transport across, 48
Cellular immunity, 78
Cellular signalling, 48–49, 49b
Cellulitis, 1277, 1277f
anaerobic, 305, 305b
Central core disease, 1230b
Central nervous system
effects of hypertension, 609
HIV infection/AIDS, 402–404
SLE, 1111
tuberculosis, 691
tumours, 1213–1216, 1213b, 1214f
Central venous catheter infections, 
303–304
Central venous pressure (CVP)
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 855
monitoring, 182b, 185
factors influencing, 183f, 186b
Cephalosporins, 151b, 155–156, 156b
cholecystitis, 984
Clostridium difficile infection, 344
effect of renal insufficiency, 36b
pneumonia, 687
in pregnancy, 154b
Cephamycins, 155–156
Cerebellar ataxia, 272, 1229b
Cerebellar degeneration, 1194b
cancer-related, 271b, 272
Cerebellar dysfunction, 1218
Cerebellum, 1145
Cerebral abscess, 1208–1209, 1208b, 
1208f
Cerebral cortex
anatomy, 1143f
lobar functions, 1142b
effects of damage, 1142b
Cerebral hemispheres, 1142–1143, 
1143f
lesions, 1165
Cerebral infarction, 1237–1239, 1238f
Cerebral ischaemia, 199b, 572, 1046f
Cerebral oedema
acute liver failure, 933b
high-altitude, 107
hypoglycaemia, 813
stroke patients, 1239–1240
Cerebral perfusion pressure, 199
Cerebral tumours see Brain, 
tumours
Cerebral venous disease, 1247
causes, 1247b
clinical features, 1247, 1247b
investigations and management, 
1247
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 1143
analysis, 1153–1154, 1154b, 1311b
circulation, 1217f
encephalomyelitis, 1193
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1225
meningitis, 1202–1203, 1205
multiple sclerosis, 1190
subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis, 1207
syphilis, 421
viral encephalitis, 1206
see also Lumbar puncture
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, 
456b
Cerebrovascular disease see specific 
conditions
Certolizumab, 1103b
Cervical cancer, 281
HIV-related, 405
incidence, 262f
screening, 281
treatment, 281
Cervical cord compression, 1221f
cervical spondylosis, 1218f
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
Cervical spine
spondylosis, 1218–1219
spondylotic myelopathy, 1219
spondylotic radiculopathy, 
1218–1219
subluxation, rheumatoid arthritis, 
1099, 1099f
Cervicitis
chlamydial, 353b
gonococcal, 418
Cestodes (tapeworms), 312b, 
378–381
Cetirizine, 1267
Cetuximab, 282, 915, 1282
CF see Cystic fibrosis
CFTR see Cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance 
regulator
CFU-E (colony-forming unit-
erythroid), 992, 994
CFU-GM (colony-forming 
unit-granulocyte, monocyte), 
992
CFU-Meg (colony-forming 
unit-megakaryocyte), 992, 
996–997
CGRP (calcitonin-gene-related 
peptide)
Chagas disease, 309b, 360–361
transfusion-transmitted, 
1011–1012
Chain of infection, 134f
Chain of survival, cardiac arrest, 
558, 558f
Chancre, 415–416
trypanosomal, 359
Chancroid, 424b
Channelopathies, 1229–1230, 1230b
Charcoal, activated, 210, 210b
antidiabetic overdose, 216
antimalarial overdose, 215
benzodiazepine overdose, 217
digoxin/oleander poisoning, 215
gammahydroxybutyrate 
poisoning, 218
NSAID overdose, 213
salicylate poisoning, 213
tricyclic antidepressant 
poisoning, 213
Charcot joints, 1133, 1133f
Charcot neuro-arthropathy, 833–835
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, 48, 
1225
Charcot’s triad, 937–938
Charles Bonnet’s syndrome, 1170
CHART see Continuous hyper-
fractionated accelerated 
radiotherapy
CHD see Coronary heart disease
Cheese worker’s lung, 719b
Cheiroarthropathy, 1133
Chelating agents, 103
Chemical cholestasis, 980
Chemical mutagens, 266b
Chemical poisoning, 219–223
Chemoembolisation, hepatocellular 
carcinoma, 968
Chemokine receptor inhibitors,  
407b
Chemoprophylaxis, 152, 153b
malaria, 153b, 357–358
Chemotherapy, 276–277
adjuvant, 276
breast cancer, 280, 280b
bronchial carcinoma, 704
colorectal cancer, 915
pancreatic cancer, 895
administration, 276–277
adverse reactions, 277, 277f
brain tumours, 1215
bronchial carcinoma, 703–704
combination, 276
gastric cancer, 879b
Hodgkin’s disease, 1043
leukaemia
acute, 1037b
chronic lymphocytic, 1040
chronic myeloid, 1039–1040
malignant melanoma
myeloma, 1047
neoadjuvant, 276
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 1044
palliative, 276
platinum-based, 280–281, 704
prostate cancer, 518, 518b
tuberculosis, 693–694
HIV/AIDS patients, 406–407
Chernobyl nuclear power explosion, 
102
Chest pain, 539–543
ankylosing spondylitis, 1105
cardiac disease
aortic dissection, 541, 606
differential diagnosis, 659b
ischaemic, 539f–540f
causes, 541b
gastrointestinal, 540
musculoskeletal, 541
psychological, 540
respiratory, 657–658
characteristics, 539–543
differential diagnosis, 540–541, 
659b
evaluation, 541–543
Chest radiography/X-ray, 649–650, 
649f
abnormalities, 650b
AKI, 480b
bronchiectasis, 679
cardiovascular disorders
aortic regurgitation, 535f
chronic constrictive 
pericarditis, 641f
congenital, 629
heart failure, 550, 550f
mitral valve, 535f
myocardial infarction, 593
cardiovascular system, 535–536
COPD, 675
empyema, 663f
pacemaker/defibrillator, 553f
pleural effusion, 661, 662b
respiratory disease, 649–650,  
650f
abnormalities, 650b
ARDS, 193f
aspergillosis, 697
asthma, 669
bronchial carcinoma, 700f
Index
1324
bronchial obstruction/lung 
collapse, 701f
bronchiectasis, 679
COPD, 675
empyema, 663f
haemoptysis, 659
HIV-related pulmonary 
disease, 397b, 400b, 401f
inhaled foreign body, 655f
interpretation, 649b
interstitial, 707f, 709f
lobar collapse, 650f
mediastinal tumours, 706f
pleural effusion, 661
pleural plaques, 718f
Pneumocystis jirovecii 
pneumonia, 401f
pneumonia, 684
pneumothorax, 729–730
pulmonary embolism, 721b, 
722f
pulmonary hypertension, 725f
pulmonary oedema, 482f
sarcoidosis, 711b
silicosis, 717f
tuberculosis, 401f, 691f–692f
Chest wall deformities, 731
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, 544
Chickenpox, 316–318, 317f
immunisation, 318
incubation period, 145b
period of infectivity, 144b
pneumonia, 317
prophylaxis, 317–318
rash, 317
varicella zoster immunoglobulin, 
318b
Chiclero’s ulcer, 366
Chief cells, 766
Chikungunya virus, 309b, 329, 1095
Chilblains, 105
Child-Pugh classification, cirrhosis 
prognosis, 944b
Childbirth, associated psychiatric 
disorders, 257
Childhood absence epilepsy, 1182b
Children
genetic testing, 63
inflammatory bowel disease,  
906
STIs, 414–415
Chiropractic, 16, 909b
Chlamydia spp., 353, 353b
Chlamydia pneumoniae, 353b
Chlamydia psittaci, 353b
Chlamydia trachomatis, 135, 151b, 
353, 353b, 417
in pregnancy, 314b, 414b
Chlamydial infection, 353, 423
men, 417, 423
treatment, 423b
urethritis, 415, 1104, 1108
women, 423
Chloasma, 1296
Chlorambucil
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 
1040
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma,  
1044
Waldenström’s 
macroglobulinaemia, 1045
Chloramphenicol, 151b, 159
contraindication
pregnancy, 154b
renal insufficiency, 36b
enteric fever, 340
mechanism of action, 150b
meningitis, 1204b
plague, 338–339
in pregnancy, 154b
pyogenic meningitis, 1204b
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
rickettsial fevers, 352
Chloride, 132
channelopathies, 1230b
disorders of, 430b
reference values, venous blood, 
1308b
Chloroquine
adverse reactions, 26
hyperpigmentation, 1296b
leprosy reactions, 350
malaria, 163, 358b
prevention, 357
myopathy, 1132b, 1230b
poisoning, 215
resistance to, 353, 356
Chlorphenamine, 38b
anaphylaxis, 92b
diphtheria, 728
pruritus, 1016f
Chlorpromazine, 249b
alcohol withdrawal syndrome, 
254
diarrhoea, 308
hepatotoxicity, 971, 971b
long QT syndrome, 571b
and lupus syndrome, 1132b
poisoning, 216
rabies, 1206
schizophrenia, 249b
Chlorpropamide, 216
neutropenia, 1005b
Cholangiocarcinoma, 969, 985–986, 
986f
Cholangiography
biliary cirrhosis, 964
percutaneous transhepatic (PTC)
sclerosing cholangitis, 945b
Cholangiopancreatography
endoscopic retrograde see ERCP
magnetic resonance see MRCP
Cholangiopathy, HIV-related, 400
Cholangitis
acute, 937–938
autoimmune, 964–965
and biliary cirrhosis, 980b
IgG4-associated, 966, 988
liver flukes, 378, 379b
primary sclerosing, 965–966, 980b
recurrent pyogenic, 985
sclerosing, 902f, 930b, 965–966
stone disease, 937b
Cholecalciferol see Vitamin D
Cholecystectomy
pancreatitis, 892
post-cholecystectomy syndrome, 
987b
Cholecystitis, 983–984
acute, 861–862, 983–984
chronic, 984
gallstones, 982
Cholecystography, oral, 988
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 846b
Cholecystolithiasis, 983
Choledochal cysts, 981, 981f
Choledochojejunostomy, 895
Choledocholithiasis, 983–985
Choledochoscopy, 985
Cholera, 138b, 309b, 344–345
fluid loss, 344
immunisation, 345
incubation period, 145b, 310b
Cholera sicca, 344
Cholestasis, 980–988
benign recurrent intrahepatic, 980
biliary cirrhosis, 964
chemical, 980
drug-induced, 971, 971b
obstetric (of pregnancy), 977–978, 
1259b
pruritus, 1259b
sclerosing cholangitis, 966
Cholestatic jaundice, 936b–937b, 
937–938
Cholesterol, 450
absorption, 113
atheroembolism, 469b, 496
and cardiovascular disease, 
452–453
dietary, 113, 114b, 451
gallstones, 982
low-density lipoprotein, 48, 451
lowering, 456–457
atherosclerosis prevention, 583b
coronary heart disease, 582
myocardial infarction, 598
peripheral vascular disease, 
601b
metabolism, 85
plasma
measurement, 453
target levels, 811
reference values, venous blood, 5, 
1310b
reverse transport, 452, 452f
see also Hypercholesterolaemia
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors, 
434
Cholesterol ester transfer protein, 
452
Cholesterolosis of gallbladder, 
986–988
Choline salicylate, 864
Cholinergic syndrome, 
organophosphate poisoning, 
220–222, 221b
Chondrocalcinosis, 1090b, 1090f
Chondrocytes
osteoarthritis, 1081
tumours, 1131b
Chondroitin sulphate, 1062–1063, 
1086
Chondroma, 1131b
Chondromalacia patellae, 1075–1076
Chondrosarcoma, 1131b
CHOP regimen, non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma, 1045
Chorea, 1166, 1166b
causes, 1167b
Huntington’s disease, 65, 1198
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS), 
63b
Choroid plexus, 1217f
Christmas disease (haemophilia B), 
1053
Chromatin, 42
Chromatography, 428b
Chromium, 132
deficiency, 132
Chromoblastomycosis, 381–382
Chromogranin A, 785
Chromomycosis 
(chromoblastomycosis), 
381–382
Chromosomal disorders, 56b, 57f, 66
see also specific conditions
Chromosomes, 42
abnormalities see Mutation(s)
analysis, 57f
leukaemia, 1039
myelodysplastic syndrome, 
1041
deletions, 55, 56b
duplications, 55–56, 57f
sex, 42
abnormalities, 50–51
see also X chromosome; Y 
chromosome
translocations, 57f, 879–880, 1044
Chronic bronchitis, 653b, 673
Chronic fatigue syndrome, 246
Chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN), 
503–504
drug induced, 504b
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease see COPD
Chronic relapsing syndrome, 321
Chronic renal failure (CRF) see 
Renal failure, chronic
CHRPE see Congenital hypertrophy 
of retinal pigment 
epithelium
Chrysops, loiasis, 373
Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS), 
1118
Chvostek’s sign, 447, 768
Chylomicrons, 113
Chylothorax, 661
Chyluria, lymphatic filariasis, 372
Chymotrypsinogen, 844b
Ciclesonide, 669
Ciclosporin, 96b
adverse reactions
chronic interstititial nephritis, 
504b, 522b
musculoskeletal, 1132b
proximal myopathy, 1230b
aplastic anaemia, 1048
asthma, 671
drug interactions, 28b
eczema, 1268
heart transplant patients, 553
HSCT, 1018
immunosuppression, 96b, 493
inflammatory bowel disease, 
903b, 904
lichen planus, 1290
liver transplant patients, 979
lung transplant patients, 666
myositis, 1115
nephrotoxicity, 979
psoriasis, 1268, 1289b
pyoderma gangrenosum, 1299
renal transplantation patients
rheumatic disease, 1101b, 1102
skin reactions, 1304b
Cidofovir
adverse reactions
CMV, 322
herpesvirus infection, 161b, 162
Ciguatera poisoning, 308
Ciguatoxin, 308
Cilia, 49
Ciliary dysfunction syndrome, 678b, 
679
Ciliary dysmotility syndrome, 648
Cilostazol, 601
Cimetidine
drug interactions, 28–29
effect of renal insufficiency, 466b
neutropenia, 1005b
urticaria, 1291
CIN see Chronic interstitial nephritis
Cinacalcet, 770
Ciprofloxacin, 151b, 157b
anthrax, 347
bacillary dysentery, 345
bronchiectasis, 679
brucellosis, 334b
cellulitis, 1278
cholangitis, 966
cholera, 345
drug interactions, 28
inflammatory bowel disease, 860
intestinal bacterial overgrowth, 
883
meningococcal infection, 
1203–1204
plague, 338–339
prophylactic, 153b
spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis, 941
Q fever, 352
STIs
chancroid, 424b
gonorrhoea, 422b
urinary tract infection, 513b
variceal bleeding, 946
Circulation
changes at birth, 630f
coronary, 530
critically ill patients
management, 189
monitoring, 185–187
effects of vasoactive drug 
infusions, 191b
enterohepatic, 22
fetal, 630f
portal, 464
stroke patients, 1243b
Circulatory failure (shock), 190–191
acute, 190, 544–546, 544f–545f
management, 190–191, 191b
Index
1325
myocardial infarction, 597
prognosis, 191
for detailed entry see Shock
Circumduction, 1168
Circumflex artery (CX)
coronary circulation, 529f
occlusion, 538f
Cirrhosis, 942–945, 943f
alcoholic, 958, 958b
ascites, 944
biliary, 963–965
investigations, 964
older people, 980b
secondary, 981
cardiac, 976–977
causes, 942b
Child-Pugh classification, 944b
clinical features, 943–944, 943b
cryptogenic, 961
drugs to avoid, 971b
haemochromatosis and, 943, 
972–973
hepatic encephalopathy, 923b, 
941–942, 941b
hepatocellular carcinoma, 967, 
969f
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, 
926, 944b, 959–961, 960f
prognosis, 944–945, 944b
viral hepatitis, 949b
Cisplatin
bronchial carcinoma, 704
endometrial cancer, 281
gastric cancer, 879b
head and neck tumours, 282
and hypomagnesaemia, 448b
nephrotoxicity, 479–481, 522b
and peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
Citalopram, 244b, 290
Citric acid (Krebs) cycle, 128
Citrobacter spp., 151b
Citrobacter freundii, 303–304
CJD see Creutzfeld-Jakob disease
CK see Creatine kinase
Cladophialophora bantiana, 382–383
Cladophialophora carrionii, 381
Cladosporium spp., 671
Cladribine, 1041
Clarithromycin
drug interactions, 28b
Helicobacter pylori eradication, 874
leprosy, 350
Mycobacterium avium complex, 
406b
pneumonia, 685b
in pregnancy, 154b
Clasp-knife phenomenon, 1145
Clathrin-coated pits, 48
Claude’s syndrome, 1148b
Claudication
arm, 602
cauda equina, 1221b
intermittent, 601
Claw foot, 1076
Clearance, 22–23, 23f
CLI (critical limb ischaemia)
Climacteric, 757
Climate change, 102
Clindamycin, 151b
acne vulgaris, 1282
babesiosis, 358
bacterial vaginosis, 417b
gas gangrene, 305
malaria, 356
MRSA, 331
necrotising fasciitis, 305
in pregnancy, 154b
septic arthritis, 1095b
soft tissue infections, 305
Clinical audit, 15, 15b, 15f
Clinical decision making, 7–9
conflict of opinion, 12
end of life, 291–292
ethical analysis, 12–13, 13b
ethical issues, 11–12, 12f
heuristics, 8b
informed consent, 10–11
lack of capacity for, 11
Clinical endpoints, 39
Clinical ethics, 10–11
scenario, 13
see also Ethics
Clinical governance, 14b
Clinical pharmacology, 18–24
Clinical psychologist, 2b
Clinical trials, 32, 32f
CLM see Cutaneous larva migrans
CLO see Columnar lined (Barrett’s) 
oesophagus
Clobazam, 1184b
Clobetasol, 416b, 418b, 1265b
Clobetasone butyrate, 1265b
eczema, 1285–1286
Clock drawing test, 1233f
Clofazimine
hyperpigmentation from, 1296b
leprosy, 349b, 350
Clomethiazole, effect of old age, 36b
Clomifene, 762, 764
Clomipramine, 244b
narcolepsy, 1187
Clonazepam
epilepsy, 1184b
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
periodic limb movement 
syndrome, 1188
sleep disorders, 1187
Clonidine
delirium, 203
diarrhoea, 833b
opiate withdrawal, 255
Clonorchiasis, 379b
Clonorchis spp., 163
Clonorchis sinensis, 312b, 378, 379b, 
984–986
Clopidogrel
acute coronary syndrome, 594b
angina, 585
unstable, 594b
myocardial infarction, 594b, 599
peripheral arterial disease, 601b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
platelet inhibition, 1050
prophylactic, 599, 1245b, 1245f
stroke prevention, 1245b, 1245f
Clostridia, soft tissue infections, 
305b
Clostridium spp., 136f–137f
Clostridium botulinum, 138b, 139, 
1210
Clostridium difficile, 137f, 138b, 151b, 
304b, 343–344, 344f
diarrhoea, 399
Clostridium novyi, injecting drug 
users, 299–300
Clostridium perfringens, 308
food poisoning, 342
intravascular haemolysis, 1031
septicaemia, 305
Clostridium tetani, 138b
Clotrimazole, 160b
erythrasma, 1278
genital candidiasis, 417b
Clotting see Coagulation
Clozapine
drug interactions, 28b
schizophrenia, 249b
Clubbing, digital, 1298, 1298f
congenital heart disease, 631
lung cancer, 271
Clue cells, 417f
Cluster headache, 1177, 1178b
CMAPs see Compound motor 
action potentials
CMV see Controlled mandatory 
ventilation
CMV (cytomegalovirus) see 
Cytomegalovirus infection
CNS see Central nervous system
Co-amoxiclav, 151b
diverticulosis, 916–917
empyema, 663
hepatotoxicity, 971, 971b
prophylactic, 153b
respiratory tract infection
pneumonia, 685b, 687
upper, 678
urinary tract infection, 513b
Co-artemether, 356
Co-proxamol, 219
Co-trimoxazole, 151b, 158
adverse reactions
brucellosis, 334b
cyclosporiasis, 369
isosporiasis, 399b, 406b
listeriosis, 339
melioidosis, 340
meningitis, 1204b
mycetoma, 341
nocardiosis, 341
P. jirovecii pneumonia, 400, 406b
bone marrow transplants, 
1017b
leukaemia patients, 1038
prophylactic, 153b
prophylaxis, 406
toxoplasmosis, HIV/AIDS 
patients, 402, 406b
Whipple’s disease, 884
Coagulation, disseminated 
intravascular, 201, 1000
Coagulation cascade, 996f–997f
Coagulation disorders, 1050–1054, 
1051b
acquired, 1051b, 1054
congenital, 1051b, 1054–1056
genetic testing, 62b
investigation, 999–1001
malaria, 357b
stroke, 1244
Coagulation factors, 926–927, 997
complications of therapy, 
1052–1053
concentrates, 1011
older people, 1001b
pregnancy, 1022b
see also specific factors
Coagulation screen, 1000b, 1312b
hepatobiliary disease, 929
Coagulation system inhibitors see 
Anticoagulants
Coal dust, lung disease and, 
602–603, 674b
Coal tar, 1265–1266
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis, 
716–717
Coarctation of aorta, 632, 632f
incidence, 630b
radiofemoral delay, 630f
Cobalamin see Vitamin B12
Cobalt, 132
Cocaine misuse, 218
Coccidioides immitis, 386
Coccidioides posadasii, 386
Coccidioidomycosis, 386
Cock-up toe deformities, 1098
Codeine, 286
contraindication, cirrhosis, 971b
diarrhoea, 918
inflammatory bowel disease, 
903b
irritable bowel syndrome, 908f
effect of hepatic impairment, 
971b
headache, 1176
malignant disease, 286
pharmacokinetics, 25b
Codons, 43
Coeliac disease, 880–882
anaemia, 1025b
and dermatitis herpetiformis, 
1293b, 1294
disease associations, 881b
investigations, 881, 881f
liver function tests, 930b
older people, 883b
pathophysiology, 880, 880f
small intestine tumours, 888–889
Coeliac plexus neurolysis, 894
Coffee, 129–130
diabetogenic effect, 804
Cog wheel rigidity, 1145
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), 
241
eating disorders, 256
hypochondriasis, 245
medically unexplained somatic 
symptoms, 247b
obsessive-compulsive disorder, 
243
schizophrenia, 249
somatoform disorders, 247b
Cognitive decline, general see 
Dementia
Cognitive function, assessment,  
234
Cognitive impairment, 234
HIV-related, 402
Cognitive therapy (CT), 241
COHb see Carboxyhaemoglobin
Coitus, headache and, 1178b
Colchicine
arthralgia, 1119
erythema nodosum, 1119
familial Mediterranean fever, 85
gout, 1089
Cold agglutinin disease, 1030–1031
Cold injury, 105, 105f
see also Hypothermia
Cold sore, 326, 326f
Cold treatment
musculoskeletal disorders
see also Cryotherapy
Colectomy, 904–906
prophylactic, 912
Colesevalam, 434
Colestipol, 434
Colestyramine, 434
bile salt malabsorption, 886
dyslipidaemia, 457
ileal resection, 884
irritable bowel syndrome, 908f
post-cholecystectomy syndrome, 
986–987
primary biliary cirrhosis, 964
pruritus, 1259b
radiation enteritis, 886
Colic
biliary, 982
renal, 507–510
ureteral, 507–508
Colipase, 844b
Colistin, 151b
Colitis
collagenous, 900b, 907
cytomegalovirus, HIV/AIDS 
patients, 399
microscopic (lymphocytic), 907
pseudomembranous, 138b
ulcerative see Ulcerative colitis
Collagen, 1253f
osteoarthritis, 1081
Collagenase, 72–73, 82–83
Collar-stud abscess, 690–691
Colles fracture, 1120
Colloid cyst, 1212b–1213b
Colloids, 482b
Colon, 844, 845f
acute pseudo-obstruction, 918, 
918b
cancer see Colorectal cancer
disorders of, 910–920
diverticulosis, 916–917, 916f
ischaemia, 909–910
motility tests, 850
obstruction, 862
polyps/polyposis, 910–912,  
911b
adenomatous, 910f, 911–912
see also Familial adenomatous 
polyposis
structure and function, 844
tumours, 910–916
see also Colorectal cancer
Index
1326
Colonoscopy, 848, 849b
abdominal pain, 863
acute colonic pseudo-obstruction, 
918
colorectal cancer, 913, 916
constipation, 861
gastrointestinal haemorrhage,  
856
inflammatory bowel disease, 
904b, 908
older people, 850b
polyps, 910, 912
radiation enteritis, 885
virtual, 914–915
Colony-forming unit-erythroid see 
CFU-E
Colony-forming unit-granulocyte 
monocyte see CFU-GM
Colony-forming unit-
megakaryocyte see CFU-Meg
Colophony, 1285b
Colorectal cancer, 912–916
clinical features, 914
colonic polyps and, 910
development, 914f
diagnosis, 913b
Dukes staging, 914f
familial adenomatous polyposis 
coli, 67, 267b, 910f–911f, 
911–912, 911b
genetics, 54b
hereditary non-polyposis, 895, 
913b, 913f
incidence, 262f
inflammatory bowel disease, 
900–901
investigations, 914–915
management, 915
palliative therapy, 915, 915f
pathophysiology, 912–914, 913f
prevention/screening, 916
risk factors, 913b
staging, 914f
Colorimetric chemical reaction, 
428b
Columnar lined (Barrett’s) 
oesophagus (CLO), 866–867
Coma, 198–200, 1159–1161
causes, 199b, 1160b
diabetics see Diabetic ketoacidosis
malaria, 357b
myxoedema, 745
poisoning, 211b
respiratory failure, 664–665
stroke patients, 1237
Comedones
acne, 1281–1282
definition, 1251b
Common cold, 681–682
Common peroneal nerve 
entrapment, 1224b
Communication, 4
doctor-patient, 4b
medical interview, 4b
of risk, 7, 7f
Comorbidities in older people, 170
Compartment syndrome, 301, 1051
anterior tibial, 1135
injecting drug users, 299–300
Complement, 74–75
activation, 75f
measurement, 88
deficiencies, 78b, 79
low, glomerulonephritis 
associated with, 501b
total haemolytic, 1310b
Complement fixation test (CFT), 142
Complement membrane attack 
complex, 75f
Complementary and alternative 
medicine (CAM), 15–16
evidence, 16
integrated health care, 16
pain management, 288
regulation, 16
safety, 16
Compound motor action potentials 
(CMAPs), 1152
Compressed air, physics of 
breathing, 109b
Compression bandages, leg ulcers, 
1263
Computed tomography see CT 
(computed tomography)
COMT see Catechol-O-methyl-
transferase inhibitors
Concentration, assessment, 234
Conduction, heart, 562–579
Condyloma, giant, 425
Condylomata lata, 419–420
Confidentiality, 11
Conflict resolution, 12
Confusion Assessment Method 
(CAM), 174b
Confusion/confusional states, 238
cerebral oedema, 107
older people, 24, 168
post-ictal, 1158b
terminal illness, 290
Congenital abnormalities
diaphragm
heart, 629–636, 629b–630b
adult patients, 635–636, 635b
maternal diabetes and, 818
pancreas, 894–895
rubella and, 315b
urinary tract, 510–511
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 
763b, 782
Congenital hypertrophy of retinal 
pigment epithelium 
(CHRPE), 911–912, 911b
Congestive gastropathy, 948
Coning, 1154
Conjunctivitis
gonococcal, 422
psoriatic arthritis, 1108–1109
reactive arthritis, 1108
Connective tissue, crystal 
deposition, 1086–1087, 1086f
Connective tissue diseases, 
1109–1115, 1300–1301
inherited, 65
management, DMARDs
mixed, 1091b, 1092, 1113–1114
prevalence, 1060b
respiratory involvement, 711–713, 
712b
Conn’s syndrome, 441, 781f
Consciousness
episodic loss/alteration, 
1157–1159
AV block, 572
epilepsy see Epilepsy
seizures, 1159
see also Coma; Syncope
minimally conscious states, 1161, 
1161b
Consent
artificial nutritional support, 124b
discontinuation of dialysis, 490
informed, 10–11
to organ donation, 203
Consequentialism, 10
Constipation, 860–861, 917–918
causes, 860b
clinical assessment, 860–861
diabetic neuropathy, 832b–833b
diverticulosis, 916–917
irritable bowel syndrome, 
907–908
older people, 918b
stroke patients, 1243b
Consultation, communication in, 2
Contact allergic eczema, 1286
Contact inhibition, 264
Continence
faecal, 844
see also Incontinence
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal 
dialysis (CAPD), 492
problems, 493b
Continuous hyperfractionated 
accelerated radiotherapy 
(CHART), 703
Continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP), 191b, 
193–194, 193f
drowning victims, 108
sleep apnoea, 727
Continuous professional 
development (CPD), 14
Contraception
epilepsy, 1184
oral see Oral contraception/
contraceptives
Contrast media, nephrotoxicity, 
469b
Controlled mandatory ventilation 
(CMV), 195f
Conus medullaris, spinal cord 
compression, 272b
Conversion (dissociative) disorder, 
246, 246b
Coombs test, 1030f
COP see Cryptogenic organising 
pneumonia
COPD, 644f, 673–678
BODE index, 677b
classification, 675b
clinical features, 673f, 674–675, 
675f
exertional dyspnoea, 655, 674b
epidemiology, 673–677
exacerbations, 674–675
acute, 658b, 677–678
investigations, 675
management, 675–677, 675b, 676f
occupational, 716
older people, 677b
palliative care, 284
pathophysiology, 673–674, 674f
prognosis, 677
respiratory failure, 663–666
risk factors, 674b
Coping strategies
fibromyalgia, 1093–1094
musculoskeletal disease, 
1080–1081, 1081b
Copper
deficiency, 119b
dietary sources, 131b
excess, Wilson’s disease, 132, 973
refeeding diet, 122b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1310b
RNI, 131b
Coproporphyria, hereditary, 460b
Copy number variants, 55–56
polymorphic, 56–57
Cor pulmonale, 548
Cordocentesis, 63b
Cordylobia anthropophaga, 381
Cori disease, 450b
Corneal arcus, hyperlipidaemia, 
454f
Corneal melting, 1099
Corneocytes, 102
Coronary angiography, 538f, 599
Coronary angioplasty, 587f, 595b, 
595f
Coronary arteries, 529–530, 529f
angiography, 526f
calcification, 537, 602b
occlusion, 1099
spasm, 589
stenosis, 538f
stenting, 1018
Coronary arteriography, 585
Coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG), 585
angina, 588–589, 588f, 589b
vs. PCI, 589b
Coronary artery disease (CAD), 
583–600
clinical manifestations, 583b
diabetics, 818
hyperlipidaemia and, 581
hypertension and, 581
obesity and, 115b
pathology, 583b
prognosis, 589
risk factors, 581
Coronary artery spasm, 589
Coronary blood flow, resistance to
Coronary circulation, 530
Coronary syndromes, acute see 
Acute coronary syndrome
Coronaviruses, 145b, 328, 683b
Corrosives
oesophagitis, 868
poisoning, 224b
Corticobasal degeneration, 1198
Corticosteroids
acute lung injury, 196
adverse reactions, 26, 1265f
osteoporosis, 1120–1121
allergy, 90, 92b
biliary cirrhosis, 964
blood disorders
autoimmune haemolysis, 1030
chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia, 1040
cluster headache, 1177
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 
782
critically ill patients, 196, 201
giant cell arteritis, 1117–1118
hepatitis
alcoholic, 959, 959b
autoimmune, 962–963
inflammatory bowel disease, 860, 
903b
inhaled, asthma, 669–670, 670b
leprosy reactions, 349b
medication overuse headache, 
1177
musculoskeletal disorders
ankylosing spondylitis, 1107
myositis, 1073
osteoarthritis, 1086
SLE, 1112
vasculitis, 1117–1118
neurological disorders
meningitis, 1204b
multiple sclerosis, 1191b
myasthenia gravis, 1227b
sciatica, 1220
pain management, 288b
palliative care, 285b, 288b
pericarditis, 597
pre-eclampsia, 521
pregnancy, 37b
pruritus, 1259b
renal disease
acute interstitial nephritis, 503
glomerulonephritis, 499b–500b, 
500
respiratory disease
allergic rhinitis, 725
aspergillosis, 698
asthma, 669–670, 670b
COPD, 676
interstitial lung disease, 708b, 
709
sarcoidosis, 711b
tuberculosis, 694
rheumatic disease, 1102
rheumatic fever, 615
skin disorders, 1267
adverse reactions, 1303b
alopecia areata, 1297
atopic eczema, 1285–1286
bullous pemphigoid, 1294b
lichen planus, 1290
photosensitivity, 1295
psoriasis, 1289b
topical, 1264–1265, 1265b
urticaria, 1291
vitiligo, 1295
systemic, 1267
topical, 1264–1265, 1285–1286
transplantation reactions, 96b
Index
1327
trichinosis, 375
weight gain, 117b
withdrawal symptoms, 20b
see also Cortisol; Glucorticoids; 
Hydrocortisone; 
Mineralocorticoids; 
Prednisolone
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone 
(CRH), 737f, 774f, 775–776
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone 
test, 774f
Cortisol, 772
deficiency, 794
hypopituitarism, 788
levels
adrenal insufficiency, 777, 779
Cushing’s syndrome, 775–776
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1309b
see also Hydrocortisone
Cortisone acetate, equivalent dose, 
776b
Corynebacterium spp., 136f–137f
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 138b, 
345
Corynebacterium minutissimum, 
1278
Coryza, acute, 681–682
Costs see Economics
Cotton wool spots
diabetic retinopathy, 828
hypertension, 609
Cough, 654–655, 654b
asthma, 667
at high altitude, 107
bovine, 701, 727
bronchial carcinoma, 700
COPD, 674
and headache, 1178, 1178b
laryngeal nerve paralysis, 651
palliative care, 289
pneumonia, 683
upper respiratory tract infections, 
648, 681–682
Cough reflex, 654
Coumarins see Warfarin
Councilman bodies, 324
Counselling
dietary
coeliac disease, 881–882
COPD, 676
hyperlipidaemia, 456
genetic, 67–68
HIV diagnosis, 393b
post-traumatic stress disorder, 
242
Coupled enzymatic reaction,  
428b
Courvoisier’s Law, 937
Cowden’s syndrome, 267b, 911b
Cowpox, 327
COX see Cyclo-oxygenase
Coxibs see NSAIDs; and individual 
drugs
Coxiella burnetii, 135, 352
endocarditis, 626
pneumonia, 720–721
Coxsackie viruses, 319, 326–327
myocarditis, 639b
CPAP see Continuous positive 
airway pressure
CPD see Continuous professional 
development
CPPD see Calcium pyrophosphate 
dihydrate
CPR see Cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation
CPT deficiency see Carnitine-
palmityl transferase 
deficiency
Crab lice, 416b
Crack cocaine, 218
Cramps
abdominal see Abdominal pain
drug-induced, 1132b
heat, 106
occupational, 1200
Cranial nerves
examination, 1140f
lesions/diseases, 1171b
nuclei, 1143–1144
see also specific nerves by name
Craniopharyngioma, 790b, 793,  
794f
Creams, 1265b
Creatine kinase (CK)
acute coronary syndromes, 593f
elevated, 1067b
hypothermia, 104–105
muscular dystrophies, 1228
musculoskeletal disease, 1067b
myocardial infarction, 593f
myopathy, 1066–1067
myositis, 1066–1067
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Creatinine, 430b
AKI, 197b
chronic renal failure, 484f, 487b
clearance, 508b
older people, 483b
diabetes mellitus, 484f
hepatorenal syndrome, 940–941
microalbuminuria, 831b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1308b
serum levels, 467f
AKI, 480b
diabetes mellitus, 484f
CREST syndrome, 1091b, 1112, 
1113f
Cretinism, 131
Creutzfeld-Jakob disease (CJD), 
329b, 1211
variant (vCJD), 1211, 1211f
transmission in blood 
products, 1015
CRF (chronic renal failure) see Renal 
failure, chronic
CRH see Corticotrophin-releasing 
hormone
Crico-arytenoid arthritis, 712b
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, 937b
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic 
fever, 309b, 324, 325b
Critical care/critically ill patient, 
179–204
admission guidelines, 183
assessment, 188–189
circulatory support, 189
clinical decision-making, 189–190, 
189b
clinical examination/assessment, 
180f–181f
discharge, 203, 203b
fluid resuscitation, 1011b
gastrointestinal support, 198
hepatic support, 198
infection sites, 200b
management
on admission, 201b
daily, 202
monitoring, 185–188
circulation, 185–187
respiratory function, 187–188
mortality, 204b
neurological support, 198–200
nutrition, 198
older people, 204b
outcome, 204
outreach, 203
oxygen delivery, 182–184
physiology, 182–185
presenting problems, 190–201
recognition, 180f–181f, 181b, 
188–190
red cell transfusion, 1011b
referral, 189–190
renal support, 197–198, 197b
respiratory support, 191–197
scoring systems, 181b, 204, 204b
transport of patient, 324
withdrawal of care, 203
Critical illness polyneuropathy, 200
Critical limb ischaemia (CLI), 
601–602, 601f
Crohn’s disease
arthritis, 1109
childhood, 906
clinical features, 899–900, 900f
comparison with ulcerative 
colitis, 897b
complications, 900–901, 901f–902f
cutaneous, 1301
differential diagnosis, 900b
investigations, 901–902
management, 904–906
metastatic, 1301
pathophysiology, 898–899, 899f
perianal, 860, 919
pregnancy, 906b
prognosis, 906
pyoderma gangrenosum, 1299f
sclerosing cholangitis and, 965
small bowel, 1025
Cronkhite-Canada syndrome, 911b
Cross-infection, 134
see also Health care-acquired 
infections
Croup, 328, 654b
Crouzon syndrome, 49
CRP see C-reactive protein
CRT see Cardiac resynchronisation 
therapy
Crust, skin, definition, 1251b
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten syndrome, 
945
Cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis, 1119
Cryoglobulins/cryoglobulinaemia, 
88, 88b
Cryoprecipitate, 1012b
Cryosurgery, chromoblastomycosis, 
381–382
Cryotherapy, 1268–1269
anogenital warts, 426
basal cell papilloma, 1274
granuloma annulare, 1301
leishmaniasis, 367
molluscum contagiosum, 426, 
1279
sarcoidosis, 1301
skin cancer, 1270b, 1271
warts, 426
Cryptitis, 897–898, 897b
Cryptococcus gattii, 384
Cryptococcus neoformans, 384
HIV/AIDS patients, 403
Cryptococcus/cryptococcosis, 384, 
384f
HIV-related, 401, 403
prophylaxis, 406b
Cryptogenic cirrhosis, 961
Cryptogenic eosinophilic 
pneumonia, 713b
Cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis see 
Pulmonary fibrosis, 
idiopathic
Cryptogenic organising pneumonia 
(COP), 708b
Cryptorchidism, 759
Cryptosporidia/cryptosporidiosis, 
309b, 369, 888
HIV/AIDS patients, 399b, 399f
Crystal formation, 223, 468, 522b, 
1086–1087
Crystal shedding, 1086f
Crystal-associated disease, 
1086–1092, 1086b, 1086f
Crystalloids, 855b, 1011b
CSF see Cerebrospinal fluid
CSS see Churg-Strauss syndrome
CT see Cognitive therapy
CT (computed tomography)
adrenal adenoma, 781f
angiography, 469, 537, 537f,  
1236f
aortic dissection, 606f
brain, 1156b
abscess, 1208f
intracerebral haemorrhage, 
1239f, 1246
metastases, 1214f
cancer diagnosis, 269, 269f
cerebral abscess, 1208f
gastrointestinal tract, 846, 847b, 
847f
colorectal cancer, 915f
pancreatic cancer, 896f
pancreatic necrosis, 892f
pancreatic pseudocyst, 891f
pancreatitis, 894f
goitre, 753f
Graves’ disease, 750f
head, 1156b
hepatobiliary disease, 930–931, 
931f, 956f, 970f, 983f
hepatocellular carcinoma, 967f
high-resolution, 651
lymphoma, 1043f
musculoskeletal disease, 1065
neuro-endocrine tumour, 785f
neurological disease, 1149b
brain tumours, 1180b
cerebral abscess, 1208
cerebrovascular disease, 1150f
epilepsy, 1182b
meningitis, 1203
stroke, 1235f, 1239f, 1240b, 
1241f
viral encephalitis, 1206
phaeochromocytoma, 782f
pulmonary angiography, 722,  
723f
renal disease, 469, 970f
respiratory disease, 650–651, 651f
aspergilloma, 698f
bronchiectasis, 679f
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 
720f
interstitial lung disease, 709f
pleural thickening, 718f
pulmonary fibrosis, 709f
rheumatic disease, 696b, 712f
spine, 1221f
spiral, 1149
Cullen’s sign, 890–891
Culture
blood, 140f
stool, 307
Cupulolithiasis, 1186
CURB score, 685b
Curettage
cancer, 281
skin disease, 1268
Cushing’s disease, 773
management, 776
Cushing’s syndrome, 773–776
aetiology, 773, 773b
classification, 773b
clinical features, 773–774, 773f
hirsutism, 763b
investigations, 774–776, 774f
management, 776
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM), 
375–376, 375f
CVP see Central venous pressure
CVS see Chorionic villus sampling
CX see Circumflex artery
Cyanide poisoning, 209b
Cyanosis, 1158b
congenital heart disease, 631
Cyclic citrullinated peptide, 
antibodies to, 1067
Cyclical vomiting syndrome, 877
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), 
263
Cyclizine, 290b
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX), 1078,  
1078f
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibitors, 
1019b
Cyclopenthiazide, 611
Index
1328
Cyclophosphamide, 266b
adverse reactions
blood disorders
autoimmune haemolysis
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 
1045
bronchial carcinoma, 704
Churg-Strauss syndrome, 1118
glomerulonephritis, 500–501
immunosuppression, 1017
leukaemias, 1040, 1041b, 1045
myositis, 1115
neuromyelitis optica, 1193
pemphigus, 1294
rheumatic disease, 1101b
SLE, 520, 1112
vasculitis, 519, 520b, 1118
warm autoimmune haemolysis, 
1030
Cyclops spp., 375
Cyclospora cayetanensis, 369
Cyclospora infections, 369
Cyclosporiasis, 369
Cylindromatosis enzyme, 48–49
Cypermethrin, 224b
Cyproterone acetate, 765b
acne, 1267, 1282
alopecia, 1297
prostate cancer, 518
Cystathionine β-synthase deficiency, 
449
Cystectomy, 517
Cysteine, 114b
stones, 507b
Cystic fibrosis (CF), 680–681, 895, 
981
adolescents, 681b
bronchiectasis, 680–681
clinical features, 680–681, 680f
complications, 680b
genetics/inheritance, 58b, 
680–681
management, 681, 681b
gene therapy, 681
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator 
(CFTR), 48
Cystic kidney diseases, 505–507
Cysticercosis, 379f, 380
Cystinosis, 521, 794b
Cystinuria, 509–510
Cystitis, 513b
Cystoscopy, 517
Cystourethrography, micturating, 
reflex nephropathy, 505f
Cysts
Baker’s (popliteal), 1076b, 1098
ruptured, 1098
choledochal, 981, 981f
colloid, 1212b–1213b
hepatic, 380–381
hydatid, liver, 380–381, 956–957, 
956f
Cytarabine (Ara-C)
acute leukaemia, 1037b
chronic myeloid leukaemia, 1040
Cytochrome bc1 complex, 46b
Cytochrome c oxidase, 46b
Cytochrome P450, 22
Cytogenetic analysis, 269
Cytokeratin, as tumour marker, 268
Cytokine receptor deficiencies, 79
Cytokines, 74
asthma, 667
cancer, 265
deficiencies, 79
immune response regulation, 74b
pro-inflammatory, 82, 1121
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, 
317b, 321–322
bone marrow transplants, 1017b
hepatitis, 955
HIV/AIDS patients
encephalitis, 402
prophylaxis, 406b
retinitis, 404
liver transplant patients
polyradiculitis, 404
in pregnancy, 314b
prophylaxis, 406b
stem cell transplantation, 1017b
Cytopathic hypoxia, 185
Cytosine, 42
Cytoskeleton, 47–48
Cytotoxic drugs see Chemotherapy; 
and names of specific  
drugs
Cytotoxin-associated gene (cagA), 
872f
D
D-dimers
pulmonary embolism, 722
reference values, 1312b
venous thromboembolism, 722
d4T see Stavudine
Dabigatran etexilate, indications, 
567, 1018b
Dacarbazine, Hodgkin’s disease, 
1043
Dactylitis, 1109f
Dalfopristin, 151b, 159
Dandruff, 1284
Dantrolene, 249
Dantron, 917b
Dapsone, 1268
adverse reactions, 158
with chlorproguanil (Lapdap), 
356
dermatitis herpetiformis, 855
erythema nodosum, 1303
haemolysis from, 1031
leprosy, 349b
linear IgA disease, 1294
malaria, 356
neutropenia, 1005b
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 
406
poisoning, 209b, 212
prophylactic, 153b
pyoderma gangrenosum, 1299
Dapsone syndrome, 158
Daptomycin, 151b, 159
mechanism of action, 150b
Darunavir, 407b
Daunorubicin, acute leukaemia, 
1037b
DCCT (Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial), 827
DDAVP see Desmopressin
ddl see Didanosine
DDT, 224b, 1048b
de Musset’s sign, 623b
De novo mutations, 59
De Quervain’s tenosynovitis, 1075
De Quervain’s thyroiditis, 751–752
‘Dead-in-bed syndrome’, 815
Deafness, 1173
Alport’s syndrome, 502
gentamicin-induced, 27b
Lassa fever, 325b
Paget’s disease, 1129
Pendred’s syndrome, 744f
quinine toxicity, 215
rubella, 315b
salicylate overdose, 212, 615
Death and dying, 284f, 290–292
advance directives, 171, 291
brainstem death, 203
care in, 291, 291b
diagnosis, 291
ethical issues, 291–292
talking about, 290–291
see also Brain death; Palliative 
care; Sudden death
Debrisoquine, 69
DEC see Diethylcarbamazine
Decision making see Clinical 
decision making
Declaration of Geneva, 11
Decompression, musculoskeletal 
disease, 1133
Decompression illness
aviators, 107
divers, 109, 109b
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) see 
Venous thrombosis/
thromboembolism
DEET (diethyltoluamide), malaria 
prevention, 358
Defecation
disorders of see Constipation; 
Diarrhoea
obstructed, 850
Defensins, 843
Defibrillation, 557, 577
external, 577
implantable cardiac defibrillator
heart failure, 553, 553f
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
638
ventricular arrhythmias, 579, 
579b
myocardial infarction, 557
public access, 558
Dehydration
cerebral, hypernatraemia, 439
cholera, 344
diabetics, 804
gastric outlet obstruction, 
875–876
heat illness, 104f, 106
intestinal resection, 885b
see also Water, body, depletion
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 
778
Déjerine-Klumpke paralysis, 1225b
Deletions, 55, 56b
Delirium, 250, 1161
cognitive impairment, 114
critically ill patients, 203
diagnosis, 174b
older people, 173–175, 173b
prevalence, 232b
terminal illness, 290
Delirium tremens (DTs), 253
Delta virus see Hepatitis D virus
Delusional disorders, 248, 248b
Delusional parasitosis, 245
Delusional perception, 247–248
Delusions, 234, 236–237
differential diagnosis, 237
schizophrenia, 237
Demeclocycline, 438–439
Dementia, 250–251
aetiology, 250, 250b
alcoholic, 253
fronto-temporal, 252, 252f
HIV-associated, 402–404
investigations, 251, 251b
Lewy body, 252
management, 251–252
vascular, 250b
see also Alzheimer’s disease
Demography, older people, 168, 
168f
Demyelinating polyneuropathy
acute inflammatory see 
Guillain-Barré syndrome
chronic, 1225
Demyelination
acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis, 
1192–1193
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 
1224–1225, 1225b
multiple sclerosis, 1188–1192
transverse myelitis, 1193, 1193b
vitamin B12 deficiency, 129, 1024b
Dendritic cells, 74, 1141
Dendritic ulcers, 326
Dengue haemorrhagic fever, 309b, 
322–323, 322b–323b, 322f, 
325b
incubation period, 145b, 310b, 
322b, 325b
pregnancy, 314b
Denosumab, osteoporosis, 1123b
Dense deposit disease, 501
Dental caries, fluoride and, 132
Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian 
atrophy (DRPLA), 65, 1199b
genetics, 56b
Deontological ethics, 10, 13
Deoxycoformycin, 1041
11-Deoxycorticosterone, 782
11-Deoxycorticosterone-secreting 
adrenal tumour, 780b
Depolarisation, cardiac muscle, 
529–530
Depression, 235, 243–244
aetiology, 243
alcohol and, 253
assessment, self-poisoning and
delusions and hallucinations, 234, 
236–237
diagnosis, 243
differential diagnosis, 235
management, 243–244
see also Antidepressants
manic (bipolar disorder), 243–245
and medical illness, 244b
negative cognitive triad, 241b
older people, 238b
in palliative care patients, 290
post-partum, 257
prevalence, 232b
prognosis, 243–244
stroke patients, 1243b
symptoms, 235b
unipolar, 243
Depressive adjustment disorder, 
235
Dermatitis
chronic actinic, 1260b
exfoliative, 1304b
herpetiformis, 272, 882, 1293b, 
1294
seborrhoeic, HIV/AIDS, 397
see also Eczema
Dermatobia hominis, 381
Dermatofibroma, 1275
Dermatographism, 90, 1092–1093
Dermatomyositis/polymyositis, 
1091b, 1114–1115, 1194b, 
1300–1301
cancer patients, 271b, 272
nails in, 1115
photoaggravation, 1298f
respiratory complications, 712b, 
1073
Dermatophytes/dermatophyte 
infection, 1279f
nails in, 1279f
see also specific infections
Dermatoscopy, 1255, 1256f
Dermatosis, acquired reactive 
perforating, 1303
Dermis, 1252
Dermoscopy, 1255
Des-aspargate-arginine vasopressin 
see Desmopressin
Desensitisation, 20–21
Desmin, 48
Desmoid tumours, 911–912, 911b
Desmopressin (DDAVP), diabetes 
insipidus, 794–795
Desmosomes, 1252
Desquamative interstitial 
pneumonia (DIP), 708b
Detrusor muscle, 466
failure, 473
overactivity, 473b
Detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, 
1174
Developing countries
bladder stones, 507
diabetic ketoacidosis, 811–812
epilepsy, 1178–1179
health-care provision, 9
peptic ulcer, 850
tetanus, 1209–1210
tuberculosis, 696
Devic’s disease, 1193
Index
1329
DEXA (dual energy X-ray 
absorptiometry)
bone mineral density, 760, 
1065–1066
hyperparathyroidism, 769
musculoskeletal disease, 1066f
osteoporosis, 172, 1122
Dexamethasone
adjunctive, bacterial meningitis, 
1204b
altitude illness, 107
brain tumours, 274, 1214
equivalent dose, 776b
gastrointestinal obstruction, 290
high-altitude cerebral oedema, 
107
meningitis, 1204b
pain management, 288b
spinal cord compression, 272–273, 
273b
thyrotoxicosis, 742–743
Dexamethasone suppression test 
(DST)
Cushing’s syndrome/disease, 
117, 775
hirsutism, 763–764
Dexamfetamine, 1187
Dextran, 1304b
Dextropropoxyphene, 217b
poisoning, 217b, 219
Dextrose, 433b
hypoglycaemia, 216, 357b
DFMO see Eflornithine
DHA see Docosahexaenoic acid
Di George syndrome, 80
genetics, 56b
Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial (DCCT), 827
Diabetes insipidus, 794–795
causes, 794b
cranial (central), 787b, 794b
nephrogenic, 794b
Diabetes mellitus, 797–836
acromegaly, 806
acute myocardial infarction, 818
adolescents, 818, 818b
aetiology and pathogenesis, 
802–807, 803f
air travel and, 108
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
and, 581, 826–827
bronzed diabetes, 972
cardiovascular disease risk 
prediction, 811
children, 818
classification, 807b, 809–810
clinical examination, 798f, 
809–810
complications, 820, 826–835,  
826b
pathophysiology, 827–828
prevention, 827–828
see also specific complications
cystic fibrosis and, 680b, 681
driving and, 810b
functional anatomy/physiology, 
800–807
gestational, 807b
hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar 
state, 814, 814b
hypertension and, 810–811
investigations/diagnosis, 
807–811, 809b
older people, 806b
latent autoimmune diabetes in 
adults, 810
long-term supervision, 811
management, 810–811, 820–826
alcohol intake, 821
dietary, 820–821, 820b
exercise, 821
goals, 811
insulin, 824–826, 824b
older people, 828b
oral hypoglycaemic drugs, 
821–824
prevention of complications, 
827–828
review, 811b
risk factors, 828
transplantation, 826
weight control, 821
maturity onset diabetes of the 
young (MODY), 807b
morbidity, 826b
mortality, 826b
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1133
nephropathy see Diabetic 
nephropathy
older people, 806b
patient education, 810
pregnancy and, 807b, 817–818
presenting problems, 808–820
prevalence, 800f
renal involvement, 519–520
surgery and, 818–820, 819b, 819f
type 1, 802–804
aetiology and pathogenesis, 
803, 803f
clinical features, 809b
environmental factors, 804
genetic predisposition, 803–804
glycaemic control, 827b
HLA associations, 803–804
metabolic disturbance, 804, 
804f
risk factors, 803b
sibling risk, 68b, 803b
type 2, 802–803, 805–806
aetiology and pathogenesis, 
805–806, 805f
blood pressure control, 811, 
811b
clinical features, 809b
environmental factors, 806
genetic predisposition, 806
glycaemic control, 827b
insulin resistance, 805
management, 811, 822b, 822f
metabolic disturbance, 806
multiple risk intervention, 831b
prevention of complications, 
827–828
risk factors, 115b, 116f, 806b
vascular disease, 602, 602b, 
826–827, 827f
visual loss, 830
Diabetic amyotrophy, 832
Diabetic foot, 602b, 833–835, 834b, 
834f
Diabetic ketoacidosis, 804, 811–814, 
812b
adolescents, 818b
clinical features, 812, 812b
investigations, 812–813
management, 813–814, 813b
pathogenesis, 812–814
pregnancy, 818
Diabetic microangiopathy, 826–827
Diabetic nephropathy, 830–831, 
830b, 830f
pregnancy and, 818
Diabetic neuropathy, 799, 831–833, 
832b–833b, 834f
Diabetic retinopathy, 799, 799f, 
828–830, 829f
pregnancy and, 818
risk factors, 828b
Diagnosis, 33
interview, 4
investigations, 4–7
see also individual conditions
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 
American Psychiatric 
Association (DSM-IV)  
(4th ed)
Dialyser fluid, hypersensitivity to, 
492b
Dialysis
amyloidosis associated with, 86b
gastrointestinal, 210
hyperkalaemia, 442–443
peritoneal, 492
poisoning, 207–208, 211
renal
AKI, 483, 491
CRF, 491
older people, 491b
SLE, 520
see also Haemodialysis
3,4-Diaminopyridine, Lambert-
Eaton myasthenic syndrome, 
1227–1228
Diamorphine
myocardial infarction, 593–594
palliative care, 287, 291
Diaphragm
acquired disorders, 731
congenital disorders, 731
diseases, 731
eventration, 731
Diarrhoea, 857
acute, 306–308, 857
assessment of patient, 306–308
causes, 306b
differential diagnosis, 306b
food poisoning and, 306
management, 307–308
after peptic ulcer surgery, 875
amoebic dysentery, 367–368
antibiotic-associated, 138b, 308
bloody, 897b, 899
cholera, 344
chronic/relapsing, 857, 857b
diabetic, 832b–833b
faecal incontinence, 918, 918b, 
1175
haemolytic uraemic syndrome
HIV/AIDS patients, 399–400, 
399b
infective, 306–308
older people, 306b
inflammatory bowel disease, 899
irritable bowel syndrome, 
907–908
malabsorption, 857–858
small bowel disease, 857b
traveller’s, 310–311, 311b
viral, 306b
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 876
Diascopy, 1255
Diastematomyelia, 1222b
Diastolic dysfunction, 546b
Diathermy
bladder cancer, 517
cervical cancer, 281
endometrial cancer, 281
gastrointestinal bleeding, 848f
rectal papillomas, 378
Diazepam
acute poisoning, 218, 220, 222
adverse reactions, 26b
alcohol withdrawal, 253–254
convulsions, 220, 357b
disturbed behaviour, 237–238, 
291
drug interactions, 28
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
status epilepticus, 1159b
terminal agitation, 291
Diazoxide, 785
hypertrichosis, 1297, 1304b
Dibenzodiazepines, 249b
Dibenzothiazepines, 249b
DIC see Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
Dichromate, 1285b
Diclofenac, 288b, 1079b, 1266
actinic keratosis, 1266, 1271
adjuvant analgesia, 288b
and gastrointestinal bleeding, 
1079b
hepatotoxicity, 971
renal colic, 509
Didanosine (ddl), 403
Dieldrin, 224b
Dietary supplements, 123
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC), 163, 373
Diethylenepenta-acetic acid (DTPA), 
indium-labelled, 851b, 896
Dietitian, 2b
Dietl’s crisis, 471
Diet(s)
cancer and, 266b, 913b
cholesterol levels and, 113, 114b, 
451
cystic fibrosis, 681
diabetes
management, 820–821, 820b
type 2, 806
diverticulosis and, 916
dyslipidaemia management, 456
elimination, 868, 887
gallstones and, 981
gastric cancer risk, 878
gluten-free, 880–882
high-fibre, 916–917
hospital patients, 122–123
inflammatory bowel disease 
management, 904–905
irritable bowel syndrome 
management, 908–909
low-carbohydrate, 118b
low-fat, 118b
low-protein
chronic renal failure, 488
obesity, 118b
multiple sclerosis management, 
1192
refeeding, 122b
renal failure
AKI, 483
chronic, 488
starvation, 118–119
stone disease, 507b
vegan, 114, 1025
very low calorie, 118–119
vitamin B12 deficiency, 1025
weight reduction, 118–119, 118b
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal 
hyperostosis (DISH), 
1133–1134, 1134f
Diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis 
syndrome (DILS), 404, 404f
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease 
(DPLD), 706–711
classification, 707f
diagnosis, 706b
investigations, 708, 708b
DiGeorge syndrome, 80, 629–630, 
770
Digestion, 841–843
malabsorption, 857–858, 857b, 
858f
Digital subtraction angiography 
(DSA), 601–602
Digitalis, adverse reactions, 26b
Digoxin
adverse reactions, 26b
arrhythmias, 575b, 576–577
atrial fibrillation, 565–566, 596
atrial flutter, 564
drug interactions, 28b
effect of old age, 36b
heart failure, 553
mitral valve disease, 618, 620b
plasma concentrations, 39b,  
209b
pulmonary hypertension, 725
therapeutic monitoring, 39b
toxicity/poisoning, 209b, 215, 
577b
Digoxin-specific antibody fragments 
(F(ab)), 215
Dihydrocodeine, 286
malignant disease, 286
musculoskeletal disease, 1078
poisoning, 217b
Dihydropyridines
angina, 586–587, 594
hypertension, 612, 613b
overdose, 214
see also individual drugs
Index
1330
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol, 766
hypoparathyroidism, 770–771
osteoporosis, 1125
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D, 464–466, 
486–488
Diiodotyrosine (DIT), 738b
Diloxanide furoate, 164, 368
Diltiazem
angina, 586–587, 587b
unstable, 594
aortic dissection, 607
arrhythmias, 574f, 576
atrial fibrillation, 536–537
hypertension, 612
skin reactions, 1304b
Diltiazem cream, anal fissure, 919
Dilute Russell viper venom time 
(DRVVT), 1055
2,3-Dimercapto-propane sulphonate 
(DMPS), 224b
2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic acid 
(DMSA), 224b
technetium-labelled (99mTc-
DMSA), 471
DIP see Desquamative interstitial 
pneumonia
Diphencyprone, 1278–1279
Diphenoxylate, 308, 883
Diphenylbutylpiperidines, 249b
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate (DPG), 
994–995
Diphtheria, 138b, 345–346, 345b
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
immunisation, 346
incubation period, 145b, 345
laryngeal obstruction, 345, 728
Diphyllobothrium latum, 378
DIPJs (distal interphalangeal joints), 
psoriatic arthritis, 1108, 
1109f
Diplopia, 1169–1170
diabetics, 832
Graves’ disease, 735b, 750f
intracranial hypertension, 
1217–1218
myasthenia gravis, 1226
Dipyridamole
platelet inhibition, 1050
stroke prevention, 1245b, 1245f
Directly observed therapy (DOT), 
tuberculosis, 695
Dirofilaria immitis, 375
Disability
critically ill patients, 189
International Classification of 
Functioning and Disability, 
176b
older people, 170
Disability-adjusted life years 
(DALY), 9
Discoid eczema, 1284
Discs, intervertebral see 
Intervertebral discs
Disease-modifying antirheumatic 
drugs (DMARDs)
osteoarthritis, 1086
psoriatic arthritis, 1109
reactive arthritis, 1108
rheumatoid arthritis, 1101b,  
1102
DISH see Diffuse idiopathic skeletal 
hyperostosis
Disopyramide
arrhythmias, 574, 575b
cardiomyopathy, 638
vasovagal syncope, 555–556
Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (DIC), 201, 496, 
1000, 1055–1056, 1056b
Dissociative (conversion) disorder, 
246, 246b
Distal interphalangeal joints (DIPJs), 
psoriatic arthritis, 1108, 
1109f
Distribution, 22
interactions, 28
volume of distribution, 22
Disturbed behaviour, 237–238,  
237f
Disulfiram, 254
DIT see Diidotyrosine
Dithranol, 1265–1266
Diuretics
adverse reactions, 26b, 176b, 436, 
436b
ascites, 940
clinical use, 435–436
dosage regimen, 35b
drug interactions, 28b
heart failure, 551, 552f
hypertension, 611, 613b
loop, mechanisms of action, 
19–20, 435
mitral regurgitation, 620b
mode of action, 434–435
obliterative cardiomyopathy, 638
oedema, 434–436
osmotic, 435
potassium-sparing, 435, 551
resistance, 436
skin reactions, 1304b
tricuspid regurgitation, 625
see also Thiazides
Diverticulitis, acute, 862
Diverticulosis, 916–917, 916f
bleeding, 916
jejunal, 847f
Diving effects/illness, 109–110,  
109b
Dizziness, 1157–1159, 1158f
older people, 173, 1158b
DMARDs see Disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs
DMPS see 2,3-Dimercapto-propane 
sulphonate
DMSA see 2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic 
acid
DNA, 42
analysis, neurological disease, 
1153
copy number, 62
microarrays, 62
mitochondrial (mtDNA), 169
nuclear chromosomal, 168
probes, 62f, 696
proviral, 391–392
repair/repair enzymes, 50, 55–56
replication, 49
sequence analysis, 61f
transcription, 42–43
DNAase, recombinant human, 
cystic fibrosis, 681b
Dobutamine, circulatory effects, 
191b
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 113, 
458
Doctor-patient relationship, 2–4, 3f
communication, 4b
difficulties in, 2–4
ethical issues, 9–13
Doctors, 2b
duties of, 3b
Docusate, 917b
Döhle bodies, 1050
Dolorplus pain scale, 285
Dominant negative mutations, 58
Domperidone, 1177
Donath-Landsteiner antibody, 1031
Donepezil, 252
Donovan bodies, 363
Donovanosis, 424b
Dopamine, low-dose, AKI, 482b
Dopamine agonists
acromegaly, 793
Parkinson’s disease, 1197, 1197b
pregnancy, 792
prolactinoma, 791–792, 791b
and renal dysfunction, 522b
restless legs syndrome,  
1187–1188
Dopamine antagonists
gastroparesis, 833b
and prolactin concentrations, 
790–791
Dopamine dysregulation syndrome, 
1196–1197
Dopexamine, circulatory effects
Doppler echocardiography, 
536–537, 536f
aortic dissection, 606–607, 606f
atrial septal defect, 633f
colour flow Doppler, 536f, 606f
interventricular septum rupture, 
597
valvular heart disease, 536f, 
613–614, 617b, 617f, 619f, 
621b, 623f
Doppler ultrasound
haemorrhoids, 918–919
hepatobiliary disease, 930, 976
leg ulcers, 1262
mitral stenosis, 617f
oesophageal, cardiac output 
monitoring, 187, 187f
renal, 480b–481b
venous thromboembolism, 722
Doripenem, 154b
Dose-response curves, 19–20, 19f
Dosulepin, 244b
DOT see Directly observed therapy, 
tuberculosis
Double duct sign, 986
Double vision see Diplopia
Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21)
genetics, 56b
screening, 63b
Doxapram, 665, 678
Doxazosin, 612, 782
Doxorubicin
bronchial carcinoma, 704
cardiotoxicity, 639b
hepatocellular carcinoma, 968
liposomal, ovarian cancer, 280–281
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 1045
Doxycycline, 151b
anthrax, 347
bacillary angiomatosis, HIV/
AIDS patients, 398
brucellosis, 334b
cholera, 345
filariasis, 373
leptospirosis, 338
louse-borne relapsing fever, 336
Lyme disease, 336
malaria, 356
melioidosis, 340
onchocerciasis, 374
plague, 339
Q fever, 352
reactive arthritis, 1108
relapsing fever, 336
rickettsial fevers, 352
skin eruptions, 1303f
skin infections, 1267
STIs
chlamydial infection, 423b
granuloma inguinale, 424b
lymphogranuloma venereum, 
424b
syphilis, 421
Whipple’s disease, 884
DPG see 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate
DPLD see Diffuse parenchymal lung 
disease
DPP-4 inhibitors, 822b, 824
Dracunculiasis (guinea worm), 375
Dracunculus medinensis, 375
Drainage
intercostal tube, 663, 730, 730f
postural, bronchiectasis, 679
DRESS, 1304b
Dressings, 1266, 1266b
Dressler’s syndrome, 597
Dribble, post-micturition, 473
Drinking, problem, 100, 100f, 240, 
252–254
Driving
diabetes and, 810b
epileptics, 1183b
Dronedarone, 565–566, 575b, 576
Drowning/near-drowning, 108, 
108b, 109f
DRPLA see Dentato-rubro-
pallidoluysian atrophy
Drug eruptions, 1289, 1303–1305, 
1303b, 1303f
blisters, 1258, 1258b
clinical patterns, 1304b
diagnosis, 1305b
fixed, 1304b
maculopapular, 1289, 1304b
photosensitive, 1260b
rash, 398, 1257b
Drug history, 26b
Drug misuse, 240, 240b, 254–255
ecthyma, 1276–1277
hepatitis transmission, 955, 955b
infective endocarditis, 625
injecting drug users
Clostridium novyi, 299–300
compartment syndrome, 
299–300
fever, 299–301, 300f
injection site infection, 299–301, 
300f
polydrug misuse, 254
psychosis, 248
septic arthritis, 1094
spinal epidural abscess, 1209
stroke, 1242b
tetanus, 1209–1210
Drug resistance, 20
Drug therapy
adverse reactions, number 
needed to treat (NNT), 32, 
1244b
balance of benefit to harm, 10,  
33b
best evidence, 9
choice of, 33–34, 33b
clinical trials, 32, 32f
dosage regimen, 34
duration, 18b
evidence-based medicine, 32, 32f
frequency of administration, 23f
monitoring, 36, 39–40, 39b
odds ratio, 32f
older people, 36b
patient information, 35b
stopping, 36
timing of, 35b
topical, 21–22, 1264–1266, 1265b
see also Prescribing
Drug-related disorders
anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid 
reactions, 92b
aplastic anaemia, 1048b
asthma, 667–668
coagulopathy, 1051b
diabetes mellitus, 807b
dyskinesia, 249b
eosinophilia, 158
gynaecomastia, 762b
haemolysis, 1029b
heparin-induced, 
thrombocytopenia, 991
hyperpigmentation, 1296b
hyperprolactinaemia, 790b
leukaemia, 1035b
liver, 930b, 970–972, 971b
lungs, 714, 714b
lupus, 1068b, 1132b
musculoskeletal system, 1132b
gout, 1132b
osteomalacia, 1126b
osteoporosis, 1121b
nausea and vomiting, 290
neutropenia, 1005b
obesity, 117b
oesophagitis, 868
parkinsonism, 1166b, 1198
peripheral neuropathy, 403
Index
1331
photosensitivity, 1260b, 1304b
psychosis, 248b
renal, 480b, 483, 522–523, 522b
respiratory system, 708b, 714b
skin, 1304b
tardive dyskinesia, 26, 249b, 877
thrombocytopenia, 1007b
thyrotoxicosis, 742f
tremor, 1200b
see also Drug eruptions
Drugs
absorption/systemic availability, 
21–22
adverse reactions, 24–28, 26b
classification, 25–27, 27b
dose-related, 20
inter-individual variation, 
23–24, 24b
older people, 175–176, 176b
pharmacovigilance, 27–28
risk factors, 26b
TREND analysis, 27b
controlled, prescription, 29b, 31
development, 30–31, 30b
discovery, 30–31
distribution, 22
dosage regimen, 34
alteration in special 
circumstances, 36–37
repeated dose, 23, 23f
timing, 35b
dose-response curves, 19–20,  
19f
efficacy, 19–20, 19f
excretion, 22
formulations
older people, 36b
prescription/nomenclature 
and, 26b, 29b
interactions, 28–29, 28b
avoidance of, 29
mechanisms, 28–29
pharmaceutical, 28b
pharmacodynamic, 28b
pharmacokinetic, 28b
licensing, 31
management of use, 31–33
marketing, 31
mechanisms of action see 
individual drugs
metabolism, 22
drug interactions and, 28–29
genetic influences, 24b
interactions, 28–29
older people, 36b
of misuse, 216–219
older people, 36b
overdose/poisoning, 212–216
drugs of misuse, 216–219
plasma concentrations, 39–40,  
39b
potency, 20
prescribing see Prescribing
route of administration, 21–22, 
34b
topical, 21–22
toxicity, 24
treatment endpoints, 39
DRVVT see Dilute Russell viper 
venom time
Dry drowning, 108
DSA see Digital subtraction 
angiography
DSM-IV, 232
DST see Dexamethasone 
suppression test
DTPA see Diethylenepenta-acetic 
acid
DTs see Delirium tremens
Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry 
see DEXA
Dubin-Johnson syndrome, 937b
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 54b, 
1228b
inheritance, 1228b
Ductopenia, 970–971
Ductus arteriosus, persistent, 631, 
631f
closure device, 632
incidence, 630b
with reversed shunting, 632
Dukes classification of tumours, 
914f
Duloxetine, pain management, 288b
Dumping syndrome, 875
Duodenal switch, 119b
Duodenal ulcers, 868b, 872–876
management, 874–875
surgery, 874–875, 874b
Duodenogastro-oesophageal reflux, 
866–867
Duodenum, functional anatomy, 
840f
Duplications, 55–56, 57f
Dupuytren’s contracture/disease, 
1133–1134
cirrhosis, 944
diabetes, 799b
Duroziez’s sign, 623b
Dusts, lung disease and, 719–720, 
719b
Dutasteride, 515
Duties of doctor, 3b
DVT see Deep venous thrombosis
Dwarfism
Laron, 786b
zinc deficiency, 131–132
DXA see DEXA
Dying see Death and dying
Dysaesthesia, 658b
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
Dysarthria, 1168–1169, 1173–1174
causes, 1169b
Dysbetalipoproteinaemia, 455
Dysdiadochokinesis, 1145
Dysentery
amoebic, 367–368
bacillary, 145b, 345
management, 345
Shigella, reactive arthritis and, 345
Dysexecutive syndrome, 1175
Dysgraphia, 1167
Dyshormonogenesis, congenital 
thyroid disease, 755–756
Dyslexia, 1167
Dyslipidaemia
diabetes, 805, 809
role of statins, 811
type 2, 805, 810
management, 456–458
pregnancy, 434
Dysmetria, 1145
ocular, 1171
Dysmorphic syndromes, 66
Dyspepsia, 852
alarm features, 852b
causes, 852b
functional, 876–877
gallstone, 982–983
investigation, 853f, 876
non-ulcer, 907
Dysphagia, 399, 851, 1173–1174
causes
bronchial carcinoma, 701
oesophageal cancer, 270b
oesophageal dysmotility, 850
gastro-oesophageal reflux, 
865–868, 865f
investigation, 851, 852f
stroke patients, 1242–1243
Dysphasia, 1168–1169
Dysphonia, 1168
Dyspnoea see Breathlessness
Dysthymia, 243
Dystonia, 1166–1167, 1166b, 1200
poisoning, 211b
Dystrophia myotonica, 250b, 1172b
Dysuria, 471
E
E-cadherin gene, mutations, 878
E3 ligases, 46
Ears
examination, critically ill patients, 
200b
freezing injuries, 105
infections of, 108, 314, 332b, 346
squamous cell carcinoma, 1271
Eastern Cooperative Oncology 
Group (ECOG) performance 
scale, 268, 268b
Eating disorders, 255–256, 256b
Ebola virus disease, 324, 325b
Ebstein’s anomaly, 635b
EBV see Epstein-Barr virus
Ecchymosis, 1007
definition, 1251b
Eccrine glands, 1254
ECF see Extracellular fluid
ECF (epirubicin, cisplatin and 
5-fluorouracil), 879
ECG (electrocardiography), 532–534, 
533f
acute coronary syndromes, 
541f–542f, 591
AKI, 480b
ambulatory (Holter monitoring), 
534
angina, 584–585
aortic dissection, 606–607
aortic regurgitation, 624b
aortic stenosis, 622f
artificial pacemaker, 578f
atrial ectopic beats, 564f
atrial fibrillation, 565f
atrial flutter, 564f
AV block, 571f–572f, 572b
AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia, 
568f
cardiac cycle, 561f
cardiac tamponade, 545–546
critically ill patients, 185–187
endocarditis, 628
exercise (stress), 529f, 534, 567f, 
584f
hyperkalaemia, 440f
hypokalaemia, 440f
left ventricular hypertrophy, 622f
mitral stenosis, 617
myocardial infarction, 534, 
592–593, 592f–593f
myocardial ischaemia, 534
pacemaker, 578f
pericarditis, 639, 640f
potassium balance disorders,  
440f
pulmonary embolism, 721b, 722
reading, 533b
sinoatrial disease, 563f
standard 12-lead, 532–534, 533b
supraventricular tachycardia, 
567f
syncope, 555–556, 555f
tachyarrhythmias, 567f
torsades de pointes, 571f
tricyclic antidepressant 
poisoning, 213f
ventricular ectopic beats, 569f
ventricular fibrillation, 557
ventricular tachycardia, 570f
Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome, 568f
Echinocandins, 160, 160b
Echinococcus granulosus, 309b, 312b, 
378, 380–381, 956–957
life cycle, 380f
Echocardiography (ECHO), 536–537
angina, 593
aortic dissection, 606f
aortic stenosis, 622f
atrial septal defect, 633f
cardiac tamponade, 545–546
critically ill patients, 187
Doppler, 536–537, 536f
ventricular septal defect, 634
endocarditis, 627–628
four-chamber view, 536f
heart failure, 549
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
638
indications, 536b
left ventricular hypertrophy, 632
mitral regurgitation, 619f
myocardial infarction, 593
myocarditis, 636
papillary muscle rupture, 597
pericardial effusion, 640f
pulmonary embolism, 723
stress, 537, 554
tetralogy of Fallot, 635
three-dimensional, 537
transoesophageal, 187, 537
two-dimensional, 536
valvular disease
aortic, 621, 624
mitral, 617–618
tricuspid, 624
ventricular aneurysm, 597–598
Echovirus, 319, 326–327
ECOG (Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group) 
performance scale, 268
Econazole, 160b, 417b
Economics, 9
cost-effectiveness of treatment, 
32, 32b
health care resources, 9
medicine in low-resource 
settings, 9
screening programmes, 7b
Ecstasy (drug), 217–218
ECT see Electroconvulsive therapy
Ecthyma, 1276–1277
Ectoparasites, 381
Ectopia lentis, 449
Ectopic beats
atrial, 564, 564f
ventricular, 569, 569f
Ectopic pregnancy, 418, 423
Ectothrix, 1280
Eczema, 1283–1286
allergic contact, 1284–1286, 1285f
asteatotic, 1285
atopic, 1283–1284, 1284f
complications, 1284b
diagnosis, 1284b
management, 1286
pruritus, 1284, 1285b
rash, 1257b, 1284b
classification, 1283b
clinical morphology, 1283b
discoid, 1284
gravitational (stasis), 1254, 1286
investigation, 1285
irritant, 1284, 1286
nails in, 1298
management, 1285–1286
pruritus, 1258–1260, 1258b–1259b
seborrhoeic, 1284, 1286
HIV/AIDS, 397
Eczema herpeticum, 326, 326f
Eczema vaccinatum, 327
Edrophonium bromide, myasthenia 
gravis diagnosis, 1226
EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
acid) clearance, 466b
Education
allergy, 90–91, 92b
asthma, 673
diabetes, 810
fibromyalgia, 1093–1094
food allergy, 888
heart failure, 550, 550b
hypoglycaemia, 816
infection control, 145b
insulin therapy, 810
leprosy, 350
musculoskeletal disease, 1077, 
1078b
low back pain, 1073
osteoarthritis, 1085
public health issues, 345
Edwards’ syndrome (trisomy 18), 
genetics, 56b
Index
1332
EEG (electroencephalography), 1151
dementia, 250
epilepsy, 1151, 1152f
hepatic encephalopathy, 942
sleep disorders, 1148, 1151
viral encephalitis, 1206
EFAs see Essential fatty acids
Efavirenz, 407b, 409
Efficacy, 19–20
Eflornithine creams, 764
Eflornithine (DFMO), 
trypanosomiasis, 164, 359b, 
360
EHEC (entero-haemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli), 306, 343
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 1050
Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 334
Ehrlichiosis, 334
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 113, 
458
EIEC (entero-invasive Escherichia 
coli)
Eikenella spp., 626
Eisenmenger’s syndrome, 553, 631, 
665–666
Ejaculatory failure, 1175
Ekbom’s (restless leg) syndrome, 
485–486, 1187–1188, 1188b
Elastase, faecal, 851b, 1311b
Elastin, 66
Elated mood see Mania
Elation, 235–236
Elbow pain, 1075, 1075b
Elderly see Older people
Elderly Mobility Scale, 177
Electrocardiography see ECG
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 241
Electrodes, ion selective, 428b
Electrodessication, warts, 1278–1279
Electroencephalography see EEG
Electrofulguration, 426
Electrolyte balance, 429–430, 429b
assessment, in hospitalised 
patients, 434b
in renal failure
AKI, 480b, 482–483
chronic, 488
Electrolytes
absorption/secretion, 842–843, 
843f
depletion, diabetic ketoacidosis, 
812
distribution, 429, 429f
investigations, 429–430
normal distribution, 429
reference values, venous blood, 
1308b
renal disease, 485
see also Bicarbonate; Chloride; 
Potassium; Sodium
Electromagnetic spectrum, 1261f
Electromyography see EMG 
(electromyography)
Electron microscopy, 139
cancer diagnosis, 269
sexually transmitted infections, 424
Electrophoresis, 428b
Elephantiasis, 372
non-filarial, 372
Elimination, 22–23
kinetics, 22–23, 23f
ELISA, 141–142, 142f
Clostridium difficile, 343–344
dengue fever, 323
hydatid cysts, 381, 956–957
leishmaniasis, 363–364
leptospirosis, 338
Lyme disease, 335
lymphatic filiarisis, 373
schistosomiasis, 378
strongyloidiasis, 370
Elliptocytes, 994
Elliptocytosis, hereditary, 1028
Embolism
acute limb ischaemia, 603, 603b
arterial gas, 109
during dialysis, 492b
myocardial infarction, 597
pulmonary see Pulmonary 
embolism/
thromboembolism
EMDR see Eye movement 
desensitisation and 
reprocessing
Emery-Dreyfuss muscular 
dystrophy, 1228b
EMG (electromyography), 1068, 
1152
motor neuron disease, 1201
Emollients, 1264
erythroderma, 1264
pruritus, 1260
in pregnancy, 1259b
psoriasis, 1289b
Emphysema, 647
CT imaging, 675f
lung transplantation, 665–666, 
665b
pathology, 674f
respiratory function 
abnormalities, 653b
Employment, sheltered, 249
Empyema, 662–663, 663b, 663f
subdural, 1209
tuberculous, 691f
Empyema necessitans, 662
Emtricitabine, 153b, 407b
Enalapril
heart failure, 552b
hypertension, 611
myocardial infarction, 599
Encephalitis
brainstem, 1206
CMV, 402
extrapyramidal, 1194b
limbic, 1194b
viral, 1205–1206
herpes simplex virus, 319
Japanese B, 328, 1205
mumps, 319
Nipah virus, 328
tick-borne, 309b
West Nile, 328, 1205
Encephalitozoon bieneusi, 399b
Encephalitozoon intestinalis, 399b
Encephalomyelitis
acute disseminated, 1192–1193
cancer-related, 272
multifocal, 1194b
Encephalomyopathy, mitochondrial 
neurogastrointestinal 
(MNGIE), 1229b
Encephalopathy
hepatic (portasystemic), 923b, 
941–942, 941b
acute hepatic failure, 932
clinical grading, 933b
HIV-associated, 402
HSV, 326
hypertensive, 609
mitochondrial, 1199b, 1229b
transmissible spongiform, 329, 
1211
Wernicke’s, 128
End of life decisions, 291–292
Endocarditis
bartonellosis, 352
gonococcal, 422
infective, 625–629
for detailed entry see Infective 
endocarditis
Libman-Sacks, 1111
mitral valve, 618
Q fever, 352
Endocrine axes, 736f–737f
Endocrine diseases, 733–796
classification, 737b
clinical examination/
presentation, 734f–735f,  
735b
genetic testing, 62b
investigation, 737, 737b
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1132–1133, 1133f
pathology, 736
presentation, 737–738, 738b
pruritus, 1259b
Endocrine function, chronic renal 
failure, 485
Endocrine glands, functional 
anatomy and physiology, 
736
Endocrine therapy, prostate cancer, 
518
Endocrine tumours, pancreatic, 896
Endocytosis, 48
Endometrial adhesions, 759
Endometrial cancer, 281
treatment, 281
Endometriosis, 919–920
Endophthalmitis, Candida
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 44–45
Endorphins, 288
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
see ERCP
Endoscopy, 846–849
abdominal pain, 863
achalasia, 869
capsule, 848, 849f
corrosive oesophagitis, 224b, 868
double balloon, 848, 849b
dysphagia, 851
gastric cancer, 878
gastric outlet obstruction, 
875–876
inflammatory bowel disease, 901
obscure major bleeding, 857f
oesophageal cancer, 870f–871f
oesophageal candidiasis, 399f
oesophageal varices, 946
older people, 850b
peptic ulcer, 873
pharyngeal pouch, 868
respiratory tract, 651–652
therapeutic
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 
848f, 855
oesophageal disease, 863
pancreatitis, 892
uses, 848f
upper gastrointestinal, 846, 848b, 
855b
wireless capsule, 849b, 849f
Endosulfan, 224b
Endothelial cells
liver, 925
tumours, 1131b
Endothelin antagonists, 725
Endothelins, 547f
endothelin-1, 531, 547, 925f
Endothelium, 531–532
Endothrix, 1280
Endotoxin, 138
Endotracheal intubation, critically 
ill patients, 194, 194b
Energy
expenditure, 101, 111f
decreased, 121b
intake, 111f, 118
decreased, 121b
production, 45–46
requirements, 114b
Energy balance, 110–112, 111f
disorders of, 115–124
effects of alteration
older people, 122b
regulation of, 110–112, 112f
and reproduction, 112f
Energy therapies, 15
Energy-yielding nutrients, 110, 
112–114, 124–132
WHO recommendations, 114b
Engerix, 955
Enophthalmos, 701
Entacapone, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197
Entactogens, 217–218
Entamoeba histolytica, 305, 308, 309b, 
957
life cycle, 368f
liver abscess, 367
see also Amoebiasis
Entecavir, 161b, 162, 953, 953b
Enteral administration, 21
Enteral tube feeding, 123
Enteric fevers, 339–340
Enteric nervous system, 844–845
Enteritis, radiation, 885–886, 885b
Entero-haemorrhagic Escherichia coli 
(EHEC), 306, 343
Enterobacter spp., 137f, 151b
Enterobacteriaceae, 136f–137f
Enterobius vermicularis 
(threadworm), 371, 371f
Enterococci, endocarditis, 332b, 
626b
Enterococcus faecalis, 137f, 151b, 332b
Enterococcus faecium, 137f, 151b, 
332b
Enterocytes, 450–451
Enterohepatic circulation, 22
Enterokinase, 842
Enteropathic arthritis, 1109
Enteropathy, protein-losing, 886, 
886b
Enteroscopy see Endoscopy
Enterovirus 71, 328
Enteroviruses, 326–327
respiratory infection, 328
Enthesis, 1063–1064
Enthesitis, 1108
Enthesopathy
gluteal, 1075b
knee, 1076b
Entrapment neuropathy, 1224, 
1224b
Entropion, 353
Envenomation, 207–208, 207b, 207f, 
224–230, 225b
diagnosis, 227–228
follow-up, 230
local effects, 226, 226b
management, 226–230, 229b
systemic effects, 226, 226b
Environment
early, and psychiatric disorders, 
233
interactions of people with, 98
Environmental diseases, 100–110
air travel, 107–108
alcohol, 100, 100f
atmospheric pollution, 102
extremes of temperature, 
103–106, 103b
high altitude, 106–108, 106f
infections, 133–164, 293–386
obesity, 101
poisoning, 223
poverty and affluence, 101–102, 
101b
radiation exposure, 102–103,  
102b
smoking, 100–101
under water, 108–110
Environmental factors in disease, 
97–132
allergy, 89
asthma, 666
atopic eczema, 1283–1284
cancer, 266–267, 266b
diabetes mellitus
type 1, 804
type 2, 806
inflammatory bowel disease, 897
investigations, 99
cause and effect, 99
incidence and prevalence, 99, 
99b
time, person and place, 99
nutrition, 110–115, 110f
older people, 102b
osteoporosis, 1121b
psychiatric disorders, 233
Index
1333
Environmental health effects, 98–99, 
98f
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay see ELISA
Enzymes
drugs acting on, 19b
pancreatic
chronic pancreatitis, 894
cystic fibrosis management, 
681
plasma, myocardial infarction, 
593
Eosinophil chemotactic factor, 89b
Eosinophilia, 1005
atopy, 90
causes, 1004b
parasite infections, 312b
heart disease, 638
helminthic infections, 312b
investigation, 312b
pulmonary, drug-induced, 714b
tropical, 311–312, 312b, 373
Eosinophilic airway inflammation, 
669
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 887
Eosinophilic granuloma, 1131b
Eosinophilic oesophagitis, 868
Eosinophilic pneumonia, 708, 713
Eosinophils, 995, 1004f
asthma, 669
count, 1312b
EPA see Eicosapentaenoic acid
EPEC (enteropathogenic Escherichia 
coli)
Ependymal cells, 1140–1141
Ependymoma, spine, 1215
Ephelides, 1274
Epidemiology, descriptive, 99b
Epidermal growth factor receptor, 
263
Epidermal necrolysis, toxic, 1292, 
1292b, 1292f, 1304b
Epidermis, 1252–1254, 1253f
Epidermolysis bullosa, 1292b
acquisita, 1293b, 1294–1295
dystrophic, 1269–1270, 1292b
junctional, 1292b
simplex, 48
Epidermophyton floccosum, 1279–1280
Epididymo-orchitis, 319, 513b
Epigenetic inheritance, 52f, 53, 54b
Epiglottitis, acute, 657
Epilepsy, 1178–1186
adolescents, 1185b
classification, 1179b
cysticercosis, 380
driving regulations, 1183b
genetics, 56b
investigations, 1182, 1182b
brain imaging, 1182b
EEG, 1151, 1152f
management, 1182–1185
anticonvulsant drugs, 
1183–1184, 1183b–1184b
first aid, 1183b
lifestyle advice, 1183
monitoring, 1184
surgery, 1184
myoclonic epilepsy with ragged 
red fibres, 46b, 1199b, 1229b
older people, 1185b
pathophysiology, 1179–1186, 
1179f
pregnancy/oral contraception, 
1184–1185, 1185b
prognosis, 1183b, 1185
seizure types, 1180–1181
absence, 1181
atonic, 1181
clonic, 1181
focal, 1180, 1180b
myoclonic, 1181
tonic, 1181
tonic-clonic, 1180–1181, 1181b
temporal lobe, 235b, 237, 248
trigger factors, 1180b
Epilepsy syndromes, 1181–1182, 
1181b–1182b
Epileptic spasms, 1181
Epimysium, 1063–1064
Epinephrine see Adrenaline
Epiphysis, 1060
femoral, 1081
Epirubicin, 879
Episcleritis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
1099
Epistaxis
cirrhosis, 1017b
dengue fever, 323
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 
1118
leptospirosis, 337
systemic vasculitis, 1116b
Epithelial membrane antigen 
(EMA), as tumour marker, 
268
Eplerenone
heart failure, 551
mineralocorticoid excess, 781
myocardial infarction, 599
Epley manoeuvre, 1186
Epo see Erythropoietin
Epoprostenol see Prostacyclin
Epoxy resin, 1285b
EPs see Evoked potentials
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 317b
cancer and, 266b, 405b
complications, 320, 321b
hepatitis, 948
infectious mononucleosis, 320, 
320b
primary CNS lymphoma, 303
Eptifibatide, platelet inhibition,  
997
Epworth sleepiness scale, 726b,  
1187
ER see Endoplasmic reticulum
Erb-Duchenne paralysis, 1225b
ERCP (endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography), 
849, 850b, 931, 931f
cholangiocarcinoma, 986f
cholangitis, 966, 985, 985f
cholecystitis, 984
choledocholithiasis, 984f
pancreatic cancer, 895
pancreatitis, acute, 892
Erectile dysfunction, 436b, 474, 
474b, 1175
diabetics, 833
haemochromatosis, 972
multiple sclerosis, 1192
Ergocalciferol, 1127
Ergotamine, 1177
Erlotinib, 279, 704
Erosion
cartilage/bone, 1064
skin, definition, 1251b
Ertapenem, 151b, 154b
Erysipelas, 1277, 1277f
Erythema
annular, 1303
drug-induced, 1303b
palmar, 253b, 740, 741b, 922f,  
943
pressure sores, 1300
Erythema ab igne, 741b, 892–893
Erythema infectiosum, 316b
Erythema marginatum, 615
Erythema migrans, 335f
Erythema multiforme, 1260b, 
1302–1303, 1302b, 1302f, 
1304b
Erythema nodosum, 1303, 1303b
Erythema nodosum leprosum, 349
Erythrasma, 1278
Erythroblasts, 994
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR), 84–85
De Quervain’s thyroiditis, 751
older people, 1001b
pneumonia, 684b
reference values, 1312b
rheumatic disease, 1097b
unexplained raised, 84b, 85
weight loss in HIV, 396
Erythrocytes see Red cells
Erythrocytosis, 1003b
Erythroderma, 1264
Erythroid cells, 992
Erythroid nests, 992f
Erythromycin, 151b
acne, 1282
bartonellosis, 352–353
cellulitis/erysipelas, 1277
diphtheria, 346
erythrasma, 1278
impetigo, 1276
Lyme disease, 335
pneumonia, 685b
in pregnancy, 154b
prophylactic, 153b
relapsing fever, 336
rheumatic fever, 615–616
rosacea, 1283
skin infections, 1267
STIs
chancroid, 424b
chlamydial infection, 423b
granuloma inguinale, 424b
lymphogranuloma venereum, 
424b
syphilis, 421
tetanus, 1210
Erythronychia, 1298
Erythropoiesis
impairment in erythrovirus 
infection, 1028
ineffective, 1024
Erythropoietic porphyria, 
congenital, 460b
Erythropoietic protoporphyria,  
460b
Erythropoietin (Epo), 992–994
chronic renal failure, 485b
ectopic production, 271b
inappropriate secretion, 
1003–1004
myelodysplastic syndrome, 1041
recombinant human, chronic 
renal failure, 488
renal adenocarcinoma, 516
Erythropoietin (Epo) receptor, 49b
Erythrovirus see Parvovirus B19
Eschar
anthrax, 346
rickettsial, 350
scrub typhus, 313f, 350
Escherichia coli, 134, 137f, 138b, 
304b
bacterial meningitis, 1202b
entero-aggregative (EAEC), 343
entero-haemorrhagic (EHEC), 
306, 343
entero-invasive (EIEC), 342
enteropathogenic (EPEC), 343
enterotoxigenic (ETEC), 342–343
food poisoning, 306, 342–343
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, 
941, 941b
verocytotoxigenic (VTEC), 343f, 
496
Escitalopram, 244b
Espundia, 366–367
ESR see Erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate
Essential fatty acids (EFAs), 
deficiency, 113
Essential tremor, 1166b, 1199
ESWL see Extracorporeal shock 
wave lithotripsy
Etanercept, 1103b
ETEC (enterotoxigenic Escherichia 
coli), 342–343
Ethambutol
adverse reactions, 694b
Mycobacterium avium complex, 
406b
opportunistic mycobacterial 
infection, 406b
and peripheral neuropathy,  
1223b
tuberculosis, 693, 694b
Ethanol
pharmacokinetics, 25b
poisoning, 209b
reference values, 1310b
see also Alcohol
Ethical analysis, 12–13, 13b
Ethics, 9–13
artificial nutritional support, 124, 
124b
clinical, 10–11
types of problem, 11–12, 12f
definition, 14b
deontological, 10, 13
end of life decisions, 291–292
genetic testing, 9–10
public health, 10
research, 10
situation, 10
teleological, 10, 13
virtue, 10
Ethosuximide, 1182b, 1184b
Ethylene glycol poisoning, 209b, 
222–223, 222f
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
(EDTA) clearance, 466b
Etidronate
osteoporosis, 1123
Paget’s disease, 1129, 1130b
Etodolac, 1079b
Etoposide
acute leukaemia, 1037b
bronchial carcinoma, 704
Etoricoxib, 1079b
Etravirine, 407b
ETT see Exercise testing
Eukaryotes, 135
Eumycetoma, 382
Eunuchoid habitus, 759
Euphoria, 235–236
Euthanasia, 292
Evidence-based medicine, 8, 8b
drug therapy, 32, 32f
Evoked potentials, 1152–1153
multiple sclerosis, 1190b
visual, 1153f
Evolutionary selection, 58
Ewing’s sarcoma, 1131b
Examination, clinical see individual 
body systems
Exanthem subitum, 316
Exanthems
drug-induced, 1304b
enteroviral, 319
viral, 314–319
Exchange transfusion
hyperparasitaemia, 357
malaria, 357
megaloblastic anaemia, 1026
sickle-cell disease, 1033
Excoriation, definition, 1251b
Excretion, 22
Exenatide, 824
Exercise ECG, 534, 534b
Exercise testing
angina, 584–585, 584f
COPD, 675
myocardial infarction, 534b
respiratory disease, 654
Exercise(s)
arrhythmias and, 534b
asthma and, 668f
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
and, 581
chest pain and, 540
COPD, 676
diabetes, 821
headache and, 1178, 1178b
heart disease and, 584f
hypoglycaemia and, 810
and hypotension, 637–638
and insulin sensitivity, 810
Index
1334
musculoskeletal disease 
management, 1077–1078, 
1078b
ankylosing spondylitis, 1107
fibromyalgia, 1094
osteoarthritis, 1085
Exertion headache, 1178, 1178b
Exons, 54f
Exophthalmos, Graves’ disease, 
735b, 741b
Extracellular fluid (ECF), 429
volume overload, 434
Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation therapy 
(ECMO), 196
Extracorporeal shock wave 
lithotripsy (ESWL), 985
Extractable nuclear antigens, 
antibodies to, 1067–1068
Extrapyramidal encephalitis, 1194b
Extrapyramidal gait, 1168
Extrapyramidal system, 1145
Extrasystoles, 564, 569
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) 
see Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis
Eye disorders
in diabetes, 799, 799f, 828–830, 
829f
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 
1118f
Graves’ disease, 735b, 741b
HIV/AIDS, 404
leprosy, 348–349
Eye movement desensitisation and 
reprocessing (EMDR), 242
Eyelid disorders, dermatomyositis, 
1115f
Eyes
diabetes mellitus see Diabetic 
retinopathy
examination, diabetes mellitus, 
799b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
Ezetimibe, 434
F
Fabry’s disease, 433–434
Face
angioedema, 93f
frostbite, 105
hemifacial spasm, 1200
numbness, 1157
skin disease see individual 
conditions
superior vena cava obstruction, 
273
Facial (7th cranial) nerve
palsy, 1163
tests, 1139b
Facial pain, 1156–1157
Facial warts, 1278
Facial weakness, 1163
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy, 
1228b
Factitious disorders, 247
Factitious fever, 298b
Factor II, 1051b
Factor IX, 1053
concentrates, 1053
deficiency, 1053
haemophilia B, 1053
Factor V, 997
Leiden variant, 1001b, 1009b, 
1055
stroke, 1242b
Factor VII, 999–1000
deficiency, 1007, 1054
Factor VIII
antibodies, 1053
concentrates, 1051–1052
virus transmission, 1053
deficiency, 1051b
haemophilia A, 1051–1052
inhibitor bypassing activity 
(FEIBA), 1053
Factor X, deficiency, 1007, 1051b, 
1054
Factor Xa, 1018–1019
Factor XI, deficiency, 1054
Factor XIII, 998f
deficiency, 1007, 1054
Faecal analysis, 1311b
Faecal antigen test, Helicobacter 
pylori infection, 856
Faecal continence, 844
Faecal impaction, 917
Faecal incontinence, 918, 918b, 1175
Faecal occult blood (FOB) testing, 
916, 916b
Faints see Syncope
Fallot’s sign, 635
Fallot’s spells, 635
Falls
older people, 172–173, 172b
prevention, 172–173, 173b
Famciclovir
herpesvirus infection, 161–162, 
161b, 318b
genital, 424–425
Familial adenomatous polyposis 
(FAP), 67, 267b, 910f–911f, 
911–912, 911b
Familial cancer syndromes, 66–67
Familial hypercholesterolaemia, 48, 
454b
Familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia, 767, 770
Familial Mediterranean fever 
(FMF), 85
Familial polyposis coli, 64
Family history, 60
allergic disease, 89
atherosclerotic vascular disease
genetic disease, 64
hypercholesterolaemia, 453–455
immune deficiency, 79b
melanoma, 1272–1273
ovarian cancer, 280
psoriasis, 1286
psychiatric disorders and, 234b
vitiligo, 1295
Family therapy, eating disorders, 
255–256
Family tree see Pedigree
Famine, 120–121
Fanconi anaemia, 267b
Fanconi syndrome, 510
Fanconi’s syndrome, 446
Fansidar, malaria, 163, 356
FAP see Familial adenomatous 
polyposis
Farmer’s lung, 719b
Fasciculations, 221b, 223b–224b, 
229b, 1139b, 1162b
Fasciculi, 1063–1064
Fascioliasis/Fasciola hepatica, 309b, 
312b, 379b, 984
Fast
prolonged
hypoglycaemia diagnosis
lipids after
Fat, 113, 113f
body
distribution, 115–116
see also Obesity
diabetic diet, 821
dietary
energy provided by, 110
recommended intake, 114b
digestion/absorption, 842f, 
850–851
malabsorption, small bowel 
disease, 883–884
normal metabolism, 800–802,  
801f
Fatal familial insomnia, 329b, 1211
Fatigue
cancer patients, 271b
chronic fatigue syndrome, 246
fibromyalgia, 1093
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
primary biliary cirrhosis, 964
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098
Fatty acids
dietary, 114b
essential, 113
n-3, 434
non-esterified (‘free’) see Free 
fatty acids
polyunsaturated, 113f
trans, 113
transport, 45–46, 45f
Fatty liver
alcoholic, 958, 958b
microvesicular, 971, 978
non-alcoholic, 959–961, 960f
pregnancy, 978
Favism, 308, 1029b
FBC see Full blood count
FDPs see Fibrin degradation 
products
Febrile response, 138
Febuxostat, 1089
Feeding
enteral (tube), 123
cystic fibrosis, 681
pancreatitis, 892
short bowel syndrome, 885
malnutrition management, 121
parenteral, 123–124
Feet see Foot/feet
FEIBA, 1053
Feline spongiform encephalopathy 
(FSE), 1211
Felty’s syndrome, 1100b
Femoral neck fractures, 1071
Femoral stretch test, 1073
Fentanyl, transdermal, 287
Ferritin
adult-onset Still’s disease, 1104
anaemia of chronic disease, 1023b
haemochromatosis, 972
iron deficiency anaemia, 1023, 
1023b
megaloblastic anaemia, 1024b
older people, 1034b
reference values, 1312b
Ferrous gluconate, 1023
Ferrous sulphate, 1023
Festination, 172b, 1168
Fetal circulation, 630f
Fetor hepaticus, 933–934
FEV1 see Forced expiratory volume
Fever(s), 295–303, 297f
accompanying features, 295–296
cancer patients, 271
clinical examination, 296
injecting drug users, 299–301, 
300f
patients in/from tropics, 309b
definition, 296
factitious, 298b
febrile response, as defence 
mechanism, 138
haemorrhagic see Haemorrhagic 
fevers
history-taking, 295b
injecting drug users, 299–301, 
300f
returning travellers, 309b
HIV/AIDS, 396
immunocompromised host, 
301–302
in/from tropics, 309–310, 
309b–310b
injecting drug user, 299–301, 300f
investigations, 296
injecting drug users, 301, 301f
management, 296
injecting drug users, 301
neutropenic, 302, 302b
cancer patients, 274
older people, 296b
post-transplantation, 302–303, 302b
rashes and, 295b
recurrent, 295–296
symptoms and signs, 296
of unknown origin, 296–299
aetiology, 298b
clinical assessment, 296–298
investigations, 298–299, 299b
older people, 296b
prognosis, 299
Fexofenadine, 1267
FFAs see Free fatty acids
FFP see Fresh frozen plasma
FGF see Fibroblast growth factor
Fibrates
dysbetalipoproteinaemia 
management, 458
hyperlipidaemia management, 
434, 458
muscle pain, 1077b, 1132b
Fibre, dietary, 113
Fibrin, 265f, 625, 996f–997f
Fibrin degradation products (FDPs), 
201, 998f, 1000
Fibrinogen, 82
concentration, 1000b
deficiency, 1000b
reference values, 1312b
Fibrinoid necrosis, 609
Fibrinolysis, 531–532
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF), 271b
Fibroblasts, tumours, 1131b
Fibrodysplasia ossificans 
progressiva, 1091b
Fibrolamellar hepatocellular 
carcinoma, 969
Fibroma, 1131b
Fibromuscular dysplasia, renal 
artery stenosis, 494
Fibromyalgia, 1092–1094, 
1092f–1093f, 1093b
investigations, 1093b
prevalence, 1060b
SLE, 1110
Fibrosarcoma, 1131b
Fibrosing alveolitis
cryptogenic see Pulmonary 
fibrosis, idiopathic
dyspnoea, 543b, 656b
in inflammatory arthritis, 1070b
systemic sclerosis, 1113
Fibrous/fibrocartilaginous joints, 
1062
Fidaxomycin, 344
Fifth disease, 316b
Fight or flight response, 1254
Filaggrin, 1252
Filaments, intermediate, 48
Filariases, 309b, 312b, 372–375, 372b
incubation period, 310b
lymphatic, 372–373
Finasteride, 515, 765b
alopecia, 1297
Fine needle aspiration, thyroid 
nodules, 747
Fingers
clubbing, 644f
asbestosis, 718–719
lung cancer, 271, 701
osteoarthritis, 1083f
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098f
triggering, 799b, 1134
Fingolimod, 1192b
Finkelstein’s sign, 1075
First-order kinetics, 22
First-pass metabolism, 21
Fish
allergy, 93b
ciguatera fish poisoning, 308
minerals in, 131b
scombrotoxic fish poisoning, 308
venom, 225b, 229b
vitamins in, 125b
Fish eye disease, 455–456, 456b
FISH (fluorescent in situ 
hybridisation)
Fish oils, 113, 125b
Fissure
anal, 919
skin, definition, 1251b
Index
1335
Fistulae
anorectal, 919
inflammatory bowel disease, 900, 
905
tracheo-oesophageal, 728
see also different types
Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome, 919
Flapping tremor (asterixis), 923b
Flat feet, 1098
Flaviviruses, 322–323
Flavonoids, 129
Fleas, 309b
bartonellosis, 352b
plague, 338–339
typhus, 351–352, 351b
Flecainide, 565–566, 568, 574, 575b
Flora, normal, 136–137, 137f
Flucloxacillin, 151b, 154b
cerebral abscess, 1208b
hepatotoxicity, 971
impetigo, 1276
infective endocarditis, 301, 628, 
628b
pneumonia, 685b
septic arthritis, 1095b
staphylococcal infections, 301, 
329–331
skin/soft tissue, 1267
Fluconazole, 159, 160b
acute leukaemia patients, 1038
candidiasis, 383
genital, 417b
HIV/AIDS patients, 398–399
cryptococcal infections, 
HIV-related, 403, 406b
cutaneous leishmaniasis, 367
paracoccidioidomycosis, 386
in pregnancy, 154b
prophylaxis, 406b
skin disease, 1267
Flucytosine, cryptococcal infections, 
403
Fludarabine
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 
1040
Waldenstrom’s 
macroglobulinaemia, 1045
Fludrocortisone
adrenal insufficiency, 779, 779b
postural hypotension, 555–556
Fluid balance
assessment, hospitalised patients, 
434b
heat exhaustion, 106
renal failure
acute, 483
chronic, 488
Fluid intake, 307
AKI, 482b
and polyuria, 472b
stone disease, 507b
urinary tract infection, 513b
Fluid loss
bullous skin disorders
diabetic ketoacidosis, 812
diarrhoeal illness, 307
see also Dehydration
Fluid replacement
acute diarrhoea, 307
bacillary dysentery, 345
cholera, 344–345
critically ill patients, 1011b
decompression illness, 110
diabetic ketoacidosis, 814
diving-related illness, 110
food poisoning, 301, 308
heat illness, 106
hospitalised patients, 434b
hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar 
state, 814b
intensive care unit, 199
intravenous
acute severe asthma, 672
decompression illness, 110
hypovolaemia, 433–434, 433b
older people, 813b
pneumonia, 685
short bowel syndrome, 885
sodium depletion, 433
Fluid resuscitation, 185, 189, 
331–332, 1011b
Flukes (trematodes), 376–378
liver, 266b, 312b, 378
lung, 312b
Flumazenil, 217
Fluocinolone acetonide, 1265b
Fluorescent in situ hybridisation 
(FISH), 62f
Fluoride, 132
dietary sources, 131b
and osteomalacia, 1126b
poisoning, 132
RNI, 131b
Fluorimetry, 428b
5-Fluorocytosine, 160, 160b
Fluoroquinolones, 157, 157b
enteric fever, 340
leprosy, 350
plague, 338–339
skin reactions, 1304b
tuberculosis, 694
Fluorosis, 223
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), 879
cancer therapy, 276
carcinoid tumour, 889
colorectal cancer, 915
gastric cancer, 879b
premalignant skin tumours, 1266, 
1270b
Fluoxetine, 244b
bulimia, 256
fibromyalgia, 1094
Flupentixol, 249b
Flutamide, 765b
Fluticasone, 1265b
Fluvoxamine, 244b
FMF see Familial Mediterranean 
fever
Foamy macrophages, 514, 883
FOB see Faecal occult blood testing
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH), 
liver, 970
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
(FSGS)
Folate antagonists, 158
Folate (folic acid), 129, 1025–1026
absorption, 1025
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 129, 1025–1026, 1025b
coeliac disease, 881
investigation, 1025b
management, 1026
myelofibrosis, 1048–1049
pregnancy, 1022b
dietary sources, 125b
haemolytic anaemia, 1028
prevention of neural tube defects, 
125b, 129
reference values, 1312b
RNI, 125b
supplements
hereditary spherocytosis, 1028
periconceptual, 125b
tropical sprue, 882
Folate synthesis inhibitors, 163
Folinic acid
colorectal cancer, 915
toxoplasmosis, 362, 402
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
deficiency, 787b
reference range, 1309b
Follicular carcinoma, thyroid, 740b, 
754
Folliculitis, 1276–1277
pruritic, 1259b
Fomepizole, 223
Fondaparinux, 1001b, 1019b
Fonsecaea, 382–383
Fonsecaea compacta, 381
Fonsecaea pedrosoi, 381
Food allergy, 888
Food hygiene, 147, 148f
Food intolerance, 887–888
irritable bowel syndrome, 907–909
Food poisoning
Bacillus cereus, 306, 341
Clostridium perfringens, 342
Escherichia coli, 306, 342–343
foods associated with, 307b
and gastroenteritis, 306b
listeriosis, 339
management, 307–308
non-infectious causes, 306b, 308
staphylococcal, 341
Foods
diabetic, 804
glycaemic index, 804
Foot drop, 172b, 1168
Foot/feet
arthritis, 1098
Charcot, 835
claw, 1076
cold injury (trench/immersion 
foot), 105
diabetic, 833–835, 834b, 834f
examination
blood disorders
diabetes, 799b, 799f
flat, 1098
pain, 1076
ulcer, 834–835
Forced expiratory volume (FEV1), 
653b
COPD, 675, 675b
older people, 648b
Forced expiratory volume/vital 
capacity (FEV1/VC) ratio, 
653b
COPD, 675, 675b
Forced vital capacity (FVC), 653b
Foreign bodies
inhalation, 655f
larynx, 728
Forest plot, 32f
Formication, 254
Formoterol, asthma, 670–671
Fortification spectra, 1170
Foscarnet
CMV infection, 322
herpesvirus infection, 161b, 162
Fosphenytoin, status epilepticus, 
1159b
Fournier’s gangrene, 305
Fractures, 1071
fragility, 1071b
high-energy, 1071b
hip, preventive measures, 
172–173, 173b
investigation, 1071, 1071b
osteoporotic, 1121f, 1123b
prevention, 172–173, 173b
pain, 1071
pathological, 1071b
recurrent, 1125
repair, 1080b
stress (fatigue), 1071b
vertebral, 1071b
Fragile site mental retardation 
(FRAXE), genetics, 56b
Fragile X syndrome, 66
genetics, 56b
Fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome, 
1199b
Frailty, 169–170, 170b
Frameshift mutations, 55
Francisella tularensis, 340
FRAXE see Fragile site mental 
retardation
FRC see Functional residual capacity
Freckles, 1274
Free fatty acids (FFAs), 113, 113f, 
802
diabetes, 801f, 802, 804f
Free radicals, 82–83, 127, 957–958
Frequency of micturition, 472
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 1012b
Fried Frailty score, 170b
Friedreich’s ataxia, 1199b
genetics/inheritance, 56b
Froin’s syndrome, 1221
Frontal lobes, 1142
functions, 1142b
effects of damage, 1142b
Fronto-temporal dementia, 252, 252f
Frostbite, 105, 105f
Frosted branch angiitis, 404
Frozen shoulder, 1074–1075
Fructose, 112–113, 113b
Fructose intolerance, inherited, 510
FSE see Feline spongiform 
encephalopathy
FSH see Follicle-stimulating 
hormone
FTC see Emtricitabine
5-FU see 5-Fluorouracil
Full blood count (FBC) see Blood 
count
Fumarates, 1268
Fumes, lung disease and, 717
Functional disorder, 876–877, 
1175–1176, 1176b
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 
647
Functional somatic syndromes, 236
Fungal infections, 135, 381–386,  
382f
antifungal agents, 159–160, 160b, 
1267
diabetes, 799b, 824
endocarditis, 626, 626b
HIV/AIDS related, 398–399
HSCT, 302b
immune deficiency and, 78b
nervous system, 1201b
respiratory, 697–699
skin, 1279–1280, 1279f
identification, 1280
scalp, 1280
subcutaneous, 381–383
superficial, 381
systemic, 383–386
see also individual infections
Funnel chest, 731
Funny turns see Blackouts
Furosemide
adverse reactions, 26b
ascites, 940
heart failure, 551
hyperkalaemia, 443b
hypertension, 611
mechanism of action, 435
mode of action, 435
oedema, 478
prescription, 38b
and renal disease, 522b
route of administration, 34b
skin reactions, 1304b
Furuncles, 1277
Fusarium/fusariosis, 384, 384f
Fusidic acid, 159
impetigo, 1266
Fusobacterium spp., 137f, 151b
Fusobacterium necrophorum, 687
Fusobacterium ulcerans, 313b
Futile treatment, 291
FVC see Forced vital capacity
G
G-CSF see Granulocyte colony 
stimulating factor
G6PD see Glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency
GABA
hepatic encephalopathy, 941–942
role in epilepsy, 1179
Gabapentin
abdominal pain, 863
adjuvant analgesia, 288b
epilepsy, 1184b
fibromyalgia, 1094
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
neuropathic pain, 288b
post-herpetic neuralgia, 319
Index
1336
shingles, 319
somatoform pain disorder, 233
GAD antibodies see Glutamic acid 
decarboxylase antibodies
Gain-of-function mutations, 58
Gait
diabetic neuropathy, 831–832
examination, 1059–1060, 1139b
shuffling/festination, 172b,  
1168
stamping, 172b, 1168
waddling, 172b
Gait disorders, 172b, 1168
Parkinson’s disease, 1196b
unsteadiness, 173
see also specific gaits
Galactorrhoea, 790–791
Galactosaemia, 449–450
Galactose, 449, 842
Galactose-1-phosphate 
uridylyltransferase gene 
(GALT), 449
Galantamine, 252
Gallbladder, 926
adenomyomatosis, 988
cholecystitis, 983–984
cholesterolosis, 986–988
disease in older people, 988b
porcelain, 983
strawberry, 987–988
tumours, 985–986
Gallstone ileus, 983
Gallstones, 981–983, 982b–983b
cholesterol, 982
hereditary spherocytosis
pancreatitis, 890
pigment, 982, 982b
in pregnancy, 977
ultrasound, 930, 930f
GALT, 449
Gambiense trypanosomiasis, 359
incubation period, 145b
Gametogenesis, 50f
Gamma butyrolactone, 218
Gamma rays, 102b, 470
γ-aminobutyric acid see GABA
γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT)
plasma
alcohol misuse, 240
drugs causing increase, 929b
liver function test, 928–929
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), 218
Gammaglobulin, Kawasaki disease, 
1116
Gammopathy, monoclonal, of 
uncertain significance 
(MGUS; monoclonal 
gammopathy unclassified; 
MGu; benign monoclonal 
gammopathy), 1045
Ganciclovir
CMV infection, 322
HIV-related, 404
transplant patients, 95, 
302–303, 1017b
exanthem subitum, 316
herpesvirus infection, 161b, 162
Gangliosidosis, GM2, 451b
Gangrene
Fournier’s, 305
gas, 305
synergistic, 305
Gap junctions, 47f, 48
Gas exchange, lungs, 646–647, 647f
Gas gangrene, 305
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
Gas transfer factor
for carbon monoxide (TLco), 653b
measurements, 653
Gas-bloat syndrome, 867–868
Gastrectomy
gastric cancer, 879
gastric outlet obstruction, 
875–876
partial
anaemia after, 851
and gastric cancer, 878b
gastric ulcer, 874–875
gastritis, 871b
peptic ulcer, 856
sleeve, 119b, 120f
vitamin B deficiency, 1025
Gastric acid secretion, 841, 841f
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 876
Gastric aspiration, 210
Gastric band surgery, 119b
Gastric bypass surgery, 119b
Gastric emptying test, 850, 851b
Gastric inhibitory polypeptide 
(GIP), 846b
Gastric intrinsic factor, 871–872, 
1024–1025
Gastric lavage, 210, 210b
Gastric outlet obstruction, 875–876, 
875b
Gastric surgery, anaemia and, 875
Gastric volvulus, 867
Gastrin, 841, 846b
reference range, 1309b
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 876
Gastrinomas, 785b
Gastritis, 871–872, 871b
bile reflux, 871b, 875
Helicobacter pylori infection
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, 
865–868, 865f
and asthma, 866b
older people, 868b
Gastroenteritis
acute, 306–308
management, 307–308
anthrax, 303
bacterial, 342, 342b
causes, 306b
differential diagnosis, 307b
eosinophilic, 887
food poisoning see Food 
poisoning
viral, 327–328
Gastroenteropathy, allergic, 888
Gastroenterostomy, 875–876
Gastrointestinal bleeding, 853–857
acute upper gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage, 853–856
causes, 854f
endoscopic therapy, 852b, 855
management, 855b
Blatchford score, 854b
liver disease, 942
lower gastrointestinal tract, 856, 
856b
NSAIDs and, 873, 1021–1022
occult, 856–857
signs, 855f
unknown cause, 856, 857f
Gastrointestinal decontamination in 
poisoning, 210, 210b
Gastrointestinal function, 24b
Gastrointestinal obstruction, 290
Gastrointestinal peptide, 801–802
Gastrointestinal stromal tumour 
(GIST), 870, 880
Gastrointestinal tract
absorption from, 21
biopsy
inflammatory bowel disease, 
901
small bowel in coeliac disease, 
881
clinical examination, 838f, 839b
diseases/disorders, 783b
chest pain, 540
critically ill patients, 198
endocrine, 782–785
functional, 876–877, 1175–1176, 
1176b
HIV-related, 399–400
investigation, 845–851
presenting problems, 851–863
protozoal, 367–369
systemic sclerosis, 1113
tuberculosis, 691
see also Gastroenteritis
function
control of, 844–845
tests, 850, 851b
functional anatomy, 840–844
hormones, 845, 846b
infections see Infection(s), 
gastrointestinal tract
obstruction, 290, 862
see also individual parts
Gastroparesis, 877
Gastropathy, congestive, 948
Gastrostomy, percutaneous 
endoscopic, 123, 123f
Gatifloxacin, meningitis, 1204b
Gaucher’s disease, 46, 433–434
Gaussian distribution see Normal 
distribution/range
Gaze palsy, 1148b
GBM see Glomerular basement 
membrane
GCA see Giant cell arteritis
GCK see Glucokinase
GCS see Glasgow Coma Scale
Gefitinib, 279, 704
Gegenhalten, 1175
Gels, 1265b
Gemcitabine, pancreatic cancer, 895
Gender
alcoholic liver disease and, 957
pharmacokinetics and, 24b
Gene promoter, 42, 43f
Gene testing, 63
Gene therapy, 31b, 69
cystic fibrosis, 681
General anaesthetics, 18–19, 577, 
651–652
General Assessment of Locomotor 
System (GALS), 1059–1060
General Medical Council (UK), 2
duties of registered doctor, 3b
General paralysis of insane, 1209b
Generalised anxiety, 241b, 243
Genes, 42–43
mutations see Mutations
oncogenes, 59
Genetic counselling, 67–68, 67b
older people, 64b
Genetic disease(s), 44f, 46b, 50–60
categories of, 64–67
chromosomal, 56b
constitutional, 58–59
gene identification, 63
inheritance patterns, 51–53
investigations, 60–64, 62b
monogenic, 68f
older people, 64b
polygenic, 68f
presenting problems, 64
risk calculation, 53
skin manifestations, 1302
somatic, 59–60
spectrum of, 68f
Genetic factors, 41–70
adverse drug reactions, 26
ageing, 168
alcohol misuse, 252
alcoholic liver disease, 957, 960f
Alzheimer’s disease, 251–252
aortic aneurysm, 603
asthma, 666
atopic eczema, 1283–1284
autoimmune disease, 87b
cancer, 262–267, 912
diabetes mellitus
type 1, 803–804
type 2, 806
HIV/AIDS, 395
hypertension, 607
inflammatory bowel disease,  
897b
multiple sclerosis, 1188
osteoarthritis, 1081
osteoporosis, 1120
Paget’s disease, 1129
Parkinson’s disease, 1194–1195
PCOS, 764
prostate cancer, 517
psychiatric disorders, 232–233
puberty onset, 758
rheumatoid arthritis, 1096
SLE, 1110
Genetic screening, 64
Genetic testing, 1153
cardiomyopathy, 638
in children, 63
colorectal cancer, 913
complex disease, 69
cystic fibrosis, 680
ethical issues, 9–10
familial adenomatous polyposis, 
912
multiple endocrine neoplasia, 795
neurological disease, 1153
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 912
phaeochromocytoma, 781
predictive, 64
Huntington’s disease, 64b
prenatal, 62–63, 63b
Genetic variants, 53–57
consequences of, 57–58, 58b
evolutionary selection, 58
Genetics
complex disease, 68–69
twin studies, 68
Genital cancer, HIV-related, 405
Genital itch/rash, 415, 416b
Genital lumps
men, 416–417
women, 418
Genital ulcers
men, 415–416, 416f
women, 418
Genitourinary tuberculosis, 692
Genome, 42
Genome-wide association studies, 
63
Genome-wide linkage analysis, 63
Genomic imprinting, 52f, 53
Genotype, 68f
Gentamicin
brucellosis, 334b
cerebral abscess, 1208b
dosing, 157, 157f
drug interactions, 27b
infective endocarditis, 301, 628, 
628b
liver abscess, 956
meningitis, 1204b
neutropenic sepsis, 1001
plague, 338–339
prophylactic, 153b
renal toxicity, 35b, 479–481
septic arthritis, 1094–1095
therapeutic monitoring, 39b
tularaemia, 340
urinary tract infection, 513b
Geriatric medicine, 165–177
assessment, 166f, 170–171, 170b
presenting problems, 171–176
see also Ageing; Older people
German measles see Rubella
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker 
syndrome, 329b, 1211
Gestational diabetes mellitus, 807b, 
817, 817b
Get up and go test, 167f
GFR see Glomerular filtration rate
GGT see γ-Glutamyl transferase
GH see Growth hormone
GHB see γ-Hydroxybutyrate; 
Glycated haemoglobin
Ghon focus/complex, 688–689
Ghrelin, 841, 846b
GHRH see Growth hormone-
releasing hormone
Giant cell arteritis, 1117–1118
Giant cell arteritis (GCA), 
1117–1118
management, 1117–1118, 1118b
Index
1337
Giant cell tumour, 1131b
Giardia lamblia (intestinalis) infection, 
311, 368–369
Giardiasis, 309b, 368–369
Gigantism, 792
Gilbert’s syndrome/disease, 936, 
937b, 974–975
Gingivitis, 398
GIP see Gastric inhibitory 
polypeptide
GISA see Glycopeptide intermediate 
Staphylococcus aureus
GIST see Gastrointestinal stromal 
tumour
Gitelman’s syndrome, 441, 510
Glandular fever (infectious 
mononucleosis), 320, 320b, 
321f
Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia,  
1050
Glasgow alcoholic hepatitis score, 
959b
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 
198–199, 208, 1159–1160, 
1160b
Glasgow criteria for prognosis in 
acute pancreatitis, 890b
Glatiramer acetate, 1191, 1192b
Glibenclamide, 823
Gliclazide, 823
Glioblastoma multiforme, 1213
Glioma, 1215
spine, 1222b
Gliosis, 828, 829f
Glipizide, 216, 823
Gliptins see DPP-4 inhibitors
Glitazones see Thiazolidinediones
Global warming, 102
Glomerular basement membrane 
(GBM)
Alport’s syndrome, 502, 502f
anti-GBM (Goodpasture’s 
disease), 499b–500b,  
713–714
thin GBM disease, 502
Glomerular disease, 480b–481b, 
497–502, 497f
drug-related, 522b
histopathology, 498f
inherited, 502
pregnancy, 520–521
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), 
466–468
assessment, 466b–467b
renal failure
acute, 483b
chronic, 467b, 468, 484
Glomerulonephritis, 498–502
crescentic, 487b, 501–502
drug-induced, 522b
focal segmental (necrotising), 
499b–500b
drug-induced, 522b
membranous, 499b–500b, 500
mesangiocapillary 
(membranoproliferative) 
(MCGN; MPGN), 499b–500b, 
501
minimal change, 498–500, 
499b–500b
nephrotic syndrome, 475b, 
476–478
post-infection, 499b–500b, 501
rapidly progressive, 501–502
SLE, 1111
Glomerulosclerosis
focal segmental (FSGS), 500
nodular diabetic, 830f
Glomerulus, 464
Glossitis, 990f
atrophic, 838f
Glossopharyngeal (9th cranial) 
nerve, tests, 1139b
Gloves and socks syndrome,  
316b
GLP see Glucagon-like peptide
GLP-1 receptor antagonists, 822b, 
823–824
Glucagon
cardiotoxic drug poisoning, 
214–215
famine, 121
hypoglycaemia, 357b
hypotension, 214
type 2 diabetes, 806
Glucagon-like peptide (GLP), 119, 
801–802
Glucagonomas, 785b
Glucocorticoid therapy, 776–777
adrenal insufficiency, 779, 779b
adverse reactions, 776
advice to patients, 777b
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 
763b, 782
dosage regimen, 35b
older people, 779b
prescription, 38b
withdrawal, 776–777
see also Corticosteroids; 
Hydrocortisone; 
Prednisolone
Glucocorticoids, 772–773
bone remodelling, 1062b
excess, 772b
see also Cushing’s syndrome
insufficiency, 778b
measurement, 777–778
Glucokinase (GCK), 817
Gluconeogenesis, 926
Glucosamine, musculoskeletal 
disease, 1086
Glucose
blood
diabetes, 800, 807–808
fasting, 807b
impaired fasting glucose, 809b
normal metabolism, 800–802, 
801f
reference values, 1310b
stroke patients, 1243b
see also Hyperglycaemia; 
Hypoglycaemia
cerebrospinal fluid, 1311b
hypoglycaemia management, 816
impaired tolerance, 169f, 455, 
754b, 1310b
intravenous
hyperkalemia, 443b
porphyria, 460
urinary, 807
Glucose tolerance, impaired, 800, 
809b
Glucose tolerance test
oral, 809b
Glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency, 1029, 1029b
Glucuronic acid, 995
Glue sniffing, 254, 1048b
GLUT 4 transporter, 801
Glutamate, 49, 114b, 251–252
Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 
antibodies, 1194b
Glutaminase, 444
Glutamine, 54f, 801f
Glutathione, 126b, 212
Gluteal enthesopathy, 1075b
Gluten, coeliac disease, 880–882
Gluten-free diet, 880–882
Glycaemic control
critically ill patients, 198
diabetes, 827–828, 827b
adolescents, 818b
older people, 828b
pregnancy, 817–818
retinopathy prevention, 
828–829
self-assessment, 807, 810–811
Glycaemic index of foods, 112–113
Glycated haemoglobin (GHb), 808, 
808b, 811f, 1310b
Glycation, 808
Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN)
angina, 586, 586b
unstable, 594
circulatory effects, 183
dosage regimen, 35b
duration of action, 586b
intravenous, malignant 
hypertension, 612
ointment, anal fissure, 919
patches, 1075
pulmonary oedema, 550
route of administration, 34b
sublingual, 586, 594
Glycine, 114b
Glycogen, 73–74, 111–112
Glycogen storage diseases (GSD), 
450, 450b
Glycols, poisoning, 222–223
Glycopeptide intermediate 
Staphylococcus aureus (GISA), 
151, 152f
Glycopeptide-resistant enterococci 
(GRE), 151b
Glycopeptides, 157–158
mechanism of action, 150b
in pregnancy, 154b
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, 
594b, 1019b, 1050
Glycoprotein intrinsic factor, 841
Glycosaminoglycans, 1062–1063
Glycosidases, 1063
Glycosides see Digoxin
Glycosuria, 471–472, 804
alimentary (lag storage), 741b
diabetes mellitus, 807
Fanconi syndrome, 510
hypernatraemia, 439b
leg ulcers, 1262
older people, 806b
pregnancy, 817
renal, 510
Glycylcyclines, 154b, 158
GM-CSF see Granulocyte 
macrophage colony 
stimulating factor
Gnathostomiasis, 309b
GnRH see Gonadotrophin-releasing 
hormone
Goitre
breathlessness in, 657f
endemic, 131
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 751
multinodular, 741b, 753–754, 753f
retrosternal, 753, 753f
toxic, 754
simple diffuse, 753, 753f
thyrotoxicosis, 745–746
Gold
adverse effects on kidney, 522b
intramuscular
adverse reactions, 711, 1005b, 
1048b
rheumatic disease, 1101b, 1102
oral, asthma, 671
skin reactions, 1290, 1304b
Golf, 1075b
Golfer’s elbow, 1075
Golgi apparatus, 44–45
Golimumab, 1103b
Gonadectomy, prophylactic, 766
Gonadotrophin deficiency, 789
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH), 737f, 757
deficiency, 787b
infertility treatment, 762
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) analogues, 460, 518
and osteoporosis, 1120, 1121b
prostate cancer, 518
Gonococcal infection, disseminated 
(DGI), 422, 1094
Gonococcal urethritis, 415
Gonorrhoea, 422–423
arthritis, 422
incubation period, 145b, 422
management, 422b–423b
pharyngeal, 422
urethritis, 415
Good medical practice, 1–16
clinical audit, 15, 15b, 15f
clinical decision-making, 7–9
communication, 4
doctor-patient relationship, 2–4, 3f
difficulties in, 2–4
evidence-based medicine, 8, 8b
guidelines and protocols, 8–9
investigations, 4–7
personal and professional 
development, 14–15, 14b, 14f
risk estimation/communication, 
7, 7f
Goodpasture’s syndrome, 
499b–500b, 713–714
Gorlin syndrome, 267b
Goserelin, 278, 518
Gottron’s papules, 1115
Gout, 1087–1090
drug-induced, 1132b
older people, 1090b
pressure erosions, 1067b
prevalence, 1060b
tophaceous, 1088–1089, 1088f
GRACE score, 591f, 598
Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), 
1290
stem cell transplantation, 1018
transfusion-associated, 1014
Graham Steell murmur, 625
Granulocyte colony stimulating 
factor (G-CSF), 992–993
Granulocyte macrophage colony 
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 
715b, 992–993
Granulocytes
count, 1312b
formation, 993f
Granuloma annulare, 1301
Granuloma inguinale, 424b
Granulomas
leprosy, 347
sarcoidosis, 709–710
schistosomiasis, 376
tuberculous, 689f
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s granulomatosis), 
713, 1118, 1118f
Granulomatous disease, chronic, 79
Granzymes, 75–76
Grapefruit juice, drug interactions, 
28b
Graves’ disease, 747–751
management, 748–749
ophthalmopathy, 735f, 739b, 
750–751, 750f
thyroid autoantibodies, 741b
thyrotoxicosis, 740, 740b, 747–750, 
748f
Gravitational (stasis) eczema, 1254, 
1286
Grays (Gy), 103
Greenhouse gases, 102
Grenz (Bucky) ray therapy, 1269
Grey baby syndrome, 154b
Grey Turner’s sign, 890–891
Grief reaction, 242
Griseofulvin, 160, 160b
onchomycosis, 1280
Groin injection sites, febrile drug 
user, 299
Growth factors, 48
asthma, 667
atherosclerosis, 579–580
cancer, 263, 263f
haematopoiesis, 993f
Growth failure, 49, 906
Growth hormone (GH), 736, 737f
deficiency, 766, 787b
hypersecretion, 787, 792–793
hypopituitarism treatment, 789
reference range, 1309b
resistance, 786b
secretion tests, 788b
Index
1338
Growth hormone-releasing 
hormone (GHRH), 737f
Growth retardation
congenital heart disease and, 631
eating disorders, 255–256, 256b
glycogen storage diseases, 450, 
450b
intrauterine, 314b, 355, 749
GSD see Glycogen storage diseases
GTN see Glyceryl trinitrate
Guanine, 42
Guidelines for treatment, 8–9
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 
1224–1225, 1225b
Guinea worm (dracunculiasis), 375
Gumma, 420
Gums
Kaposi’s sarcoma, 398f
scurvy, 130f
Gums, dietary, 113b
Gut, hormones, 845, 846b
GVHD see Graft-versus-host disease
Gynaecomastia, 762–763, 762b, 781, 
943–944
H
HAART see Antiretroviral therapy
HACE see High-altitude, cerebral 
oedema
HACEK group bacteria, 
endocarditis, 626, 626b
HAE see Hereditary angioedema
Haem
biosynthetic pathway, 459f
synthesis disorders, 458–460
Haemagglutination test, 340
Haemagogus spp., yellow fever, 323
Haemangioblastoma, 267b, 1216
Haemangioma, 1131b, 1274
liver, 970, 970f
Haemarthrosis, 1069
Haematemesis, 854
Haematocrit, 1003, 1312b
Haematological disorders see Blood 
diseases
Haematological function, older 
people, 1001b
Haematological investigations see 
Blood tests
Haematological tests see Blood tests
Haematological values, 1312b
Haematomas
intracerebral, 1218
muscle, haemophilia, 1051
stroke patients, 1239, 1242b, 1246
subdural, 1218
subungual, 1298, 1298f
Haematopoiesis, 992–994
extramedullary, 1006
Haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT), 
1017–1018
acute leukaemia, 1037f, 1038
allogeneic, 1017–1018, 1017b
aplastic anaemia, 1048
autologous, 1018
β-thalassaemia, 1034b
chronic myeloid leukaemia, 1040
fever after, 302–303
infection in, 1017b
myelodysplastic syndrome, 1041
myelofibrosis, 1049
myeloma, 1047b
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 
1044–1045
Haematopoietic stem cells, 992–994, 
993f
Haematuria, 474–476, 475f
dipstick-negative, 475b
dipstick-positive, 474b
investigations, 476f
‘loin pain’, 471
and malignancy, 475b
Haemochromatosis, 131, 972–973
causes, 972b
hereditary, 972–973
inheritance, 58b
investigations, 972, 973f
liver function tests, 930b
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1133
secondary, 972b, 973
Haemodiafiltration, 492
Haemodialysis, 490–491, 490f–491f
AKI, 483
chronic renal failure, 491
complications, 489b, 492b
intermittent, 491
poisoning, 207–208, 211
Haemofiltration, 490f, 491–492
AKD, 483
continuous venovenous, 491–492
pumped venovenous, 197–198
Haemoglobin, 994–995
abnormal, 1031–1032, 1034
full blood count, 1312b
glycated, 808, 808b, 811f, 1310b
high, 1003–1004
mean cell (MCH), 1312b
oxygen dissociation curve, 183f
reference values, 1312b
Haemoglobin A, 1032–1033
Haemoglobin C, 1031–1032
Haemoglobin C disease, 1034
Haemoglobin D, 1031–1032
Haemoglobin E, 1031–1032
Haemoglobin F, 994–995, 1033
Haemoglobin H disease, 1034–1035
Haemoglobin S, 1031–1033
Haemoglobin SC disease, 1034
Haemoglobinopathies, 1031–1035, 
1032f
genetic testing, 62b
Haemoglobinuria, 474b
march, 1031
paroxysmal cold, 420
paroxysmal nocturnal, 1031
Haemolysis
autoimmune, 1029–1030
blood transfusion reaction,  
1016f
drug-induced, 1031, 1303b
extravascular, 1027–1029
intravascular, 1026–1027, 1026b, 
1031
malaria, 357b
Haemolytic anaemia, 1026–1031, 
1026b, 1027f
alloimmune, 1031
autoimmune, 1029–1031
microangiopathic, 1031
non-immune, 1031
Haemolytic crisis, 1028
Haemolytic disease of the newborn 
(HDN), 1014
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome 
(HUS), 138b, 468, 495–496
Haemoperfusion, poisoning, 211, 
211b
Haemopexin, 1026–1027
Haemophilia, 1052f
haematomas, 1051
inheritance, 1051
Haemophilia A, 1051–1053, 1051b
Haemophilia B (Christmas disease), 
1053
Haemophilus spp., 137f
Haemophilus ducreyi, 424b
Haemophilus influenzae, 151b
bacterial meningitis, 1202b,  
1204b
immunisation, 149b
immunocompromised patients, 
78b
pneumonia, 401, 687
Haemoptysis, 658–659, 659b
bronchial carcinoma, 700
bronchiectasis, 678
COPD, 674
Haemorrhage
cancer-related, 270b
during dialysis, 492b
intracerebral, 1238f–1239f, 1239
retinal, 107, 609, 609f
splinter, 1070b, 1298
subarachnoid, 1246–1247
see also Bleeding
Haemorrhagic fevers
dengue, 309b, 322–323, 
322b–323b, 322f, 325b
with renal syndrome (Hantan 
fever), 325b
viral, 309b, 311f, 324–325
Haemorrhagic papilloedema
Haemorrhoids, 918–919
Haemosiderin, 927, 976
Haemosiderosis, 130
idiopathic pulmonary, 715b
Haemostasis, 996–997, 996f–997f
disorders, 1049–1050
older people, 1056b
Haemothorax, 661
Hair
disorders, 1264, 1296–1297
excess, 763–764, 1297
follicles, 1252–1253
growth cycle, 1253
loss see Alopecia
Hair pluck test, 1280
Hairy cell leukaemia, 1041
Hallpike manoeuvre, 1167b, 1186
Hallucinations, 237
differential diagnosis, 237
drug misuse, 20b, 217b
hypnagogic, 237
hypnopompic, 237
schizophrenia, 237, 247–248
visual, 248
Hallucinogens, 254
Hallucinosis, alcoholic, 253
Hallux valgus, 1076
Haloperidol, 249b
adverse reactions, 26b
delirium, 174–175, 203
disturbed behaviour, 237–238
nausea and vomiting, 290b, 291
older people, 237–238
poisoning, 216
schizophrenia, 249b
terminal agitation, 290
Halothane, 87, 933f
Hamartomas
adrenal, 779
lung, 704b
small intestine, 888
Hand, foot and mouth disease, 
326–327
Handicap, mental, 66
Hands
examination
blood disorders, 990f
cancer, 260f
cardiovascular disease, 526f
diabetes, 799b
diabetes mellitus, 798f
endocrine disease, 734f
gastrointestinal disease, 838f
infectious disease, 294f
liver and biliary disease, 922f
older people, 166f
renal/urinary tract disease, 
462f–463f
respiratory disease, 644f
rheumatic disease, 1058f
skin disease, 1250f
hygiene, infection control, 
145–146, 146f
osteoarthritis, 1083f
pain, 1075
psoriatic arthritis, 1109f
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098f
washing, 146f
Hantan fever, 325b
Hantavirus, 337
HAPE see High altitude, pulmonary 
oedema
Haploinsufficiency, 766
Haplotypes, 63, 803–804
Haptoglobins, 1312b
Hard metal disease, 718
Hartmann’s procedure, 862
Hartmann’s solution, 433b
hypovolaemia, 433b
Hartnup’s disease, 128
Hasenclever prognostic index, 
1043b
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 751
HAV see Hepatitis A virus
Haversian system, 1062b
Hay fever, 94, 1283
Hayflick limit, 50
HBV see Hepatitis B virus
HCG see Human chorionic 
gonadotrophin
Hct see Haematocrit
HCV see Hepatitis C virus
HDL see High-density lipoproteins
HDN see Haemolytic disease of the 
newborn
HDV see Hepatitis D virus
Head
examination
diabetes, 799b
endocrine disease, 734f
imaging, 1149–1150, 1150f
injury, 1218
Head lice, 1281
Head and neck
cancer, 262f, 281–282, 282b
examination, gastrointestinal 
disease, 838f
Headache, 1156–1157, 1176–1178
analgesic, 1176
brain tumour, 1213
cluster, 1177, 1178b
exertion, 1178
fever and, 83f, 295
heat stroke, 106
medication overuse, 1177
meningitis
bacterial, 1202–1204, 1202b, 
1203f
viral, 1201–1202
migraine see Migraine
morning, in respiratory failure, 
657
paroxysmal, 1178b
post-ictal, 1158b
raised ICP, 285b
red flag symptoms, 1157b
and sexual activity, 1178
stroke, 1237
subarachnoid haemorrhage, 1246
syndromes, 1156b
tension-type, 1176
see also specific types
Heaf test, 695b, 695f
Health care
integrated, 16
low-resource settings, 9
resources, fair allocation, 9
Health care-acquired infections, 
145–147, 145b, 146f
Clostridium difficile, 304b, 343–344, 
344f
control, 146f
MRSA, 134, 330–331
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, 
696
pneumonia, 685–687
risk factors, 146f
Hearing disturbance see Deafness
Heart
anatomy, 528–530, 528f–529f
arrhythmias see Arrhythmias
auscultation, 527b
blood flow, 528f, 530–531
catheterisation, 538–539, 538f
chambers, 529f
dilatation, 535
conduction system, 529–530, 529f
endothelial function, 531–532
imaging, 537
nerve supply, 530
Index
1339
physiology, 530–532
Starling’s Law, 182, 530, 547f
transplantation, 553
tumours, 639
valves
prosthetic, 546b
replacement, 629
see also Valvular heart disease 
see also Cardiac
Heart beats
ectopic
atrial, 564, 564f
ventricular, 569, 569f
see also Palpitation
Heart block
atrioventricular, 571–573, 
571f–572f, 572b
bifascicular, 573
bundle branch blocks, 573, 573b
complete, 572b
hemiblock, 573
Heart disease
congenital, 629–636, 629b–630b
adult, 635–636, 635b
coronary, 583–600
hepatic damage, 976–977
HIV-related, 405
hypertension and, 609
quantification of risk, 609–610
investigations, 532–539
ischaemic see Ischaemic heart 
disease
New York Heart Association 
functional classification, 
539b
pregnancy, 631, 631b
presentation throughout life,  
629b
presenting problems, 539–562
rheumatic, 614–616
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
risks of non-cardiac surgery, 600, 
600b
structural, (pre-)syncope, 555
valvular, 546, 613–629
for detailed entry see Valvular 
heart disease
see also names of specific conditions
Heart failure, 546–553
acute, 548
acute left, 548
breathlessness, 543
acute-on-chronic, 548
aortic regurgitation, 527b, 
623–624, 623b, 623f
biventricular, 548
cardiac resynchronisation 
therapy, 579, 579b
cardiomyopathy, 636–638
chest X-ray, 550, 550f
chronic, 548–549
breathlessness, 543–544
chronic constrictive pericarditis, 
641, 641b
clinical assessment, 548–549
compensated, 548
complications, 549
congestive, older people, 551b
diastolic and systolic dysfunction, 
548
heart transplantation, 553
high-output, 548
implantable defibrillator, 553, 
553f
investigations, 549–550
left-sided, 548, 549f
acute, 543, 548
liver damage in, 549
management, 550–553, 550b, 551f
drug therapy, 550–553
mechanisms, 546b, 547f
myocardial infarction see 
Myocardial infarction
neurohormonal activation, 547f
pathophysiology, 547–550, 547f, 
583b
pleural effusion, 662b
precipitating factors, 548b
revascularisation, 553
rheumatic fever, 614–616, 614f
right-sided, 548, 549f
types, 548
ventricular assist devices, 553
ventricular ectopic beats, 569,  
569f
ventricular septal defect, 633–634, 
634f
Heart murmurs, 560–562
for detailed entry see Murmurs
Heart rate
control, 191, 566
disorders, 562–579
respiration effects, 532b
Heart rhythm
control, 191, 566
disorders see Arrhythmias
Heart sounds
abnormal, 560–562, 560b
aortic stenosis, 562b, 620
atrial myxoma, 639
atrial septal defect, 633
cardiac cycle, 561f
mitral regurgitation, 562b, 610b
mitral stenosis, 617, 617f
normal, 560b
pulmonary stenosis, 625
ventricular septal defect, 562b
Heart transplantation, 553
Heart valves
common infecting organisms, 
626b
haemolysis, 1031
mechanical, 629, 629b
see also Valvular heart disease; 
and names of individual 
valves
Heart-lung transplantation, 665–666
Heartburn, 852–853
Heat cramps, 106
Heat exhaustion, 106
Heat stroke, 106
Heat syncope, 106
Heat-related illness, 105–106
Heavy metals
adverse effects on kidney, 446b
poisoning, 308
Heberden’s nodes, 1083f
Height, measurement of, 114–115
Heimlich manoeuvre, 728
Heinz bodies, 1031
Helicobacter pylori
diagnosis of infection, 873b
eradication therapy, 874, 874b
adverse reactions, 874b
indications, 874b
gastric cancer, 266b
gastric lymphoma, 879
gastritis, 871
peptic ulcer and, 872–873
Helium dilution technique, 675
Heller’s operation, 869
HELLP syndrome, 978
Helminthic infections, 135, 369–381, 
369b
drug therapy, 162–163
eosinophilia and, 312b
nervous system, 1164–1165
soil-transmitted, 312b
treatment, 162–163
Hemicellulose, 113b
Hemicranias, paroxysmal, 1178b
Hemifacial spasm, 1200
Hemiparesis, 1117, 1119
Hemiplegic gait, 172b
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 
443, 444f
Hendra virus, 144f, 328
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP), 
501, 1119
Heparin, 1018–1019
acute limb ischaemia, 603
angina, unstable, 594b
atrial fibrillation, 566
indications, 1018b
low molecular weight, 1019
diabetic ketoacidosis, 813b
pulmonary embolism, 618
venous thromboembolism, 
1010–1011, 1019
mechanism of action, 1018–1019
monitoring, 1000–1001
pulmonary embolism, 618
standard (unfractionated), 
1018–1019
stroke, 1244
venous thromboembolism, 723, 
1010–1011
prophylaxis, 599
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
(HIT), 1019
Hepatic, see also Liver
Hepatic acinus, 924f
Hepatic artery disease, 975
Hepatic decompensation, 944
Hepatic encephalopathy, 923b, 
941–942, 941b
clinical grading, 933b
Hepatic failure see Liver failure
Hepatic fibrosis, 925f
congenital, 945f
drug-induced, 972
histology, 943f
non-invasive markers, 932
pathogenesis, 925f
schistosomiasis, 377–378
Hepatic hydrothorax, 939
Hepatic osteodystrophy, 963
Hepatic veins, outflow obstruction, 
976
Hepatic venous disease, 976–977
Hepatic venous pressure, 943
Hepatitis
acute, drug-induced, 971b
alcoholic, 958, 958b
autoimmune, 930b, 962–963, 
962b, 965
cholestatic, 971b
drug-induced, 971b
interface, 962
ischaemic, 198
neonatal, 974
viral see Viral hepatitis
Hepatitis A virus (HAV), 309b, 
949–950, 949b
antigen, 949
immunisation, 149b
haemophiliacs, 1051–1052
incubation period, 145b, 310b
investigations, 949
management, 949–950
older people, 980b
in pregnancy, 977
prevention, 949b
transmission, 949b
sexual, 426
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), 949b, 
950–954, 950f
acute liver failure, 950
antigens, 950–952, 951b, 952f
chronic infection, 951b
HBeAg-negative, 951b, 951f
natural history, 951f
hepatocellular carcinoma, 967
HIV/AIDS patients, 400
immunisation/prevention, 954, 
954b
HIV/AIDS patients, 407
incubation period, 145b, 310b
investigations, 950–952, 952b
liver function tests, 930b
management, 952–953
pregnancy, 314b
prevention see Immunisation 
above
transmission, 950b
blood products, 1011–1012
sexual, 426
viral load, 952, 952f
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), 949b, 
954–955
antigens, 954
chronic infection, 955b
hepatocellular carcinoma, 967
HIV/AIDS patients, 400
investigations, 954–955
liver function tests, 930b
management, 955, 955b
prevention, 955
prognosis, 955
transmission
blood products, 1011–1012
sexual, 426
Hepatitis D virus (HDV), 949b, 954
antigen, 954
vertical transmission, 954
Hepatitis E virus (HEV), 949b, 955
Hepato-renal disease, 519
Hepatocellular carcinoma, 967–969
fibrolamellar, 969
haemochromatosis, 967–968
older people, 980b
Hepatocellular jaundice, 936–937
Hepatocerebral degeneration
Hepatocytes, 924–925, 925f
necrosis, 971
Hepatomegaly, 938
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 976
cirrhosis, 943
heart failure, 624
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, 
975–976
Hepatorenal failure/syndrome, 
940–941
Hepcidin, 130–131
HER2 receptor, 268
Herbal medicine, pain management, 
288
Herceptin see Transtuzumab
Herd immunity, 149
Hereditary angioedema (HAE), 93b, 
93f, 94
Hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia (HHT), 1007, 
1049
Hereditary non-polyposis colon 
(colorectal) cancer (HNPCC), 
67, 267b
Heredity see Genetic factors; 
Inheritance
Hernia
diaphragmatic, 731
hiatus, 865, 865b, 865f
Heroin misuse, 219
Herpangina, 327
Herpes labialis, 326f
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 
325–326
acute leukaemia, 1038
cutaneous, 326f
eczema, 326, 326f
encephalitis, 1205–1206
genital, 416b, 418b, 423–425, 424f
pregnancy, 425
treatment, 318b
HIV infection/AIDS, 397
HSV 1/2, 325–326
liver failure, 934b
in pregnancy, 314b, 414b
recurrent, 326
stem cell transplantation, 1017b
treatment, 318b
Herpes zoster, 295f, 317f, 318–319, 
1157, 1207
facial pain, 1157
HIV infection/AIDS, 397
treatment, 318b
Herpesviruses
HIV infection/AIDS, 387
treatment, 161–162, 161b
Hers disease, 450b
HEV (hepatitis E virus), 949b, 955
HFE protein, 972
HHT see Hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia
Index
1340
HHV see Human herpes virus
5-HIAA see 5-Hydroxyindole-acetic 
acid
Hiatus hernia, 865, 865b, 865f
Hibernating myocardium, 537, 584b
Hibernian fever, 85
Hidebound chest, 713
HIDS see Hyper IgD syndrome
Hierarchy of systems, 98b
High altitude
effects/illness, 106f, 107
cerebral oedema (HACE), 107
pulmonary oedema (HAPE), 
107
High dependency care see Critical 
care
High-density lipoproteins (HDL), 
1310b
High-frequency oscillatory 
ventilation (HFOV), 196
Highly active antiretroviral therapy 
see Antiretroviral therapy
Hip
fractures, preventive measures, 
172–173, 173b
osteoarthritis, 1084, 1084f
pain, 1075, 1075b, 1075f
tendinitis, 1075b
Hip circumference, 115
Hip protectors, 1122
Hippocampus, 1142–1143
Hirschsprung’s disease, 917–918
Hirsutism, 763–764, 1297
causes, 763b
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 
763b, 782
polycystic ovarian syndrome, 
764–765
His bundle, 529–530
Histamine, 841
Histamine H2-antagonists
functional dyspepsia, 877
gastro-oesophageal reflux, 867, 
868f
stress ulcers, 198
urticaria, 1291
Histidine, 114b
Histiocytosis, Langerhans cell 
(histiocytosis X), 715b
Histoplasma capsulatum, 304b, 385
Histoplasma duboisii, 385
Histoplasmosis, 385–386
HIT see Heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia
HIV cholangiopathy, 400
HIV infection/AIDS, 387–410
associated conditions, 395, 395b
cardiac disease, 405
dementia, 402–404
eyes, 404
fever, 396
gastrointestinal, 399–400, 909
haematological, 404–405
hepatobiliary, 400, 955
leishmaniasis, 364–365
lymphadenopathy, 395–396
mucocutaneous disease, 
396–398, 397b
musculoskeletal, 1095b
neoplastic, 405, 405b
nervous system, 402–404
oral, 398
renal disease, 405
respiratory, 400–401, 400b, 401f
rheumatological, 404
tuberculosis, 396, 400–401, 401f, 
696
weight loss, 396, 396f
asymptomatic, 395
CD4 counts, 393–394, 395b
chemoprophylaxis, 153b, 406–407, 
406b
children, 393
classification, 389b
clinical examination, 388f
counselling, 393b
diagnosis, 392–393
epidemiology, 390–391, 390f
immunisation of HIV-infected 
persons, 407
immunology, 391–392, 394f
investigation/tests, 393b
life cycle, 392f
management/treatment
antiretroviral drugs, 407–410
complications, 408–409
drug resistance, 408
efficacy, 408
natural history, 394–395
older people, 410b
opportunistic infections
prophylaxis, 405–407, 406b
see also associated conditions above
pregnancy, 314b, 409–410
presenting problems, 395–405, 
1259b
prophylaxis, 410, 410b
opportunistic infections, 
405–407, 406b
perinatal, 409
post-exposure, 410
vaccines, 407
staging, 389b, 394–395
testing for, 393b, 412
transmission, 390–391, 390b–391b
blood products, 391b
prevention, 410
viral load, 394
virology, 391–392
HIV-associated nephropathy 
(HIVAN), 405
Hives, 1290
for detailed entry see Urticaria
HLA antigens, 75, 78
diabetes mellitus, 803–804
sclerosing cholangitis, 965
transplant rejection, 94–95
HLA-B, 25b
HIV/AIDS, 409
juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 
1104b
spondarthritides, 1104
HMG CoA reductase enzyme 
inhibitors see Statins
HNPCC see Hereditary non-
polyposis colon/colorectal 
cancer
Hoarseness
chronic, causes, 727
laryngeal disorders, 727
laryngeal paralysis, 727
psychogenic, 728
HOCM see Hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy
Hodgkin’s disease, 1042–1043, 
1042f–1043f
classification, 1042b
epidemiology/aetiology, 1042b
HIV-associated, 405, 405b
prognosis, 1043b
staging, 1042b
Holmes-Adie syndrome, 1172b
Holter monitoring, 534
Homeopathy, pain management, 288
Homeostasis, 100
Homocystinuria, 449
Homozygosity, 53
Honeycomb lung, 709f
Hookworm, 312b
ancylostomiasis, 369–370, 370f
dog, 375–376
Hoover’s sign, 1163
Hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT)
hypopituitarism, 789
osteoporosis, 1123b, 1124–1125
post-menopausal women, 760b, 
766b
secondary amenorrhoea, 760
Hormone therapy
malignant disease, 278
skin disease, 1267
Hormones
actions see individual hormones
ectopic production by tumours, 
271, 271b
gastrointestinal tract, 845, 846b
reference range, 1309b
Horner’s syndrome, 1172b, 1172f
bronchial carcinoma, 701
Hospital CURB-65 system, 683f
Hospital-acquired infections see 
Nosocomial infections
Hospitals
prescribing in, 37
undernutrition in, 115–120, 122f
Host-pathogen interaction, 134, 
137–138
Hot tub lung, 720
House dust mites, 666–667, 1255, 
1283
Howell-Jolly bodies, 999f
HPOA see Hypertrophic pulmonary 
osteoarthropathy
HPV see Human papillomavirus
HRT see Hormone replacement 
therapy
HSCT see Haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation
β-HSD see β-Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase
HSP (Henoch-Schönlein purpura), 
1119
HSV see Herpes simplex virus
HTLV see Human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus
Human chorionic gonadotrophin 
(hCG)
infertility, 762
pregnancy testing, 282, 756b, 
759–760
as tumour marker, 268, 270b
Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV6), 316, 
317b
Human herpesvirus 7 (HHV7), 316, 
317b
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8), 326
Human immunodeficiency virus see 
HIV
Human leucocyte antigens see HLA
Human papillomavirus (HPV)
anogenital, 425–426
cancer and, 267
HIV infection/AIDS, 405b
in pregnancy, 414b
vaccines, 149, 425, 425b
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus 
(HTLV), 311, 328–329
Humidifier fever, 719b, 720
Hunter’s syndrome, 433–434
Huntington’s disease, 65, 1198
genetic testing, 64, 64b, 1153
genetics, 56b
inheritance, 232–233, 250b
juvenile, 1198
Hurler’s syndrome, 433–434
HUS see Haemolytic uraemic 
syndrome
Hutchinson’s sign, 1273
Hyaluronan, intra-articular 
injection, 1086
Hydatid cysts, liver, 380–381, 
956–957, 956f
Hydatid disease, 380–381, 380f
alveolar, 380–381
Hydralazine
hypertension, 612
malignant, 612
and lupus syndrome, 1132b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
skin reactions, 1304b
Hydration
dying patients, 291–292
intravenous, acute leukaemia 
patients, 1001
stroke patients, 1243b
see also Fluid replacement
Hydroa vacciniforme, 1260b
Hydrocephalus, 1216–1217, 1217f
causes, 1217b
dementia, 250b
normal pressure, 1217
obstructive, 1173b, 1205
Hydrocortisone
adrenal insufficiency, 779, 779b
anaphylaxis, 92b
asthma, 672
eczema, 1285–1286
equivalent dose, 776b
hypopituitarism, 788–789
inflammatory bowel disease, 
903b, 904
laryngeal obstruction, 728
potency and strength, 1265b
sexually transmitted infections
topical, 1265b
see also Cortisol
Hydrocortisone sodium succinate, 
728
Hydrogen ions
acid-base disorders, 429b
diabetic ketoacidosis, 812
arterial blood, 664b, 1308b
critically ill patients, 187
Hydromorphone, 287
Hydronephrosis, 377, 481, 510–511
Hydrophobia, 1206
Hydrops fetalis, 316b
Hydrotherapy, 1080
Hydrothorax, hepatic, 939
Hydroxyapatite crystals, deposition, 
1062, 1091
Hydroxycarbamide, 1268
essential thrombocythaemia, 1049
leukaemia, 1039–1040
myeloproliferative disorders, 
1049
sickle-cell disease, 1033
Hydroxychloroquine
adverse reactions, 1101b
rheumatic disease, 1101b, 1102
skin reactions, 1304b
SLE, 1112
Whipple’s disease, 884
1α-Hydroxycholecalciferol 
(alfacalcidol), 770–771
Hydroxycobalamin see Vitamin B12
5-Hydroxyindole-acetic acid 
(5-HIAA), 1311b
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency, 607b
17α-Hydroxylase deficiency, 607b
21-Hydroxylase deficiency, 782
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
(β-HSD), 772, 772f
deficiency, 607b
5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) see 
Serotonin
25-Hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D), 
1066b
Hyfrecation, 426
Hygiene hypothesis, 89
Hyoscine butylbromide, 290b, 291
Hyper IgD syndrome (HIDS), 85
Hyperacusis, 1163
Hyperaesthesia
dengue fever, 322b
diabetic neuropathy, 831–832
herpes simplex, 326
Hyperaldosteronism
diabetes type 1, 804
glucorticoid suppressible, 607b, 
780
primary, 780–781, 780b
secondary, 780b
Hyperalgesia, 285b
fibromyalgia, 1093
Hyperalphalipoproteinaemia, 455
Hyperbilirubinaemia
congenital non-haemolytic, 937b
critically ill patients, 198
see also Jaundice
Hypercalcaemia, 767–769
cancer patients, 271b, 273, 273b
causes, 767b
Index
1341
differential diagnosis, 768b
familial hypocalciuric, 767, 770
hyperparathyroidism and, 
770–771, 770b
malignant, 767
multiple myeloma, 1046f
sarcoidosis, 711
Hypercapnia, respiratory failure, 
192
Hypercarotenosis, 127
Hypercholesterolaemia, 453–455, 
454b
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
risk, 581
biliary cirrhosis, 963–964
familial, 453–455, 455b
management, 456–457
nephrotic syndrome, 477b
polygenic, 453
secondary, 453b
Hypercoagulability, and nephrotic 
syndrome, 477b
Hypercortisolism, 773b
Hyperemesis gravidarum, 756b
Hyperglycaemia
acute myocardial infarction, 818
clinical assessment, 809–810
critical illness, 198
diabetes mellitus, 799, 808–811
type 1, 803–804
type 2, 806
diabetic ketoacidosis, 804, 
811–814, 812b
drugs to reduce, 821–824
fasting, 809b
pancreatitis, 891b
pregnancy, 817–818
stress, 809
symptoms, 809–810, 809b
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar 
state, 814, 814b
Hyperinsulinaemia, 809b, 815
fetal, 817
Hyperkalaemia, 442–443, 443b,  
443f
chronic interstitial nephritis, 504
diabetic nephropathy, 814
heart failure, 549
periodic paralysis, 1230b
renal failure
AKI, 482
chronic, 488
Hyperkeratosis, subungual, 1108
Hyperketonaemia, 802
Hyperlipidaemia, 454f
classification, 454b
familial combined, 454b, 455
management, 456–458, 457f, 598
older people, 458b
mixed, 454b, 455, 458
remnant, 455
secondary, 453b
Hypermagnesaemia, 448
Hypermelanosis, 1296
Hypermobility, 1134, 1134b
Hypernatraemia, 439, 439b
older people, 439, 439b
Hyperostosis, diffuse idiopathic 
skeletal, 1133–1134, 1134f
Hyperparasitaemia, malaria, 357b
Hyperparathyroidism, 769–770, 
769b, 770f
chronic renal failure, 486–487
hypercalcaemia and see 
Hypercalcaemia
older people, 770b
pain, 769
Hyperphosphataemia, 449
chronic renal failure, 486–487
Hyperpigmentation, 1296
Hyperprolactinaemia, 790–791, 790b
chronic renal failure, 485
‘disconnection’, 774
Hyperpyrexia
malaria, 357b
malignant, 51–53
Hypersensitive carotid sinus 
syndrome (HCSS), 556
Hypersensitivity
allergic rhinitis, 725
Gell and Coombs classification, 
88b
patch tests, 1255
prick tests, 1255
reactions to drugs, 25b
type I, 87, 88b, 89f
type II, 87, 88b
type III, 87, 88b
type IV, 87, 88b
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 
719–720, 720f
Hypersensitivity responses, 83
Hypersomnolence, 1187, 1187b
idiopathic, 727
Hypersplenism
brucellosis, 333
and leucopenia, 929
portal hypertension, 945b
and thrombocytopenia, 946
Hypertension, 607–613
aetiology, 607–613
atherosclerosis and, 551
cardiovascular disease and, 609
quantification of risk,  
609–610
cocaine misuse, 218
definition, 607b
diabetes mellitus, 810–811
essential, 607
examination, 608
history, 608
intracranial, 1217–1218
investigations, 609, 610b
malignant (accelerated phase), 
497, 497f, 609
AKI, 480b–481b
emergency treatment, 612
management, 609–613
antihypertensive drugs, 610b, 
611–612
British Hypertension Society 
guidelines, 611f
newly-diagnosed hypertension, 
607–608
non-drug therapy, 610
quantification of cardiovascular 
risk, 609–610
refractory hypertension, 
612–613
treatment targets, 610, 611b
older people, 610b
portal, 945–948, 945b, 945f
portopulmonary, 976
pre-eclampsia and, 521, 521b
pulmonary see Pulmonary 
hypertension
renal disease, 478
AKI, 480b–481b
chronic, 484
polycystic, 505–507
reflux nephropathy, 504–505
renal artery stenosis, 494–495, 
494b–495b, 495f
secondary, 607b
target organ damage, 608–609, 
609b, 609f
venous, 1262
white coat, 608
Hyperthermia
malignant, 1230b
organophosphate poisoning,  
224b
Hyperthyroidism see Thyrotoxicosis
Hypertrichosis, 1297
drug-induced, 1304b
Hypertriglyceridaemia, 454b, 455
familial, 454b, 455
management, 457–458
secondary, 453b
Hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy (HOCM), 
554f, 561, 637, 1159
Hypertrophic pulmonary 
osteoarthropathy (HPOA), 
701
Hyperuricaemia, 1087
asymptomatic, 1087
gout, 1087b
Hyperventilation
panic disorder, 243
psychogenic, 246
and respiratory alkalosis, 447
Hyperviscosity syndrome, 1045
Hypervolaemia
CVP, 183f
with hypernatraemia, 439b
with hyponatraemia, 433b, 437b
Hypnic jerks, 1167
Hypnotics
dosage regimen, 35b
effect of old age, 36b
Hypoadrenalism, tuberculosis, 696
Hypoalbuminaemia, 768b
nephrotic syndrome, 477b
Hypobetalipoproteinaemia, 455–456
Hypocalcaemia, 768–769
differential diagnosis, 768b
ethylene glycol poisoning, 222
and hypomagnesaemia, 448
hypoparathyroidism and, 770
management, 769b
pancreatitis, 891b
renal failure
acute, 482–483
chronic, 486–488
Hypochlorhydria
anaemia and, 1025
and small bowel bacterial 
overgrowth, 872–873
Hypochlorous ions, 73
Hypochondriacal disorder, 245
Hypofibrinogenaemia, 1000b, 1051b
Hypogammaglobulinaemia, 81
Hypoglossal (12th cranial) nerve, 
tests, 1139b
Hypoglycaemia
awareness of, 815–816
causes, 815b
diabetics, 814–816
drug-induced, 823, 825, 825b
exercise-induced, 815
malaria, 357b
management, 816, 816b
nocturnal, 815
older people, 784b
prevention, 816, 816b
risk factors, 815b
spontaneous, 783–784, 783f, 
814–815
symptoms, 815b
Hypogonadism, 758b
hypergonadotrophic, 759
hypogonadotrophic, 759–760
male, 760–762
Hypokalaemia, 440–442, 440f–441f
chloroquine poisoning, 215
heart failure, 549
hyperaldosteronism, 780
mineralocorticoid excess, 781
periodic paralysis, 1230b
Hypomagnesaemia, 448, 448b, 768b
management, 769b
Hypomania, 244–245
Hypomimia, 1196b
Hyponatraemia, 437–439, 437f, 929
adrenal insufficiency, 777, 778b
brain in, 437f
causes, 437b
depletional, 437–438
differential diagnosis, 438b
dilutional, 437b, 438
acute renal failure, 482–483
ecstasy/amphetamine misuse, 
218
with euvolaemia, 437b, 438
heart failure, 549
with hypervolaemia, 433b, 437b
hypopituitarism, 787–788
with hypovolaemia, 433b, 
437–438, 437b
older people, 176b, 439, 439b
Hypoparathyroidism, 768b, 770–771
Hypophosphataemia, 448–449,  
449b
rickets/osteomalacia, 1066b, 1128
Hypophosphatasia, 1128
Hypopigmentation, 1295–1296
Hypopituitarism, 787–789
clinical assessment, 787–788, 788f
investigation, 787b, 788
management, 788–789
Hyposmia, 1169
Hypotension
dialysis, 492b
poisoning, 211b
postural, 554, 556
hypopituitarism, 787–788
management, 172
older people, 36b
renal disease, 479
shock, 83
Hypothalamus, 785–795, 786f, 1143
diseases
classification, 786b
investigation, 786–787, 787b
older people, 795b
presenting problems, 787–791
functional anatomy and 
physiology, 786–787
thermoregulation, 103–104
tumours, 790b
Hypothermia, 104–105, 104f
cold water immersion, 108
older people, 104b
Hypothyroidism, 743–745
autoimmune, 741b, 743b
causes, 743b
clinical features, 740b, 743
congenital, 755
iatrogenic, 743b
investigations, 743
laboratory abnormalities, 741b
management, 743–745, 744f
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1132
with normal thyroid function 
tests, 745
obesity, 759
older people, 755b
pregnancy, 745, 756b
primary
causes, 743b
clinical features, 743
investigations, 743
management, 743–745
secondary, 743b
spontaneous atrophic, 743b
subclinical, 746
transient, 743
transient thyroiditis, 743b
Hypoventilation, alveolar, 191, 665
Hypovolaemia
AKI, 197
with hypernatraemia, 439b
with hyponatraemia, 433b, 
437–438, 437b
right atrial pressure, 185
shock, 74b
Hypovolaemic shock, 83, 190
CVP, 183f
Hypoxaemia, 106f
acute, 191
circulatory collapse, 191b
cirrhosis, 943
high-altitude pulmonary oedema, 
107
near-drowning accidents, 108
respiratory failure, 191
Hypoxia
altitude illness/air travel, 107
cytopathic, 185
pancreatitis, 891b
respiratory failure, 664b
Hypromellose, 1114
Index
1342
Hysterectomy, cancer treatment, 
280–281
Hysteria, 1210
I
Ibandronate, osteoporosis, 1123b
IBD see Inflammatory bowel 
disease
IBS see Irritable bowel syndrome
Ibuprofen, 1079b
adverse reactions, 26b
and gastroduodenal bleeding, 
1079b
ICAM-1, 531–532
ICD see Implantable cardiac 
defibrillator
ICD-10 see International 
Classification of Disease-10
Ice cream headache, 1178b
Ice pick headache, 1178b
ICF see Intracellular fluid
Ichthyosis, 350, 1252
ICP see Intracranial pressure
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura (ITP), 1050
IDL see Intermediate-density 
lipoproteins
If channel antagonists, angina, 587
Ifosfamide, 446b
Ig see Immunoglobulin
IGF see Insulin-like growth factor
IGF-BP3 see Insulin-like growth 
factor binding protein
IgG4-associated cholangitis, 966, 
988
IGT see Impaired glucose tolerance
IL see Interleukin
Ileal resection, 850, 884f
Ileus
gallstones, 983
meconium, 895
paralytic, 890–892
Illusions, 234
Iloprost, 603
Imaging
cardiovascular system, 535–538
epilepsy, 1182b
gastrointestinal tract, 845–851, 
847b
hepatobiliary disease, 930–931, 961
musculoskeletal disease, 
1064–1066
nervous system/brain, 1149–1150, 
1149b, 1235–1236, 
1235f–1236f, 1241–1242
renal tract, 468–471
respiratory tract, 649–651
see also Radiology; and individual 
imaging techniques
Imatinib, 279
acute leukaemia, 1037b
chronic myeloid leukaemia, 
1039–1040
GIST, 880
Imidazoles, 159, 160b
topical, 1266
Imipenem, 154b
melioidosis, 340
Imipramine, 244b
bladder dysfunction, 1175b
irritable bowel syndrome, 909
Imiprothrin, 224b
Imiquimod, 1266
anogenital warts, 426
lentigo maligna, 1273
molluscum contagiosum, 1279
skin cancer, 1270–1271
viral warts, 1278–1279
Immersion foot, 105
Immotile cilia syndrome, 678b
Immune deficiency, 78–82
adaptive immunity, 80–82
combined B/T-lymphocyte, 80
common variable (CVID), 81
genetic testing, 62b
older people, 82b
presenting problems, 79
secondary, 82, 82b
severe combined, 80
T-cell, 78b, 80, 80f
warning signs, 79b
see also HIV infection/AIDS
Immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome 
(IRIS), 138, 408–409
Immune response modifiers, 1266
Immune responses
adaptive (acquired), 76–78
cytokines, 74b
innate, 72–76
lower airway defence, 648
Immune senescence, 82
Immune surveillance, 1269–1270
Immune system
adaptive (acquired), 76–78, 76f
deficiencies, 80–82
diabetes type 1, 804
functional anatomy and 
physiology, 72–78
innate, 72–76
regulation, 927–928
Immunisation, 148–149
antibody deficiencies, 81–82
chickenpox, 318
cholera, 345
diphtheria, 346
Haemophilus influenzae, 149b, 
1051–1052
HIV/AIDS patients, 407
influenza, 320
HIV/AIDS patients, 407
meningococcal infection, 
1203–1204
mumps, 319
plague, 339
pneumococcal, 346
poliomyelitis, 1207
rabies, 1206
rubella, 315
tetanus, 1210
tick-borne encephalitis, 309b
transplant recipients, 95
tuberculosis, 696
typhoid, 340
varicella, 318
viral hepatitis, 954b
haemophiliacs, 1051–1052
HIV/AIDS patients, 407
whooping cough (pertussis), 149b
yellow fever, 324
see also Vaccines/Vaccination
Immunity
adaptive, 76–78
cellular, 78
HIV infection/AIDS, 390
humoral, 77–78
Immunoblot test, 141–142
innate, 843
Immunoblot test, 141–142
Immunochromatographic tests, 142
Immunocompromised host, fever 
in, 301–302
Immunodiffusion, 142
Immunofluorescence, 142
amoebiasis, 368
anti-endomysial antibodies, 881
glomerular disease, 498f
leishmaniasis, 363
plague, 338
skin samples, 1294f
Immunoglobulin(s), 77–78, 1011
antiRhD (anti-D), 1014
in glomerulonephritis, 499b–500b
intravenous
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 
1225b
myasthenia gravis, 1227b
myositis, 1115
thrombocytopenia, 405, 1050
toxic epidermal necrolysis, 
1292b
toxic shock syndrome, 331
in multiple myeloma, 1046b
prophylactic, 149b
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
structure, 77f
thyroid-stimulating, 747–748
Immunoglobulin A (IgA), 77b
deficiency, selective, 81
dermatitis herpetiformis, 1294
linear IgA disease, 1293b, 1294
nephropathy, 499b–500b, 500–501
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Immunoglobulin D (IgD), 77b
hyper IgD syndrome, 85
Immunoglobulin E (IgE), 77b
antibodies, 89
reference values, 1310b
specific IgE tests, 90, 1255
total serum, 90
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), 77b
anti-HBc, 952b
anti-HDV, 954
cerebrospinal fluid, 1311b
functional IgG antibody 
deficiency, 81
reference values, 1310b
rubella-specific, 315
Immunoglobulin M (IgM), 77b
anti-HBc, 929, 952f
anti-HDV, 954
cold agglutinin disease, 
1030–1031
reference values, 1310b
Immunohistochemistry, tumour 
identification, 268
Immunological memory, 77–78
Immunological tests, 141–143, 1153
antibody-independent, 142–143
hepatobiliary disease, 929–930
renal disease, 468
respiratory disease, 652
Immunological tolerance, 86–87
Immunomodulation, 1267–1268
Immunophenotyping, 998, 
1035–1036
Immunoproliferative small 
intestinal disease (IPSID), 889
Immunosuppressants
autoimmune hepatitis, 962–963
HSCT, 1018
multiple sclerosis, 1191–1192, 
1192b
myasthenia gravis, 1227b
skin disease, 1267–1268
see also individual drugs
Immunosuppression
autoimmune hepatitis, 963b
complications of, 95–96
SLE, 1112
transplant patients, 96b
liver transplantation, 979
Immunotherapy
allergy, 90–91, 91b
cancer, 278
myasthenia gravis, 1227b
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), 
169f, 455, 754b, 1310b
Impetigo, 1275–1276, 1275f
bullous, 1258b, 1276
Implantable cardiac defibrillator 
(ICD)
heart failure, 553, 553f
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
638
ventricular arrhythmias, 579, 
579b, 599
Impotence see Erectile dysfunction
Inborn errors of metabolism, 64–65
genetic testing, 62b
intoxicating, 64–65
mitochondrial disorders, 65, 1229, 
1229b
storage disorders, 65
Incapacity, 291
Incidence of disease, 99, 99b
Incident pain, 285b
Incidentaloma, 737b, 779
Inclusion body myositis, 1115
Incontinence
faecal, 918, 918b, 1175
stroke patients, 1243b
urinary, 472–474, 1174
neurogenic bladder, 1174
older people, 175, 175f, 473b
overflow, 473, 1174
stress, 473
urge, 473, 1174
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio 
(ICER), 32
Incretin effect, 801–802, 802f
Incretin-based therapies, 822b, 
823–824
Incubation period, infections, 310b
Indigestion see Dyspepsia
Indometacin, 1079b
diabetes insipidus, 795
gastrointestinal bleeding, 1079b
paroxysmal headache prevention, 
1178
pericarditis, 639
persistent ductus arteriosus, 632
skin reactions, 1304b
Indoramin, 612
Infection(s), 133–164, 293–386
adolescents, 313, 313b
agents of, 134–135, 134b
bacterial, 329–353
gastrointestinal, 341–345
with neurological involvement, 
347, 1202–1204, 1202b
respiratory, 345–347
skin, 329–333
soft tissue, 329–333
systemic, 333–341
bone, 329–333
central venous catheters, 303–304
chain of infection, 134f
chlamydial, 353, 423
chronic renal failure, 477b
clinical examination, 294f
common infecting organisms, 
151b
constitutive barriers to, 72–76
control, 145–149
critically ill patients, 200b
definition, 134, 184b
deliberate release, 145
emerging/re-emerging disease, 
143, 144f
endemic disease, 143
epidemiology, 143–145
fungal see Fungal infections
gastrointestinal tract
bacterial infections, 341–345
inflammatory bowel disease, 
903b
oesophagus, 868
oral cavity, 864
protozoal, 367–369
small intestine, 888
tests, 849–850
viral, 327–328
glomerulonephritis and, 
499b–500b, 501
haematological disorders, 1008
health care-acquired see Health 
care-acquired infections
helminthic, 369–381
history-taking, 295b
hospital-acquired, 685–687
host-pathogen interaction, 134, 
137–138
HSCT, 1017b
incubation periods, 145b, 310b
injecting drug users, 299–301, 
300f
joints, 1094–1096
neuropathic (Charcot), 833–835
older people, 1094b
kidney, 511–514
tuberculosis, 514, 692
Index
1343
liver, 948–957
microbiological investigations, 
138–143, 139b
culture, 140–141
direct detection, 139–140, 139b
immunological tests, 141–143
microbiological sampling, 139b
mycobacterial, 135, 347–350
myocardial, 636
nervous system, 1201–1211, 1201b
normal flora, 136–137, 137f
opportunistic
HIV/AIDS patients, 405–407, 
406b
mycobacterial, 696, 696b
outbreaks, 147
reporting, 148b
terminology, 148b
pathogenesis, 138
pericardial see Pericarditis
periods of infectivity, 144b
post-operative see individual 
infections
in pregnancy, 313, 314b
presenting problems, 296–313
prevention, 145–149
protozoal, 353–369
recurrent, 78b, 79
reservoirs, 143–144
animal, 144
environmental, 144
human, 143
respiratory tract
asthma and, 667
cystic fibrosis, 681
fungal, 697–699
older people, 686b
pneumonia, 658b, 682–688
rheumatoid disease, 713
SARS, 682–683
upper, 681–682
rickettsial, 350–352, 351b
sexually transmitted see Sexually 
transmitted infections
skin see Skin infections
starvation-associated, 121b
stem cell transplantation, 1017b
stroke patients, 1243b
transmission, 144, 147b
blood transfusion, 1014–1015
treatment, 149–164, 151b
tropical, 308–313
urinary tract, 511–514
older people, 512b
stroke patients, 1243b
VUR and, 511b
viral see Viral infections
wound see Wound infections
Infectious mononucleosis, 320, 320b, 
321f
Infective endocarditis, 625–629
acute, 626
bartonellosis, 352–353, 352b
diagnosis, 627b
injecting drug users, 625
management, 628, 628b
older people, 626b
pathophysiology, 625–629, 626b
post-operative, 626–627
prevention, 628–629
subacute, 626
symptoms, 626–627, 627f
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling, 
774f
Inferior vena cava, 464, 515–516, 
516f
Infertility, 761–762, 761b
hypogonadism, 762
polycystic ovary syndrome, 762, 
764b
Infestations, skin, 1275–1281
Inflammation
acute, 82–83, 83f
cancer, 265–266
chronic, 83
investigations, 83–85
local, 184–185
presenting problems, 85
resolution, 82–83
systemic, 185
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
897–907
childhood, 906
clinical features, 899–900
complications, 900–901, 901f–902f
differential diagnosis, 900, 900b
disease distribution, 898f
investigations, 901–902
management, 902–905, 903b
metabolic bone disease, 907
microscopic colitis and, 907
monitoring, 904b
pathophysiology, 897–907, 898b, 
898f
perianal, 860, 919
pregnancy, 906–907, 906b
Inflammatory myopathy, 1117b
Inflammatory response, 82–86
asthma, 669
pathophysiology, 184–185
terminology, 184b
Infliximab
inflammatory bowel disease, 
903b, 904, 905b
psoriasis, 1289b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1103b
skin reactions, 1304b
Influenza, 319–320
avian, 320
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
epidemic, 138
immunisation, 149b
HIV/AIDS patients, 407
older people, 686b
incubation period, 145b, 310b
swine, 320
treatment, 161b, 162, 320
Influenza-like illness, 1123–1124
Information provision
genetic diseases, 67–68
for informed consent, 10–11
on risk, 7, 7f
truth-telling, 10
Informed consent, 10–11
Infrapatellar bursitis, 1076b
Infrared radiation, 1257b
Inhalation fever, 719b, 720
Inhalational administration,  
21–22
Inheritance, 51–53
autosomal dominant, 51–53
autosomal recessive, 53
epigenetic, 52f, 53, 54b
mitochondrial, 53
pedigrees, 51f
X-linked, 53
Inherited diseases see Genetic 
diseases
Inhibin, 737f, 756f
INO see Internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia
Inorganic micronutrients, 130–132
INR see International Normalised 
Ratio
Insect bites, 308–309, 309b
Insect stings, allergic reactions, 94
Insecticides
carbamate, 222
organophosphorus, 220–222, 
220b, 221f
pyrethroid, 224b
Insertions, 55
Insight, 234
Insomnia
fatal familial, 329b, 1211
sporadic fatal, 329b
Insulin
adverse reactions, 26b
deficiency, type 1 diabetes, 799
diabetic ketoacidosis, 813
ectopic production, 271b
hypoglycaemia, 810, 810b
manufacture and formulation, 
824–826
metabolic actions, 801b, 801f
metabolism, chronic renal  
failure
reference range, 1309b
secretion, 802f
Insulin receptor, 49b
Insulin resistance, 821
polycystic ovarian syndrome, 
764b
in pregnancy, 817
type 2 diabetes, 799, 805
Insulin resistance (metabolic) 
syndrome (syndrome X), 
589, 805
Insulin secretagogues see Oral 
hypoglycaemics
Insulin therapy
adverse reactions, 825b
delivery (systems), 826
diabetes mellitus, 822b, 824–826, 
824b
hypoglycaemia and, 810, 810b
myocardial infarction, 818
patient education, 810
regimens, 825, 825f
subcutaneous, 824–825
surgical patients, 818–820
diabetic ketoacidosis, 813
injection sites, 799b
injection technique, 824b
preparations, 825
Insulin tolerance test, 789b
Insulin-like growth factor binding 
protein (IGF-BP3), 737f
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF), 
737f, 786, 925f
Insulinomas, 785b
Insulitis, 803, 803f
Integrase, 391
Integrase inhibitors, 407b
Integrated health care, 16
Integrative medicine, 446
Intellectual abilities, assessment, 234
Intensive care units (ICUs) see 
Critical care
Intention tremor, 1145
Intercostal tube drainage, 663, 730, 
730f
Interferon
cancer therapy, 785
leukaemia, 1039b
pegylated, 954b
renal adenocarcinoma, 516
viral hepatitis, 954b, 955
HIV/AIDS patients, 400
warts, 1278–1279
see also specific interferons
Interferon-α, 74b, 162
chronic myeloid leukaemia, 
1039–1040
hepatitis B, 161b, 162, 953
hepatitis C, 161b, 162, 955
malignant melanoma, 278
pegylated, 161b, 955b
polycythaemia rubra vera, 1049
Interferon-β, multiple sclerosis, 
1191b–1192b
Interferon-γ, 74b, 1266
in coeliac disease, 880f
pulmonary fibrosis, 709
release tests, 142–143, 695, 695f
Interindividual variation in drug 
response, 23–24, 24b
Interleukin (IL)
bone remodelling, 1062b
immune response, 74b
renal adenocarcinoma, 516
Intermediate filaments, 48
Intermediate syndrome, 
organophosphate poisoning, 
222
Intermediate-density lipoproteins 
(IDL), 451
Intermittent claudication, 601
Intermittent clean self-catheterisation 
(ISC), 474, 1174b
Intermittent positive pressure 
ventilation (IPPV), 195f, 482
International Association for the 
Study of Pain (IASP), 284
International Classification of 
Disease-10 (ICD-10), 232
International Classification of 
Functioning and Disability, 
176b
International Normalised Ratio 
(INR), 926–927, 1000
International Prostate Symptom 
Score (IPPS), 514b
International system of units, 1308
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia 
(INO), 1190b
Interpersonal therapy (IPT), 242
Interphalangeal joints (IPJs)
distal, psoriatic arthritis, 1108, 
1109f
osteoarthritis, 1083f
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098f
Interstitial cells of Cajal, 845
Interstitial lung disease, 706–714
diagnosis/investigation, 707f
drug-induced, 714b
older people, 714b
rare, 715b
Interstitial nephritis see Nephritis, 
interstitial
Interstitial pneumonia, 709
desquamative, 708b
acute, 708b
idiopathic, 706–709, 708b
lymphocytic, 708b
usual, 708b, 709f
Interstitial pneumonitis
lymphocytic, 401, 404
usual, 709f
Intertrigo, 381, 1280
Interventricular septal rupture,  
597
Intervertebral discs, 1062
degeneration, 1218
herniation, 1219–1220
intra-articular, 1063
prolapsed, 541b, 659b, 1073, 1220, 
1220b
Interviewing patient, 4b
Intestines see Colon; Gut; Small 
intestine
Intra-articular discs, 1063
Intra-epidermal carcinoma see 
Bowen’s disease
Intracellular fluid (ICF), 429
Intracerebral haemorrhage, 
1238f–1239f, 1239
causes, 1239b
Intracranial hypertension
idiopathic, 1217–1218
pain, 285b
Intracranial mass lesions, 
1211–1218, 1212b
Intracranial pressure (ICP)
control, 199, 199b
raised, 1212–1213, 1212b, 1213f
headache, 285b
Intramuscular administration, 21
Intranasal administration, 21
Intraretinal microvascular 
abnormalities (IRMA), 829f
Intravenous administration, 21
Intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIgG) see 
Immunoglobulin(s), 
intravenous
Intravenous urography (IVU), 470, 
470f
medullary sponge kidney, 507f
renal colic, 508
renal stones, 508f
retroperitoneal fibrosis, 511
stone disease, 508f
stress incontinence, 473–474
Index
1344
Intrinsic factor, gastric, 871–872, 
1024–1025
Introns, 43f
Intubation
critically ill patients, 194, 194b
endotracheal, 194, 194b
nasogastric, 879b
Investigations, 4–7
normal distribution/range, 5, 5f
predictive value, 6
screening, 6–7
sensitivity and specificity, 5–6, 
6b, 6f
Involuntary movements, 1145
Iodide, 738
Iodine, 131
deficiency, 131, 752
dietary sources, 131b
radioactive
and fetal hypothyroidism, 750
thyroid cancer, 754b
thyrotoxicosis, 741–742, 749
RNI, 131b
Iodine-induced thyroid dysfunction, 
752
Iodoquinol, 164
Iomeara spp., 309b
Ion channels, drugs acting on, 19b, 
47f
Ion-exchange resins, 442–443, 443b
Ionising radiation, 102–103, 102b
Ipecacuanha, 210
IPJs see Interphalangeal joints
IPPS see International Prostate 
Symptom Score
IPPV see Intermittent positive 
pressure ventilation
Ipratropium bromide
asthma, 560
COPD, 675
IPSID see Immunoproliferative 
small intestinal disease
IPT see Interpersonal therapy
Irbesartan, 611–612
Irinotecan, 857
IRMA see Intraretinal microvascular 
abnormalities
Iron, 130–131
absorption/uptake/distribution, 
130–131, 1022, 1022f
deficiency, 131, 1001–1002, 
1021–1023
alimentary tract disorders, 867
ancylostomiasis, 310
older people, 1034b
pregnancy, 1022b
dietary sources, 131b
overload, 131
haemochromatosis, 131, 
972–973
plasma, iron deficiency anaemia, 
1023
poisoning, 209b, 216
reference values, 1312b
RNI, 131b
supplements
congestive gastropathy, 928
and constipation, 860b
pregnancy, 1022b
total iron binding capacity, 1023
Iron oxide, 717b
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), 
907–909
diagnosis, 907b–908b
diarrhoea, 907–908
management, 908–909, 908f, 909b
Irritant eczema, 1284
management, 1286
ISC see Intermittent 
self-catheterisation
Ischaemia
acute limb, 603, 603b
cerebral, 199b, 572, 1046f
critical limb, 601–602, 601f
gastrointestinal tract, 909–910
liver, 975
lower limbs, 580, 601b
myocardial see Myocardial 
ischaemia
splanchnic, 198
Ischaemic heart disease
chest pain, 539f–540f
hierarchy of systems, 98b
sibling risk, 67b
thyroxine replacement, 744–745
Ischaemic hepatitis, 198
Ischaemic nephropathy, 494
Ischaemic pain, 285b
Ischaemic penumbra, 1239
Ischiogluteal bursitis, 1075b
Islet cells
antibodies, type 1 diabetes, 803
transplantation, 826
Isocyanates, lung disease and, 715b
Isolation, 147b
Isoleucine, 114b
Isoniazid
adverse reactions, 694b
hepatotoxicity, 154b, 971b
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
overdose, 224b
and peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
poisoning, 224b
prophylactic, 153b
and pyridoxine deficiency, 129
resistance, 151–152
skin reactions, 1304b
tuberculosis
HIV/AIDS patients, 406–407, 
407b
prophylaxis, 406–407, 407b
treatment, 693, 694b
Isoprenaline, 214–215
AV block, 572–573
torsades de pointes, 571
Isosorbide dinitrate, 586b
Isosorbide mononitrate, 586b
Isospora infections
HIV/AIDS patients, 399b, 406b
prophylaxis, 406b
Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid), 
37b, 1267
Ispaghula husk, 908f, 916–917
Itch see Pruritus
ITP see Idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
Itraconazole, 159–160, 160b
acute leukaemia patients, 1038
aspergillosis, 699
blastomycosis, 386
chromoblastomycosis, 381–382
cutaneous leishmaniasis, 367
fungal infections, 159–160
histoplasmosis, 385–386
mycetoma, 382
onychomycosis, 1280
P. marneffei infection, 385–386
prophylactic, 153b, 1038
skin disease, 1267
sporotrichosis, 383
Ivabradine
angina, 587
heart failure, 552
Ivermectin
helminthic infections, 163, 371
filariases, 373–374
scabies, 1280–1281
IVU see Intravenous urography
J
Jaccoud’s arthropathy, 1110
Japanese B encephalitis, 328, 1205
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (JHR), 
335, 338, 421–422
Jaundice, 936–938, 936b
acute liver failure, 932–934, 
932b–933b
alcoholic liver disease, 958, 958b
cholestatic, 936b–937b, 937–938
cirrhosis, 943b
cytomegalovirus, 321
heart failure, 549
hepatocellular, 936–937
intensive care unit, 198
investigations, 938f
leptospirosis, 337
obstructive, 937–938, 937b
pancreatic tumours, 895
pancreatitis, 891b, 892, 893b
pre-hepatic, 936
primary biliary cirrhosis, 963
see also Hyperbilirubinaemia
JC virus, 402
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 11
Jejunum
coeliac disease see Coeliac 
disease
hormones of, 846b
short bowel syndrome, 885b
Jellyfish, 228b
JIA see Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Jiggers, 381
Jod-Basedow effect, 752
Joint capsule, 1063
Joint disease
crystal-associated, 1086–1092, 
1086b, 1086f
infection, 1094–1096
tuberculosis, 691–692
tumours, 1131–1132, 1131b
see also Arthritis; Arthropathy
Joints, 1062–1063, 1062b
aspiration, 1064
bleeding into, 1006, 1051
examination
blood disorders, 990f
febrile patient, 294f
older people, 166f
fibrocartilaginous, 1062
fibrous/fibrocartilaginous, 1062
haemophilia, 1051
hands, diabetes, 799b
hypermobility, 1134, 1134b
infection, 1094–1096
neuropathic (Charcot), 833–835
older people, 1094b
pain, 902f, 1097
prosthetic, infection, 1094, 1094b
protection, 1078
replacement, osteoarthritis, 1086
surgery, 1086
synovial, 1062–1063, 1063f
osteoarthritis, 1085
types of, 1062b
Jugular venous pressure, 548
respiration effects, 532b
Jugular venous pulse (JVP)
ascites, 923b
examination, 527b
pulmonary hypertension, 724
tricuspid valve disease, 624–625
Junin virus, 325b
Justice, 11
Juvenile absence epilepsy, 1182b
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), 
1103–1104, 1104b
adolescents, 1104b
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, 1182b
JVP see Jugular venous pulse
K
Kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis), 
362–365
HIV co-infection, 364–365
incubation period, 310b
post-kala-azar dermal 
leishmaniasis, 365
Kallmann’s syndrome, 759
Kaposi’s sarcoma, 397–398, 398f
HHV8 and, 317b, 326
treatment, 398
Kartagener’s syndrome, 648
Karyotype analysis, 57f
Kashin-Beck disease, 1084–1085
Katayama fever, 312b–313b
Kawasaki disease, 1116
Kayser-Fleischer rings, 974
Kco (transfer coefficient for carbon 
monoxide), 653b
KDIGO criteria, 481b
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, 1199b, 
1229b
Keloids, 1264–1265
Kennedy disease, 65
Keratan sulphate, 1062–1063
Keratinocytes, 1252
Keratins, 48, 1252
Keratoacanthoma, 1272, 1272f
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
Sjögren’s syndrome, 1114
Keratoderma blennorrhagica, 1108
Keratolysis, pitted, 1278
Keratomalacia, 127
Keratosis, actinic, 1266, 1271, 1271f
Kerion, 1280
Kernig’s sign, 1201
Kerosene poisoning, 224b
Keshan’s disease, 132
Ketamine, 288b
Ketoacidosis, diabetic, 804, 811–814
Ketoconazole, 159, 160b
Cushing’s syndrome, 776
cutaneous leishmaniasis, 367
mycetoma, 382
paracoccidioidomycosis, 386
shampoo, 1280
skin disease, 1267
systemic fungal infections
Ketogenesis, 801b, 801f
Ketolides, 156
Ketone bodies, 801f, 802
testing for, 807
Ketones
blood, 808, 808b
urine, 807–808
Ketonuria, 807–808
Ketoprofen, 1079b
Kidney disease see Nephropathy; 
Renal disease
Kidneys, 461–523
acid-base balance control, 444
clinical examination, 462f–463f
congenital abnormalities, 510–511
cystic disease, 505–507
drugs and, 522–523, 522b
duplex, 510
functional anatomy, 464–466, 465f
functions, 24b
tests, 466–471
imaging, 468–471
infections, 511–514
tuberculosis, 514, 692
medullary sponge, 506, 507f
potassium handling, 440, 440f
pregnancy, 520–521, 520b
single, 510
sodium handling, 430–432, 430f
stones, 507–510, 507b
clinical features, 507–510
investigations, 507, 508b
management, 509–510, 509b, 
509f
pathophysiology, 507–510
prevention, 509b
systemic conditions affecting, 
519–520
transplantation, 482b, 492–494
contraindications, 493b
cystic disease, 506
diabetics, 826, 831
SLE, 520
tumours, 515–519
inherited, 519
urothelial, 516–517, 517f
water handling, 436–437
see also Renal
Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodule, 830f
Kinases, cyclin-dependent, 263
Klebsiella spp., 137f, 512
Klebsiella granulomatis, 424b
Klebsiella oxytoca, 308
Klebsiella pneumoniae infection, 687
Index
1345
Klinefelter’s syndrome, 766
genetics, 56b
Knee
osteoarthritis, 1083–1084, 1083f
pain, 1075–1076, 1076b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098
Knudsen two-hit hypothesis, 59–60
Köbner phenomenon, 1289–1290, 
1290f
Koch’s postulates, 99, 134b, 346
Koilonychia, 1298, 1298f
Koplik’s spots, 314, 315f
Korsakoff’s syndrome/psychosis, 
128, 1162
Krebs (citric acid) cycle, 128
Krukenberg tumour, 878
Kupffer cells, 74, 927
Kuru, 329b, 1211
Kussmaul respiration, 484
Kussmaul’s sign, 545b
Kwashiorkor, 120–121
Kyasanur forest disease, 309b, 324, 
325b
Kyphoplasty, 1080b, 1125, 1125b
Kyphoscoliosis, 644f
thoracic, 731
Kyphosis, 114–115, 166f, 692f
ankylosing spondylitis, 1105
L
L-dopa see Levodopa
Labetalol
aortic dissection, 607
hypertension, 612
malignant, 612
Laboratory investigations, 
biochemical, 428–429, 428b
Laboratory values, 1308
Labyrinthitis, 1186
Lactase deficiency, 887
Lactate
blood, measurement in critically 
ill patients, 187
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
AKI, 480b
empyema, 663
hypothyroidism, 741b
megaloblastic anaemia, 1003f, 
1024b
pancreatitis, 890b
pleural effusion, 275–276
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Lactation, nutrition in, 125b
Lactic acidosis, 445
diabetics, 823
Lactitol, 917b
Lactobacillus spp., 137f
Lactoferrin, 1068
Lactose, refeeding diet, 122b
Lactose hydrogen (H2) breath test, 
851b
Lactose intolerance, 112–113, 887–888
Lactulose, 917b
hepatic encephalopathy 
management, 942
hydrogen breath test, 883
variceal bleeding, 946b
Lacunar infarctions, 1174b, 1237
Lacunar syndrome, 1241f
LAD see Left anterior descending 
artery
LADA see Latent autoimmune 
diabetes in adults
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome (LEMS), 271b, 
272, 1194b, 1227–1228, 1227f
Lamina densa, 1252
Lamina lucida, 1252
Laminins, 48
Lamivudine (3TC), 407b
resistance, 408
viral hepatitis, 161b, 162, 953
HIV/AIDS patients, 400
Lamotrigine, 1184b
skin reactions, 1304b
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, 715b
Langerhans cells, 1252
Language
disorders, 1170b
spoken, 4, 19
Lanreotide, 793
Laparoscopy
ascites, 940
infertility, 762
lower abdominal pain, 418
pyrexia of unknown origin, 
298–299
tuberculosis, 691
Lapdap, 356
Laron dwarfism, 786b
Larva currens, 370
Larva migrans
cutaneous, 375–376, 375f
visceral, 311–312
Laryngeal nerve, recurrent, palsy, 
748b, 753
Laryngitis
acid, 680
chronic, 727, 727b
cough, 654–655, 654b
Laryngoscopy, 651, 727
Larynx
obstruction, 728, 728b
paralysis, 727
Lasègue’s sign, 1219
Laser therapy
benign prostatic hyperplasia,  
515
bleeding control, 848f
bronchial carcinoma, 704
carbon dioxide, 1269
colorectal cancer, 915
diabetic retinopathy, 828
hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia, 1049
hypertrichosis, 1297
oesophageal carcinoma, 871
rosacea, 1283
skin disease, 1269
Lassa fever, 324, 325b
incubation period, 145b, 325b
Latent autoimmune diabetes in 
adults (LADA), 810
Latex agglutination test, 383
Lavage
bronchoalveolar, 711
gastric, 210, 210b
Law see Legal issues
Lawrence-Moon-Biedl syndrome, 
116
Laxatives, 917b
body packers, 219, 219f
misuse, 917
LBBB see Left bundle branch block
LCAT see Lecithin cholesterol acyl 
transferase
LDH see Lactate dehydrogenase
LDL see Low-density lipoprotein
Lead
poisoning, 224b
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Lead pipe rigidity, 1145
Leão, spreading depression of, 
1176–1177
Learning difficulties, 66
congenital heart disease and,  
631
Leber’s hereditary optic 
neuropathy, 1229
Lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase 
(LCAT), 452
deficiency, 455–456, 456b
Lectin
mannose-binding
deficiency, 79
pathway, 75f
pathway, 75
Leflunomide, 1101b, 1102
Left anterior descending artery (LAD)
coronary circulation, 529f
occlusion, 538f
stenosis, 538f
Left atrial dilatation, 535, 566–567
Left bundle branch block (LBBB), 
573, 573b
Left main coronary artery, 529f
occlusion, 529, 589b
Left ventricular dilatation, 535, 
618–619
Left ventricular function, 598
Left ventricular hypertrophy, 622f
Legal issues, 13–14
artificial nutritional support, 124, 
124b
definition of law, 14b
psychiatry, 257
Legionella spp., 148b, 153b, 310b
Legionella pneumophila infection, 139, 
151b
Legs
examination
cardiovascular disease, 526f
diabetes mellitus, 798f, 799b
endocrine disease, 734f
febrile injecting drug user, 300f
HIV/AIDS, 388f
liver and biliary disease, 922f
musculoskeletal disease, 1058f
oedema, 478
restless, 485–486, 1187–1188, 
1188b
ulcers, 1262–1263, 1262b
arterial, 1263
tropical, 333
venous, 1263, 1263f
see also Foot
Leigh’s syndrome, 46, 1199b
Leishman-Donovan bodies 
(amastigotes), 363f
Leishmania, 362
life cycle, 362f–363f
Viannia subgenus, 366–367
Leishmania aethiopica, 366b
Leishmania amazonensis, 366
Leishmania brasiliensis, 366f
Leishmania chagasi, 362–363
Leishmania donovani, 362–363
Leishmania guyanensis, 366
Leishmania infantum, 362–363, 366f
Leishmania major, 366b, 366f
Leishmania mexicana, 366, 366f
Leishmania tropica, 366b, 366f
Leishmaniasis, 309b, 362–367
cutaneous, 365–366, 366b, 366f
incubation period, 145b, 310b
HIV co-infection, 364–365
mucosal, 366–367
post-kala-azar dermal, 365
transmission, 362
visceral (kala-azar), 362–365, 363f
HIV co-infection, 364–365
incubation period, 145b, 310b
Leishmanin antigen skin test (LST), 
367
Lemierre’s syndrome, 687
LEMS see Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome
Lens opacification, diabetics, 830
Lentigines, 1274
Lentigo maligna, 1273
Leprosy, 347–350, 347f
borderline, 349
clinical features, 347–349, 348b, 
348f
control, 350
epidemiology/transmission, 347
incubation period, 145b, 347
investigations, 349
lepromatous, 348b, 349
management, 349–350, 349b
multibacillary, 349b
pathogenesis, 347
paucibacillary, 349b
prevention, 350
prevention of disability
prognosis, 350
pure neural, 349
reactions in, 349, 349b
tuberculoid, 348b, 349
Leptin, 110–111
Leptosphaera senegalensis, 382
Leptospira interrogans, 336
Leptospirosis, 309b, 336–338, 337f
aseptic meningitis, 337
bacteraemic, 337
icteric (Weil’s disease), 337
pulmonary syndrome, 337
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, 1088
Leucine, 114b
Leucocyte adhesion deficiencies, 79
Leucocytes see White cells
Leucocytosis, 1005
hepatobiliary disease, 929, 956
neutrophil see Neutrophilia
Leucoencephalopathy, progressive 
multifocal, 402, 402f, 1207
Leucoerythroblastic anaemia, 
1048–1049
Leuconychia, striate, 1297
Leucopenia, 1004–1005
hepatobiliary disease, 929
respiratory disease, 686, 689–690
Leucoplakia see Leukoplakia
Leukaemias, 1035–1041
acute, 1036–1039
infection in, 1038
investigations, 1036, 1036f
management, 1036–1038, 
1037b, 1037f
prognosis, 1038–1039, 1038b
acute lymphoblastic, 1036f, 1038
acute myeloid, 1036f
acute promyelocytic, 1036b, 1039
aetiology, 1035–1036
chronic lymphocytic, 1040–1041, 
1040b–1041b
chronic myeloid, 1039–1040
genetics, 1039
epidemiology, 1035–1036
hairy cell, 1041
HSCT, 1038
incidence, 262f
prolymphocytic, 1041
risk factors, 1035b
T-cell, 1035b
terminology/classification, 
1035–1036, 1036b
Leukoplakia, oral hairy, 398
Leukotriene receptor antagonists, 
asthma, 669–671, 670f
Leukotrienes, 75, 89b
Levetiracetam, 1182b, 1184b
in pregnancy, 1185b
Levodopa
adverse reactions
chorea, 1167b
dark urine, 475b
Parkinson’s disease, 1196
Levofloxacin, 151b, 157b
plague, 338–339
Levomepromazine, 290b, 291
Lewy body dementia, 252
Leydig cell tumours, 758b
LFTs see Liver function tests
LGV see Lymphogranuloma 
venereum
LH see Luteinising hormone
Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 67, 267b
Libman-Sacks endocarditis, 1111
Lice, 309b, 1281
bartonellosis, 352b
body, 1281
head, 1281
pubic, 1281
relapsing fever, 336, 336f
typhus fever, 351, 351b
Lichen planus, 1289–1290, 1290f
nails in, 1289–1290, 1298
rash, 416b, 1257b
vulval pain/itch, 418b
Index
1346
Lichen sclerosus, 416b, 418b
Lichen simplex, 1285
Liddle’s syndrome, 441
Lidocaine
arrhythmias, 570, 574, 575b
effect of old age, 36b
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
Life course, 98–99, 102b
Life expectancy, 168, 168b
Life support
advanced, 558–559, 559f
basic, 558, 558f
cardiac arrest, 558–559
Lifestyle changes
chronic renal failure, 488
dyslipidaemia management, 456, 
458
hypertension management, 534
musculoskeletal disorders, 
1077–1078
myocardial infarction, 598
obesity, 118
Lifestyle factors
ageing, 169
atherosclerotic vascular disease
cancer, 260–262
diabetes mellitus, 811b, 820–821
weight reduction, 821
Ligaments, 1063
Ligand assay, 428b
Lightheadedness see Presyncope
Lignocaine see Lidocaine
Limb girdle dystrophy, 1228b
Limbic encephalitis, 1194b
Limbic system, 1143
Limbs
lower see Legs
upper see Arms
Linagliptin, 824
Lincomycin, 156
Lincosamides, 156
mechanism of action, 150b
Lindane, 224b
Linear accelerators, 850
Linear IgA disease, 1293b, 1294
Linezolid, 151b, 159
pneumonia, 686
in pregnancy, 154b
Linitis plastica, 878
Linoleic acid, 113
Linolenic acid, 113
LIP see Lymphocytic interstitial 
pneumonia
Lipaemia retinalis, 454f
Lipase, 844b
Lipid emulsion therapy, 211
Lipid peroxidation, 169
Lipid-lowering therapy
chronic renal disease, 488, 488b
coronary heart disease, 588
myocardial infarction, 598
diabetes mellitus, 811
dyslipidaemia, 456
see also individual drugs
Lipids
blood
diabetes, 801b, 805, 809
disorders of, 450–458
and cardiovascular disease, 
452–453
complex, disorders of 
metabolism, 450
dietary, 450–452, 452f
endogenous, 451–452, 452f
lowering, chronic renal failure, 
488, 488b
measurement, 453
metabolism, 450–453, 926
disorders of, 450, 451b, 1229b
effects of insulin, 801b
plasma, target levels, 456
transport, 452f
see also Fat
Lipodermatosclerosis, 1263
Lipodystrophy, 409, 409f
Lipohypertrophy, 799f
Lipolysis, 111–112
Lipomas
skin, 1275
small intestine, 888
Lipoprotein lipase, 450–451, 452f
deficiency, 454b
Lipoproteins
and cardiovascular disease see 
Atherosclerosis
disorders of, 450–458
high-density (HDL), 1310b
intermediate-density (IDL), 451
low-density (LDL), 48, 451
structure, 451f
very low-density (VLDL), 451
Liquid nitrogen cryotherapy see 
Cryotherapy
Liquorice misuse/excess intake, 441
Liraglutide, 824
Lisch nodule, 1216b
Lisinopril
heart failure, 552b
hypertension, 611
Listeria monocytogenes
bacterial meningitis, 1202b, 1204b
listeriosis, 339
Listeriosis, 339
in pregnancy, 314b, 339
Lisuride, Parkinson’s disease, 1197b
Lithium, 241b
bipolar disorder, 245
cluster headache, 1177
dilution, cardiac output 
measurement, 187
drug interactions, 28b, 29
effect of renal insufficiency, 36b
and hypothyroidism, 743b
nephrotoxicity, 446b, 504b, 522b
plasma concentrations, 39b
poisoning, 209b, 214
in pregnancy, 256b
prescribing, 38b
skin reactions, 1304b
teratogenesis, 245
therapeutic monitoring, 39b
Lithotripsy, 985
Livedo reticularis, 1111f
Liver
abnormal size, 923b, 938b
see also Hepatomegaly
abscess, 956–957, 956b, 970
amoebic, 368, 957
older people, 980b
pyogenic, 936, 956
biopsy, 931–932, 931b
hepatocellular carcinoma, 968
non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease, 961
blood supply, 924f, 925–926
cells see Hepatocytes
critically ill patients, 198
cysts, 380–381
drugs and, 970–972
fatty
alcoholic, 958, 958b
microvesicular, 971, 978
non-alcoholic, 959–961, 960f
pregnancy, 978
fibrosis, 971b, 972
congenital, 981
functional anatomy/physiology, 
924–928
functions, 926–928, 926f
HIV infection and, 400
ischaemia, 975
nodular regenerative hyperplasia, 
977
paracetamol-induced damage, 
212, 934b
resection, 968
‘shock’, 198
structure, 924, 924f
transplantation, 978–980
acute liver failure, 934–935
alcoholic liver disease, 959
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 976
cirrhosis, 978b
complications, 979
hepatic encephalopathy, 942
hepatitis, 955
hepatocellular carcinoma, 968
indications/contraindications, 
978–979, 978b, 979f
living donors, 979
orthotopic, 966
primary biliary cirrhosis, 964
prognosis, 979–980
sclerosing cholangitis, 966
split, 979
viral hepatitis, 953
Wilson’s disease, 974
see also Hepatic
Liver capsule pain, 285b
Liver disease, 921–988
abdominal signs, 923
acute, 932f
alcoholic, 957–959
fatty, 959–961
liver function tests, 930b
older people, 980b
autoimmune, 961–966
bleeding, 1054
chronic, 929b, 932f
cirrhosis see Cirrhosis
clinical examination, 922f, 923b
cystic/fibropolycystic, 970
decompensated, 944
drug-induced, 930b, 970–972
effect on drug dosages, 24b, 36b
HIV-related, 400, 955
hydatid cysts, 380–381, 956–957, 
956f
infections, 948–957
inherited, 972–975
investigation, 928–932, 928b
older people, 980b
pregnancy, 977–978
prescribing in, 35b, 36
presenting problems, 932–942, 932b
pruritus, 1259b
renal involvement, 519
tumours, 966–970
benign, 970
incidence, 262f
malignant, 967–969
metastatic, 274–275
secondary, 969
vascular, 971, 975–977
see also specific diseases
Liver failure
acute, 932–935, 932f
adverse prognostic criteria, 
934b
causes, 932f–933f, 933–935
classification, 933b
complications, 934b
investigations, 934, 934b
management, 934–935, 934b
chronic, 932b, 932f, 944b
effect on drug dosages, 24b, 36b
hepatic encephalopathy, 933b
Liver flukes, 266b, 312b, 378
Liver function, 24b
Liver function tests (LFTs), 928–929, 
930b
abnormal, 935–936, 936b
asymptomatic, 935f
HIV infection, 956b
alcoholic liver disease, 929b
biliary obstruction, 929b
gastrointestinal bleeding, 850
hepatitis, 929b, 955
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, 
961
in pregnancy, 977b
LMWH (low molecular weight 
heparin) see Heparin, low 
molecular weight
Loa loa, 312b, 372b, 373
Loading dose, 23
Locked-in syndrome, 1161
Lockjaw, 1210
Locus heterogeneity, 59
LoD score, 63
Lofexidine, 255
Löfgren’s syndrome, 710–711
Loiasis, 312b, 373–374
Loin pain, 471
Lomotil, 903b
Long QT syndrome, 571, 571b
Loop of Henle, 431, 464–466
Looser’s zones, 1127, 1127f
Loperamide
faecal incontinence, 918
inflammatory bowel disease, 903b
and intussusception, 308
irritable bowel syndrome, 908f
radiation enteritis, 886
short bowel syndrome, 885
small bowel bacterial 
overgrowth, 883
Lopinavir, 407b
prophylactic, 153b
Loratadine, 725, 1291
Lorazepam
disturbed behaviour, 237f
dyspnoea, 289
epilepsy, 1159b
palliative care, 289
Loricrin, 1252
Losartan, 552b
Loss-of-function (LOF) mutations, 
58
Lotions, 1265b
Low back pain
causes, 1072b
clinical features, 1073b
investigations, 1062–1063
management, 1074b
mechanical, 1073b
radicular, 1073b
Low birth weight, and disease 
susceptibility, 99
Low molecular weight heparin see 
Heparin, low molecular 
weight
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL), 48, 
451
Low-resource settings, 9
Lower limbs
acute ischaemia, 580, 601b
chronic arterial disease, 600–602, 
601b
examination, diabetes mellitus, 
798f, 799b
see also Foot; Leg
LSD see Lysergic acid diethylamide
LST see Leishmanin antigen skin 
test
Lubiprostone, 909
Lujo virus, 324
Lumbar canal stenosis, 1220
Lumbar disc herniation, 1219–1220
Lumbar puncture, 1153–1154
meningitis, 1202–1203, 1205
stroke, 1236
viral encephalitis, 1206
Lumbar root compression, 1219b
Lumbosacral plexopathy, 1226
Lumefantrine, malaria, 163, 356
Lumps, skin, 1256–1257
Lung cancer, 699–706, 699b
aetiology, 266b, 267, 699
finger clubbing, 271
incidence, 262f
metastatic, 274
mortality, 700f
occupational, 720
older people, 730b
pleural effusion, 662b
secondary tumours, 704–705
staging, 702–703
see also Bronchial carcinoma
Lung disease
alveolar
alveolitis see Alveolitis
microlithiasis, 715b
proteinosis, 714b–715b
Index
1347
diffuse parenchymal, 706–711
drug-induced, 714, 714b
dust exposure and, 719–720,  
719b
fibrosis see Pulmonary fibrosis
HIV-related, 400–401
infections, 681–699
interstitial, 706–714
for detailed entry see Interstitial 
lung disease
rare, 715b
investigations, 649–654
obstructive, 666–681
older people, 677b
occupational, 715–721
presenting problems, 654–666
radiotherapy-induced, 714
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
tumours, 699–706, 699b
secondary, 704–705
see also Bronchial carcinoma
vascular, 721–725
Lung flukes, 312b
Lung function monitoring, 
ventilated patients, 188, 188f
Lung function tests see Pulmonary 
function tests
Lung injury, transfusion-associated 
(TRALI), 1014
Lung(s)
abscess, 109f, 297f
anatomy, 646f–647f
biopsy
bronchial carcinoma, 702
interstitial disease, 706–707
pleural effusion, 661
cavitation, 650b
collapse
bronchial obstruction and,  
650f
upper lobe, 644f
consolidation, 650b
defences, 648–649, 648f
fibrosis see Pulmonary fibrosis
gas exchange, 646–647, 647f
irradiation damage, 714
mechanics, 647–649
near-drowning victims, 108
shrinking, 712, 712b
transplantation, 665–666, 665b
volumes, measurement, 653
Lupus, drug-induced, 1132b,  
1304b
Lupus anticoagulant, 999–1000
Lupus erythematosus
cutaneous, 1260b, 1300
bullous, 1293b
systemic see Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Lupus nephritis, 499b–500b
Lupus pernio, 710f, 711
Luteinising hormone (LH)
deficiency, 787b
reference range, 1309b
Lyme borreliosis (disease), 309b, 
334–336, 335f, 1209
myopericarditis, 335
Lymecycline, 1267
Lymph nodes, 76, 76f
biopsy, 1042f
diphtheria, 345
examination, 261b
cancer, 260f–261f
trypanosomiasis, 359
tuberculosis, 690–691
Lymphadenopathy, 991b, 1005–1006
causes, 1005b
HIV-associated, 395–396
persistent generalised, 232b, 388f, 
395–396
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099–1100
Lymphangiectasia, intestinal, 887
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis, 715b
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis, 705
Lymphatic filariasis, 372–373
Lymphatics, 77
Lymphocytes, 992f, 995–996, 1004f
count, 1312b
older people, 1001b
see also B lymphocytes; T 
lymphocytes
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia 
(LIP), 708b
Lymphocytosis, 1005
causes, 1004b
infectious mononucleosis, 310b, 
320
Lymphogranuloma venereum 
(LGV), 424b
Lymphoic interstitial pneumonitis, 
401
Lymphoid organs, 76–78
Lymphoid tissue
gastrointestinal tract, 266b, 
843–844
mucosa-associated (MALT), 76
Lymphomas, 1041–1045
B cell, 879–880, 1272
CNS, HIV-associated, 402–403, 
403f
cutaneous, 1272
gastric, 879–880
gastrointestinal tract, 889
HIV-associated, 395–396, 395b, 
402–403, 403f, 405
Hodgkin’s disease, 405b, 
1042–1043
MALT, 266b, 1043
mantle cell, 1043
non-Hodgkin’s, 262f, 1043–1045, 
1044b, 1044f
primary CNS, 1192
T cell, 1043
cutaneous, 1264
enteropathy-associated, 882
thyroid, 755
treatment, 1044–1045
Lymphopenia, 1004–1005
causes, 1004b
HIV infection, 393–394
sarcoidosis, 711
Lymphoproliferative syndrome, 
autoimmune, 80
Lyonisation, 1029, 1051
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 
218
Lysine, 114b
Lysolecithin, 983
Lysosomal storage diseases, 450,  
451b
Lysosomes, 433–434
Lysozyme, 72–73
M
M-CSF see Macrophage colony 
stimulating factor
M-proteins see Monoclonal proteins
MAC (Mycobacterium avium 
complex)
McArdle’s disease, 450b
McCune-Albright syndrome, 59, 
1131
Machado-Joseph disease, 65
genetics, 56b
Machupo virus, 325b
Macrocytosis, 999f, 1021f
Macroglobulinaemia, 
Waldenström’s, 1045
Macrolides, 151b, 156
mechanism of action, 150b
Macronutrients see Energy-yielding 
nutrients
Macrophage colony stimulating 
factor (M-CSF), 992–993, 993f
Macrophages, 74
alveolar, 385, 711
foamy, 514, 883
functions of, 74b
gastrointestinal tract, 843–844
Macroprolactin, 791
Macroprolactinaemia, 790b, 791
Macroprolactinoma, 789–791
Macules
ash leaf, 1302f
café au lait, 1216f
definition, 1251b
Maculopathy, diabetic, 830
Maddrey’s score, 959
Madopar, 1196
Madura foot, 382
Madurella grisea, 382
Madurella mycetomatis, 382
Magic (hallucinogenic) mushrooms, 
254
Magnesium, 132
cardiotoxic drug poisoning, 215
dietary sources, 131b
intravenous
acute severe asthma, 672
arrhythmias, 191
tetany, 769b
torsades de pointes, 211b
metabolism, disorders of, 429b, 
447–448
refeeding diet, 122b
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
RNI, 131b
Magnesium ammonium phosphate 
stones, 507b
Magnesium chloride, 448
Magnesium salts, 448, 917b
Magnesium sulphate
asthma, 672f
hypomagnesaemia, 448
pre-eclampsia, 521
ventricular tachycardia, 211b
Magnetic resonance angiography 
(MRA)
nervous system, 1149b
renal artery stenosis, 494–495, 
495f
stroke, 1240b
urinary tract disease, 469–470
Magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography 
see MRCP
Magnetic resonance imaging see 
MRI
Magnetic stimulation, 1153
Magnifying glass, skin examination, 
1254–1256
Main d’accoucheur, 768
Main en lorgnette, 1108
Major histocompatibility complex, 
803–804, 1096, 1286
Malabsorption, 857–858, 857b, 858f
after gastric resection, 850
after ileal resection, 884
biliary cirrhosis, 964
chronic pancreatitis, 894
cystic fibrosis, 681
disorders causing, 880–882
investigation, 858, 858f, 859b
iron deficiency anaemia, 1022
older people, 883b
pathophysiology, 858
Maladie de Roger, 634
Malar flush, 526f
Malar rash, 1110f
Malaria, 304b, 309b, 353–358
algid, 357b
cerebral, 357b
chemoprophylaxis, 153b, 357–358
clinical features, 355, 356f
complications, 357b
distribution, 353f
drug-resistant, 353, 356
exchange transfusion, 357
haemolysis, 357
incubation period, 145b, 310b, 354
investigations, 355
pathogenesis, 354–355
pathology, 354–355
in pregnancy, 314b
prevention, 357–358, 358b
sickle-cell anaemia, 1032
treatment, 163, 356–357
Malarone, 356
Malassezia spp., 137f
Malassezia furfur, 1280
Malathion
louse infestation, 1281
scabies, 1280–1281
Malignant disease see Cancer
Malignant hyperpyrexia, 51–53
Malingering, 247
Mallory-Weiss syndrome, 253b, 
541b, 659b
Mallory-Weiss tears, 854f
Mallory’s hyaline, 958b
Malnutrition
hospital patients, 122–124, 122f
see also Undernutrition
MALT lymphomas, 266b, 1043
MALT (mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissue), 843–844
Malt worker’s lung, 719b
Mammalian target of rapamycin see 
mTOR
Mammary artery grafts, 588
Mammography, 279, 762–763, 912
Manganese, 132
Mania, 235–236, 244–245
Manipulation, 15
low back pain, 1073
Mannitol, 197
as osmotic diuretic, 199b, 435
Mannose-binding lectin deficiency
Mansonella perstans, 312b, 372b, 
375
Mansonella streptocerca, 372b
Mantle cell lymphoma, 1043
Mantoux test, 695b
MAOIs see Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors
MAP see Mean arterial pressure
Maple bark stripper’s lung, 719b
Marasmus, 120–121
Maraviroc, 407b
Marburg disease, 324, 325b
March haemoglobulinuria, 1031
Marche à petits pas, 172b, 1168
Marcus Gunn pupil, 1172b
Marfan’s syndrome, 603–604
cardiovascular system
aortic aneurysm, 604f
aortic dissection, 605, 605b
mitral valve prolapse, 618
congenital defects, 629–630
joint hypermobility, 1134
mutation, 58, 603–604
Marine envenoming/poisoning, 
228b–229b
Marjolin’s ulcer, 1095–1096, 1263
MARS see Molecular adsorbent 
recirculating system
Mass spectroscopy, 428b
inductively coupled, 428b
Mast cells, 75
allergy, 89b
tryptase measurement, 90
Mastectomy, 280
prophylactic, 67
Matrix metalloproteinases, 580
Mayaro virus, 329, 1095
MC4R see Melanocortin receptor 
mutations
MCGN see Mesangiocapillary 
glomerulonephritis
MCH see Mean cell haemoglobin
MCU see Micturating 
cystourethrography
MCV see Mean cell volume
MDMA see Ecstasy
MDS see Myelodysplastic syndrome
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 185, 
607
Mean cell haemoglobin (MCH), 
1312b
Mean cell volume (MCV), 998, 999f
alcohol misuse, 240, 929
anaemia, 1021f
reference values, 1312b
Index
1348
Measles, 314–315, 315f
incubation period, 145b, 310b, 314
period of infectivity, 144b
pregnancy, 314b
rash, 315f
subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis and, 314
Mebendazole
helminthic infections, 162, 
370–372, 375
hydatid cysts, 957
Meckel’s diverticulum, 851b, 887
bleeding from, 856b
Meckel’s scan, 851b
Meconium ileus, 895
Medial fibroplasia, 494
Medial longitudinal fasciculus 
(MLF), 1146
Median nerve
entrapment, 1224b
palsy, 832
Mediastinoscopy, 706
Mediastinum, 705f
assessment, 651–652
tumours, 705–706, 705b, 706f
Medical ethics see Ethics
Medical interview, 4b
Medical law see Legal issues
Medical practice see Good medical 
practice
Medically unexplained somatic 
symptoms, 236, 236b, 236f
general management, 246–247, 
246b
older people, 238b
Medication errors, 29–30
causes, 30b, 30f
response to, 29–30
types of, 29b
Medication overuse headache, 1177
Medicines management, 30–32
Medroxyprogesterone, 760
Medullary cystic kidney disease, 
506–507
Medullary sponge kidney disease, 
506, 507f
Medulloblastoma, 911–912
Mefenamic acid, overdose, 213
Mefloquine, malaria, 356
Megacolon, 918
toxic, 900
Megakaryoblasts, 993f, 996–997
Megakaryocytes, 992f–993f
Megaloblastic anaemia, 1024–1026
clinical features, 1024b
investigations, 1024b
management, 1026
Megaloblastic crisis, 1028
Megaureter, 510
Megestrol, cancer cachexia, 290
Meglitinides, 822b, 823
Meglumine antimoniate, 164, 364
Meiosis, 50–51, 50f
Meissner’s plexus, 845
Melaena, 854
Melanocortin receptor (MC4R) 
mutations, 116
Melanocytes, 1252
Melanocytic naevus (mole), 
1274–1275, 1275f
Melanoma, 1272–1274
ABCDE rule, 1257b
acral lentiginous, 1273
amelanotic, 269
diagnosis, 1257b
epidemiology, 267b
incidence, 262f
lentigo maligna, 1273
management, 1273–1274, 1274b
nodular, 1273
subungual, 1273
superficial spreading, 1273, 1273f
Melanoptysis, 716–717
Melanosis coli, 917
Melarsoprol, trypanosomiasis, 164, 
359b, 360
MELAS, 1199b, 1229b
MELD (Model for End-stage Liver 
Disease), 944–945, 944b, 978b
Meleney’s gangrene, 305b
Melioidosis, 340
Meloxicam, 1079b
Melphalan, 266b, 1047
Memantine, 251
Membrane attack complex, 75, 75f
Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis (MPGN), 
499b–500b, 501
Membranous nephropathy, 497f, 
522b
Memory, 1142–1143
Alzheimer’s disease, 252
assessment, 234
disorders of, 246, 1142b
long-term, 234, 252
loss, 250–251, 402
short-term, 234, 253
MEN see Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia
Ménétrier’s disease, 872
Ménière’s disease, 1186
MENIN, 795
Meningioma, 1215
Meningism, 1201
Meningitis, 1201–1205
aseptic, 337, 1205
bacterial, 1202–1204, 1202b, 1203f
cerebrospinal fluid in, 1203
prevention, 1203–1204, 1204b
treatment, 1204b
causes, 1202b
Coccidioides, 1202b
cryptococcal, 403, 1205
fungal, 1205
headache, 1202–1203
herpes simplex, 326
HIV/AIDS patients, 403
immunisation, 1203–1204
Listeria, 1202b
malignant, 1205
mumps, 319
protozoa and parasites, 1205
recurrent aseptic, 1205
tuberculous, 403, 1204–1205, 
1205b
cerebrospinal fluid in, 1205
viral, 1201–1202
cerebrospinal fluid in, 1202
Meningococcal infection, 151b, 304b
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
immunisation, 1203–1204
incubation period, 145b, 310b
meningitis, 1202–1204, 1202b, 
1204b
prevention, 1203–1204
rash, 1203
treatment, 1204b
see also Meningitis
Meningococcal septicaemia, 295f, 
1203b
Meningoencephalitis, 321
Menopause, 757
male, 766b
premature, 759
Menorrhagia, 1004
Menstruation, 757f
Mental handicap, 66
Mental State Examination, 233–234
Mental test, older people, 234
Menthol, topical, 1260
Mepacrine, hyperpigmentation 
from, 1296b
Meptazinol, 1078
Meralgia paraesthetica, 1224b
Mercaptopurine
acute leukaemia, 1037b
inflammatory bowel disease, 903b
Mercury
adverse effects on kidney, 446b, 
499b–500b
poisoning, 210b, 446b
Merkel cells, 1252
Meropenem, 151b, 154b, 155f
melioidosis, 340
neutropenic fever, 274
nocardiosis, 341
pneumonia, 686
in pregnancy, 154b
MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy with 
ragged red fibres), 1199b, 
1229b
Mesalazine
contraindication, renal 
insufficiency, 502b
inflammatory bowel disease, 860, 
900–901, 903b
Mesangiocapillary 
glomerulonephritis (MCGN), 
499b–500b, 501
Mesenteric ischaemia, chronic, 910
Mesna, 1112
Mesothelioma, 262f, 719
Meta-iodobenzyl guanidine (MIBG) 
scintigraphy, 781
Metabolic acidosis, 445–446, 445b
acute mountain sickness, 107
critically ill patients, 183f
diabetic ketoacidosis, 812
differential diagnosis, 658b
hypothermia, 104–105
malaria, 357b
near-drowning, 108
poisoning, 209b
renal failure
acute, 479
chronic, 484
renal replacement therapy, 
197b
starvation, 121
Metabolic alkalosis, 445b, 446–447, 
447f
Metabolic disorders
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1132–1133
skin manifestations, 1301–1302
Metabolic (insulin resistance) 
syndrome, 589, 805
obesity and, 115b
Metabolic myopathies, 1229–1230
Metabolic rate, critically ill patients, 
201b
Metabolism, 22
first-pass, 21
interactions, 28–29
phase I, 22
phase II, 22
Metadrenalines, 1310b
Metalloproteinases, 264f, 580
Metamyelocytes, 993f, 995
Metapneumovirus, 328
Metastasis see various cancer types
Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint 
pain, 1070f
Metavir scoring system, hepatitis C, 
955
Metered-dose inhalers, 670f
Metformin, 821–822, 822b
acidosis, 209b, 216
effect of renal impairment, 36b
mechanism of action, 822–823
overdose, 209b, 216
polycystic ovary syndrome, 764
in pregnancy, 817
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
Methadone
chronic pain management, 287
misuse, 217b, 219
withdrawal, 20b
Methaemoglobin, 209b
Methanol poisoning, 209b, 211b, 
222–223
Methicillin see Meticillin
Methimazole, 749
Methionine, 114b, 212
Methotrexate, 1267
acute leukaemia, 1037b
drug interactions, 28b
eczema, 1267
hepatotoxicity, 36b, 971b
inflammatory bowel disease, 860, 
897b, 903b
musculoskeletal disorders, 712
myositis, 1115
psoriatic arthritis, 1109
rheumatoid arthritis, 1101b, 
1102
vasculitis, 1117–1118
pregnancy, 906b, 1101b
psoriasis, 1267, 1289b
renal toxicity, 36b
and respiratory disease, 714b
sarcoidosis, 711
SLE, 1110
Methyl-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP), parkinsonism and, 
1195b
Methylbenzethonium chloride, 367
Methylcellulose, 750–751, 917b
3,4-Methylenedioxy-
methamphetamine (MDMA) 
see Ecstasy
Methylphenidate, 1187
Methylprednisolone
acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis, 1193
Graves’ disease, 750–751
histoplasmosis, 385–386
inflammatory bowel disease, 904, 
904b
liver transplant patients, 979
multiple sclerosis, 1191b
myositis, 1115
P. marneffei infection, 385–386
rheumatic disease, 1102
SLE, 1112
transverse myelitis, 1193
Methysergide
cluster headache, 1177
nephrotoxicity, 511
and respiratory disease, 714b
Meticillin, 154b
Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA), 330–331
Metoclopramide
critically ill patients, 198
and hyperprolactinaemia, 790b
mechanism of action, 290b
myocardial infarction, 593–594
nausea and vomiting, 290b, 1177
overdose, 211b
Metoprolol, 575b
angina, 586
unstable, 594
arrhythmias, 576
hypertension, 612
Metronidazole, 151b, 158
amoebiasis, 368
balanitis, 416b
cerebral abscess, 1208b
cholecystitis, 984
choledocholithiasis, 985
Clostridium difficile infection, 344
diverticulitis, 916–917
gas gangrene, 305
genital infections, 417b
giardiasis, 369
Helicobacter pylori eradication, 874
inflammatory bowel disease, 860
liver abscess, 368, 956
necrotising fasciitis, 305
neutropenic fever, 274
and peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
PID, 418
pneumonia, 687
in pregnancy, 154b
prophylactic, 153b
rosacea, 1258
small bowel bacterial 
overgrowth, 883
tetanus, 1210b
tropical ulcer, 333
Metyrapone, 776, 777b
Mevalonate kinase deficiency, 85
Mexiletine, 574, 575b
Index
1349
MGUS see Monoclonal gammopathy 
of uncertain significance
MI see Myocardial infarction
MIBG see Meta-iodobenzyl 
guanidine (MIGB) 
scintigraphy
Micafungin, 160b
Micelles, mixed, 841–842
Miconazole, 160b, 1267
erythrasma, 1278
Microalbuminuria, 476–477
diabetes mellitus, 831, 831b
Microaneurysms, retinal, 609
Microangiopathy, diabetic, 826–827
Microarray analysis, 62
Microbiome, 136
Microcytosis, 999f, 1021f
Microdeletion syndromes, 55
Microglia, 1140–1141
β-2-Microglobulin, as tumour 
marker, 270b
Microlithiasis, alveolar, 715b
Microorganisms
culture, 140–141
detection of components, 139–140
detection of whole organisms, 
139
host response, 134, 137–138
MicroRNA (miRNA), 413
Microsatellite repeats, 55
Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), 
1118
Microscopy
bright field, 139
dark field, 139
electron, 139
epiluminescence, 1255
Microsomal ethanol-oxidising 
system (MEOS), 957–958
Microsporidia, HIV/AIDS patients, 
399b
Microsporum audouinii, 1280
Microsporum canis, 1279f, 1280
Micturating cystourethrography 
(MCU), reflex nephropathy, 
505f
Micturition
cycle, 466
disorders of
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 
472, 514–515
incontinence see Incontinence, 
urinary
frequency, 472
mechanisms, 466
Mid-axillary line (MAL), 730
Midazolam, 237f
terminal agitation, 291
Midges, filariases, 375
Miglitol, 823
Migraine, 1176–1177
stroke risk, 1177
visual disturbance, 1170
Migrainous neuralgia, 1177, 1178b
Migrating motor complexes (MMC), 
845
Milk, cow’s, type 1 diabetes and, 
804
Milk alkali syndrome, 130
Milk intolerance, 93b, 1284b
Millard-Gubler syndrome, 1148b
Miller Fisher syndrome, 1224–1225
Miltefosine, 364
Milwaukee shoulder syndrome, 
1091b, 1092
Mind-body interactions, 15
Mineralocorticoid receptor, 435
Mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonists, 781
Mineralocorticoids, 772–773, 779
excess, 780b
insufficiency, 778b
measurement, 778
Minerals, storage, 927
Mini-mental state examination 
(MMSE), 234
Mini-tracheostomy, 194
Minimal change nephropathy, 
498–500
drug-induced, 522b
Minimally conscious states, 1161, 
1161b
Minimum bactericidal concentration 
(MBC), 143
Minimum inhibitory concentration 
(MIC), 143
Minocycline
acne, 1267
hyperpigmentation from, 1267, 
1296b
leprosy, 349b
skin reactions, 1304b
Minoxidil
alopecia, 1297
hypertension, 612
skin reactions, 1304b
Mirizzi’s syndrome, 984
Mirtazepine, 244b, 290
Misoprostol, 1079
Missense mutations, 54f, 58
MIT see Monoiodotyrosine
Mites
house dust, 666–667, 1255, 1283
typhus, 350
Mitochondria, 45–46, 45f
Mitochondrial disorders, 65, 1229, 
1229b
Mitochondrial DNA, 169
Mitochondrial inheritance, 53
Mitochondrial myopathy, 
enchephalopathy, lactic 
acidosis and stroke-like 
episodes see MELAS
mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal 
encephalomyopathy 
(MNGIE), 1229b
Mitomycin/mitomycin C, 517, 714b
Mitosis see Cell division
Mitotane, 776
Mitotic spindle poisons, 261b
Mitoxantrone, 1191, 1192b
acute leukaemia, 1037b
Mitral regurgitation, 618–620, 618b, 
619f
clinical features, 618–619, 618b
heart murmurs, 562b
investigations, 619, 619b
Mitral stenosis, 616–618, 617f
clinical features, 616–617, 616b
investigations, 617, 617b
chest X-ray, 535f
management, 618
Mitral valve
balloon valvuloplasty, 618, 618b
chronic rheumatic heart disease, 
616
cleft, 632–633
endocarditis, 618
prolapse (floppy valve), 618
pain, 541
repair, 619–620
replacement, 618
Mixed connective tissue disease, 
1091b, 1092, 1113–1114
Mixed venous oxygen saturation, 
184
MLF see Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
MMC see Migrating motor complex
MMR vaccine, 319
MMSE see Mini-mental state 
examination
Mobitz types I and II AV blocks, 
571, 572f
Moclobemide, 244b
Modafinil, 1187, 1192b
MODS see Multiple organ 
dysfunction syndrome
MODY see Maturity onset diabetes 
in the young
MOF see Multiple organ failure
Moh’s surgery, 1268
Mole, 1274–1275, 1275f
Molecular adsorbent recirculating 
system (MARS), 964
Molecular biology, 42–50
Molecular diagnostics, 428b
Molecular medicine, 69–70
molecular mimicry, 87
Mollaret’s syndrome, 1205
Molluscum contagiosum, 327f, 426, 
426f, 1279, 1279f
HIV/AIDS patients, 388f, 397b
Mometasone, 1265b
Monday fever, 716
Monge’s disease, 107
Monitoring
in critically ill patients
circulation, 185–187
respiratory function, 187–188
drug therapy, 36, 39–40, 39b
Monkeypox, 327
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs), 241b, 244, 244b
drug interactions, 28b
Parkinson’s disease, 1197
Monoarthritis, acute, 1069, 1069b
Monobactams, 154b, 156
Monoclonal antibody therapy, 31b
allergy, 91
cancer, 279–280, 915
diabetic retinopathy, 829
haemolytic uraemic syndrome, 
496
leukaemias, 1039, 1041b
multiple sclerosis, 1037, 1192b
osteoporosis, 1124
psoriasis, 1268
Monoclonal gammopathy of 
uncertain significance 
(MGUS; monocolonal 
gammopathy unclassified; 
MGu; benign monoclonal 
gammopathy), 1045
Monoclonal proteins, 1045
Monocytes, 74, 995, 1004f
count, 1312b
Monocytosis, 1004b
Monofilament testing, 799b
Monoiodotyrosine (MIT), 739f
Mononeuritis multiplex, 1224
Mononeuropathy
diabetes mellitus, 832
multifocal, 1224b
Monosodium urate monohydrate 
(MSUM) crystals, 1064f, 
1086b, 1087
Monospot test, 321
Montelukast, asthma, 671
Mood, 1148
assessment, psychiatric interview, 
234
Mood (affective) disorders,  
243–245
bipolar, 243–245
depression see Depression
Mood-stabilising drugs, 241b
Moral dilemma, 11–12
Moral reasoning (ethical analysis), 
12–13, 13b
Moraxella spp., 136f
Moraxella catarrhalis, 137f
Morphine
adverse reactions, 26b–27b, 287, 
287b
critically ill patients, 202
misuse, 219
myocardial infarction, 593–594
palliative care, 289, 291
pharmacogenetics, 25b
renal colic, 509
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
route of administration, 34b
Morphoea, 1300
Morquio’s syndrome, 433–434
Mortality ratios, standardised (SMRs)
Morton’s neuroma, 1076
Mosaic warts, 1278
Mosquitoes, 309b
filariasis, 372
malaria, 353–358
virus transmission, 144
Motilin, 846b
Motor disorders
diabetes, 826b
see also Diabetic neuropathy
Motor neuron disease, 1162b, 1194b, 
1200–1201, 1200b, 1222b
Motor neurons
lesions, 1162b, 1163f
lower, 1144–1145
upper, 1145
Motor neuropathy, 1194b
Motor system, 1144–1145, 1144f
Mountain sickness
acute, 107
chronic, 107
Mouth
diseases of, 863–864
examination
blood disorders, 990f
cardiovascular disease, 526f
respiratory disease, 644f
older people, 864b
oral allergy syndrome, 860
ulcers
Behçet’s syndrome, 1119
SLE, 1111
see also Oral
Movement disorders, 1165–1167, 
1166b, 1194–1198
involuntary movements, 1145
see also names of specific disorders
Moxifloxacin, 157b
meningitis, 1204b
MPA see Microscopic polyangiitis
MPGN see Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis
MPTP see Methyl-
phenyltetrahydropyridine
MRA see Magnetic resonance 
angiography
MRCP (magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography), 
848–849, 931, 931f
cholangiocarcinoma, 931f
pancreatic cancer, 895
pancreatitis, 892
primary sclerosing cholangitis, 966
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
cancer diagnosis, 269
cardiovascular system, 537–538, 
538f
aortic dissection, 606f
coarctation of aorta, 632f
craniopharyngoma, 794f
endocrine disease
macroprolactinoma, 792f
pituitary gland, 786f
gastrointestinal tract, 846, 847b, 
847f
inflammatory bowel disease, 
900f
hepatobiliary disease, 930–931, 
931f, 970f
haemangioma, 970f
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
967–968
musculoskeletal disease, 1065, 
1065f
sacroiliitis, 1107f
neurological disease, 1149b
brain tumours, 1180b–1181b
epilepsy, 1182b
hydrocephalus, 1217f
spinal cord compression, 1221f
stroke, 1235f
viral encephalitis, 1206
pelvic abscess, 847f
renal disease, 469–470, 506f
spine, 1222f
MRSA (meticillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus), 134, 
151b, 330–331, 687
Index
1350
MSA see Multiple systems atrophy
MSUM see Monosodium urate 
monohydrate (MSUM) 
crystals
mTOR inhibitors, 785b
MTP see Metatarsophalangeal 
(MTP) joint pain
Mucociliary escalator, 648f
Mucocutaneous disease, 
HIV-related, 396–398, 397b
Mucopolysaccharidosis, 433–434
Mucor spp., 384
Mucormycosis, 699
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT), 76
Mucous membranes see individual 
organ systems
Mucous patches, syphilis, 419–420
Multidisciplinary team, 2b, 167, 177
Multifocal encephalomyelitis, 1194b
Multifocal neuropathy, 1224, 1224b
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN), 795, 795b
genetic testing, 63
genetics/inheritance, 267b
Multiple myeloma, 84b, 262f, 
1046–1048, 1046b–1047b, 
1046f
Multiple organ dysfunction 
syndrome (MODS), 184b
Multiple organ failure (MOF)
AKI, 478
critically ill patients, 184, 184b
pancreatitis, 892b
Multiple sclerosis, 1188–1192
cerebrospinal fluid in, 1188
clinical features, 1189–1190, 
1189b–1190b, 1189f
investigations, 1150f, 1190, 1190b, 
1191f
Macdonald criteria, 1189b
management, 1191–1192
of complications, 1192, 1192b
complications, 1192, 1192b
disease-modifying treatments, 
1191–1192, 1192b
pathophysiology, 1188–1189, 
1188f
post-transverse myelitis, 1193b
pregnancy, 1192b
sibling risk, 68b
Multiple systems atrophy (MSA), 
1198
Mumps, 306b, 319
immunisation, 319
incubation period, 145b, 310b, 
319
period of infectivity, 144b
testicular swelling, 319
Münchausen’s syndrome, 247
Mupirocin, impetigo, 1276
Murmurs, 560–562
aortic regurgitation, 527b, 
623–624, 623b, 623f
aortic stenosis, 527b, 562b, 
620–623, 621f
atrial septal defect, 632–633, 633f
ausculatory evaluation, 560–562, 
561b
Austin Flint, 623–624
benign, 560b, 562b
cardiac, 560–562
carditis, 614–615
Carey Coombs, 614–615
coarctation of aorta, 632, 632f
continuous, 562
diastolic, 561–562
Graham Steell, 625
mitral regurgitation, 562b, 
618–620, 618b, 619f
mitral stenosis, 616–618, 617f
persistent ductus arteriosus, 631, 
631f
pulmonary stenosis, 625
systolic, 561, 562b
tetralogy of Fallot, 634–635, 634f
timing and pattern, 561f
tricuspid stenosis, 624
ventricular septal defect, 562b
Murphy’s sign, 984
Muscle
biopsy, 1068
myositis, 1115f
contraction, 1144, 1152
haematomas, 1051
pain, 1076, 1077b
drug-induced, 1132b
infections, 295
sensory changes, diabetes see 
Diabetic neuropathy
skeletal, 1063–1064
Muscle diseases, 1228–1230, 1228b
acquired, 1230, 1230b
chronic renal failure, 485–486
drug-induced, 1132b
genetic testing, 62b
heart muscle, 636–639
inherited, 1229–1230, 1229b
metabolic, 1229–1230
proximal myotonic myopathy, 
1228b
see also specific conditions
Muscle fibre, 531f
Muscle relaxants, 202–203
Muscle weakness/wasting, 1076, 
1077b
diabetes, 831–832
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098
systemic sclerosis, 1113
see also Dermatomyositis/
polymyositis; Myositis
Muscular atrophy
motor neuron disease, 1200b
spinal, 1201
Muscular dystrophies, 1228–1230, 
1228b
inheritance, 1228b
see also specific types
Musculoskeletal chest pain, 541
Musculoskeletal disease, 1057–1135
anatomy and physiology, 
1060–1064, 1060f
clinical examination, 1058f
drug-induced, 1077b
investigation, 1064–1068
management, 1077–1081, 1077b
in pregnancy, 1101b, 1121
presenting problems, 1069–1076
prevalence, 1060b
systemic illness and, 1132–1133
see also individual conditions
Musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1132–1133
Musculoskeletal system
anatomy and physiology, 
1060–1064, 1060f
clinical examination, 1138f
drug-induced effects, 1126b
manifestations of diseases in 
other systems, 1132–1133
tumours of, 1131–1132
Mushrooms
‘magic’ (hallucinogenic), 254
poisoning, 503–504
Mutation(s)
de novo, 59
dominant negative, 58
duplications, 55–56, 57f
frameshift, 54f, 55
gain-of-function, 58
inheritance, 51–53
insertions and deletions, 55, 56b
loss-of-function (LOF), 58
missense, 54f, 58
nonsense, 54f
null, 58
oncogenesis, 54b
point, 53
somatic, 59
splice site, 55f
tandem repeat, 55, 56b
triple repeat, 56b
Myalgia, 1076, 1077b
drug-induced, 1132b
infections, 295
see also Polymyalgia rheumatica
Myasthenia gravis, 1194b, 
1226–1227, 1227f
diplopia, 1226
drug-induced, 1132b
weakness, 1226
Myasthenic crisis, 1226–1227
Mycetoma, 382
intracavitary
Mycobacteria, 135, 347–350
atypical, cystic fibrosis, 681
opportunistic infection, 696, 696b
Mycobacterium abscessus, 696
Mycobacterium avium complex 
(MAC), 304b, 396, 407, 696b
prophylaxis, 406b
Mycobacterium chelonei, 696b
Mycobacterium fortuitum, 696b
Mycobacterium genavense, 696b
Mycobacterium haemophilum, 696b
Mycobacterium kansasii, 696, 696b
Mycobacterium leprae, 134, 141, 347, 
696b
see also Leprosy
Mycobacterium malmoense, 696b
Mycobacterium marinum, 696b
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 141, 304b
bacterial meningitis, 1202b
bone infection, 691–692
see also Tuberculosis
Mycobacterium ulcerans, 333, 696b
Mycobacterium xenopi, 696, 696b
Mycology, 1255
Mycophenolate mofetil, 96b
ANCA-associated vasculitis,  
1118
autoimmune hepatitis, 962–963
myasthenia gravis, 1227b
myositis, 1115
psoriasis, 1268, 1289b
SLE, 1112
vasculitis, 1118
Mycoplasma spp., 156
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 682–683
cold agglutination, 1031
Mycoses see Fungal infections
Mycosis fungoides (cutaneous T-cell 
lymphoma), 1272
Myelin sheaths, 438, 1140–1141
Myelinolysis, 438
Myelitis, 319
transverse, 1193, 1193b, 1222b
Myeloblasts, 993f
Myelocytes, 992f–993f, 995
Myelodysplasia, 159, 298–299, 1001b
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 
1041, 1041b
Myelofibrosis, 1048–1049
Myelography, spine, 1073, 1149b
Myeloma
AKI, 480b–481b
hypercalcaemia, 271b
multiple, 84b, 262f, 1046–1048, 
1046b–1047b, 1046f
Myelopathy, 1194b
cervical spondylotic, 1219
HIV-related, 403–404
vacuolar, 403–404
Myeloperoxidase, 520
Myeloproliferative disorders, 
1048–1049
Myelosuppression, drug-induced, 
277, 1101b, 1267
Myiasis, 381
Myocardial cells see Myocytes
Myocardial contractility
critically ill patients, 183
improving, 191
Myocardial contraction, 530, 531f
Myocardial infarction (MI)
acute, 590b
haemodynamic subsets, 545b
atrioventricular block, 572–573
clinical features, 583b, 590–593, 
590b
cocaine-induced, 218
complications, 596–598
definition, 590b
diabetics, 818
diagnosis, 591
expansion, 597
and hyperglycaemia, 818
investigations, 592–593, 598
ECG, 534, 592–593
management
early, 593–596
late, 598–600, 598b
older people, 599b
pain, 590
painless (silent), 590–591
prognosis, 599–600
rehabilitation, 598–599
risk factors, 591, 591f, 598
risks of non-cardiac surgery, 600, 
600b
secondary prevention, 599
shock, 545
time course, 590f
ventricular ectopic beats, 569, 569f
Myocardial ischaemia
cocaine-induced, 218
ECG, 534, 584f
myocardial infarction, 596–598
Myocardial perfusion imaging, 539, 
585, 585f
Myocardial stunning, 190, 545
Myocarditis, 636
acute, 636
chronic, 636
fulminant, 636
pain, 541
Myocardium
diseases, 636–639
specific, 638–639, 639b
hibernating, 537
oxygen supply and demand, 
584b
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red 
fibres (MERFF), 46b, 1199b, 
1229b
Myoclonus, 1166b, 1167
Myocytes, 531f
Myofibrils, 1063
Myoglobin, 543
urinary, 301, 474–475
Myoglobulinuria, 474b
Myonecrosis, clostridial, 305, 305b
Myopathic gait, 1168
Myopathy see Muscle diseases
Myophosphorylase deficiency 
(McArdle’s disease), 450b
Myosin, 530, 531f, 1063
Myositis
drug-induced, 1132b
inclusion body, 1115
systemic sclerosis, 1113
see also Dermatomyositis/
polymyositis
Myotonia, potassium-aggravated, 
1230b
Myotonia congenita, 1230b
Myotonic dystrophy, 1228b
genetics/inheritance, 56b, 1228b
Myxoedema
coma, 745
Graves’ disease, 751
Myxoma, atrial, 639
N
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) see 
Acetylcysteine
Nabumetone, 1079b
NAD (nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide), 45f, 128, 957
NADH dehydrogenase, 46b
Nadolol
arrhythmias, 574–576
thyrotoxicosis, 741–742
variceal bleeding, 946
Index
1351
NADP/NADPH (nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate), 73
NADPH oxidase enzyme complex, 
73
Naegleria fowleri, 309b
Naevus
blue, 1275
melanocytic (mole), 1274–1275, 
1275f
spider, 922f, 962, 975–976
Nafcillin, 154b
NAFLD see Non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease
Nail fold disorders see Nails
Nails, 1254
abnormalities, 1264, 1297–1299
arthritis, 1070b
in congenital disease, 1299
examination, 1250f
fungal infections, 398, 1280
lichen planus, 1289–1290, 1298
normal variants, 1297
psoriasis, 1108–1109, 1287f, 1288
in systemic disease, 1298, 1298f
trauma, 1297–1298
whitening, 1298
Na,K-activated ATPase (sodium-
potassium pump), 429
Nalidixic acid, 157b
in pregnancy, 154b
skin reactions, 1304b
Naloxone, 219, 287b
adverse reactions, 28
drug interactions, 28b
Naltrexone
primary biliary cirrhosis, 964
pruritus, 964
Naproxen, 1079b
Narcolepsy, 1187, 1187b
NASH see Non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis
Nasogastric tube, 879b
Nasopharynx, diseases, 725
Natalizumab, 1192, 1192b
Nateglinide, 823
National Institute for Health and 
Clinical Excellence (NICE), 9
Natriuretic peptide see Atrial 
natriuretic peptide; Brain 
natriuretic peptide
Natural killer (NK) cells, 75–76
Nausea
mechanisms, 852
palliative care, 289–290, 289f
Necator americanus, 312b, 369
Neck
Casal’s necklace, 128, 128f
examination
diabetes, 798f
endocrine disease, 734f
neurological disease, 1138f
pain, 1060b, 1074, 1074b
stiffness, 302
see also Head and neck
Necrobiosis lipoidica, 1301, 1301f
Necrosis, 50, 262
Necrotising enteritis, 342
Necrotising fasciitis, 305, 305f
Necrotising pancreatitis, 891–892, 
892f
Necrotising soft tissue infections, 
305, 305b
Nefopam, 1078
Negligence, definition, 14b
Neisseria spp., 136f–137f
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 151b, 421–422
in pregnancy, 314b, 414b
see also Gonorrhoea
Neisseria meningitidis see 
Meningococcal infection
Nelson’s syndrome, 1296
Nematodes, 369b
intestinal, 369–372
tissue-dwelling, 372–375
zoonotic, 375–376
Neomycin
allergy, 1285b
and vitamin B12 deficiency, 129
Neostigmine, 918
Nephelometry, 428b
Nephrectomy, 505, 514
Nephritic syndrome, 475, 475b
Nephritis
crescentic, 487b, 501–502
drug-induced, 504b, 522b
interstitial, 480b–481b
acute, 502–503, 502b
chronic, 503–504
lupus, 499b–500b
post-streptococcal, 501
Nephrocalcinosis, 507, 522b
Nephrogenic sclerosing fibrosis, 
469b
Nephron, 464
segments, 430–432, 431f
Nephronophthis, 506–507
Nephropathy
analgesic, 514
Balkan, 503–504
diabetic, 830–831, 830b, 830f
pregnancy and, 818
HIV-associated, 405
IgA, 499b–500b, 500–501
ischaemic, 494
membranous, 497f, 522b
minimal change, 498–500
drug-induced, 522b
reflux, 504–505
salt-losing, 504, 859f
sickle-cell, 505
see also Renal disease
Nephrotic syndrome, 475b, 476–478
Nephroureterectomy, 517
Nerve agents, organophosphorus, 
220–222, 220b, 221f
Nerve biopsy, 1154–1155
Nerve conduction studies, 
1151–1152, 1153f
Nerve root diseases see 
Radiculopathy
Nerve root lesions, 1164–1165
Nerve root pain, 1073b
Nervous impulse, 1141, 1141f
Nervous system
anatomy and physiology, 
1140–1148, 1141f
cells, 1140–1141, 1140f
clinical examination, 1138f
older people, 1139b
in gastrointestinal function, 
844–845
see also Autonomic nervous 
system: Peripheral nervous 
system
Nervous system diseases, 1137–1230
cerebrovascular disease see specific 
conditions
clinical examination, 1138f, 1139b
cranial nerves, 1139b
diagnosis, 1155b
emergencies, 1140b
genetic, 65
HIV-related, 402–404
infections, 1201–1211, 1201b
intracranial/raised intracranial 
pressure, 1212–1213, 1212b, 
1213f
investigations, 1149–1155
lesion localisation, 1148, 1156b
neuromuscular junction, 
1226–1228
paraneoplastic, 271–272, 272b, 
1193, 1194b, 1216
peripheral nervous system, 
1223–1226
presenting problems, 1155–1175, 
1155b
spine/spinal cord, 1218–1222
symptom evolution, 1156b
see also Neuropathy; and specific 
conditions
Nettle rash see Urticaria
Neural tube defects (NTD), 
prevention with folic acid, 
125b, 129
Neuralgia
migrainous, 1177, 1178b
post-herpetic, 319, 1157
trigeminal, 1157, 1178
Neuralgic amyotrophy, 1223b, 1226
Neuraminidase inhibitors, 320
Neurasthenia, 232b, 246
Neuro-endocrine tumours (NETs), 
pancreatic, 784–785, 785b, 
785f
Neuro-inflammatory diseases, 
1188–1193
Neuroacanthocytosis, 1167b
Neurodegenerative diseases, 
1194–1201
Neurofibroma, 1213b, 1221f
Neurofibromatosis, 715b, 1216, 
1216b, 1216f
and cancer predisposition, 267b
inheritance, 267b, 1216
Neurofibromin, 51–53
Neurogenic shock, 190
Neuroglycopenia, 815
Neuroimaging, 1149–1150, 1149b, 
1235–1236, 1235f–1236f, 
1241–1242
see also specific modalities
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome,  
249
Neuroleptics see Antipsychotics
Neurological disease see Nervous 
system diseases
Neurological failure, 198–200
Neuroma
acoustic, 1215–1216
Morton’s, 1076
Neuromuscular junction disorders, 
1226–1228
Neuromyelitis optica, 1193
Neuromyotonia, 1194b
Neuronectomy, multiple sclerosis, 
1192b
Neurons, motor see Motor neurons
Neuropathic pain, 285, 285b, 1165
management, 285b, 288b
Neuropathy, 1223
ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa 
(NARP), 1229b
autonomic, 832, 832b–833b
axonal, 1224
chronic renal failure, 485–486
critical illness, 200
demyelinating, 1225
see also Guillain-Barré 
syndrome
diabetic, 799, 831–833, 832b–833b, 
834f
entrapment, 1224, 1224b
focal (mononeuropathy), 832
generalised (polyneuropathy), 
1223b, 1224
hereditary see Charcot-Marie-
Tooth disease
leg ulceration, 1263
motor, 1194b
multifocal motor, 1224
multifocal, 1224, 1224b
optic, 1229
organophosphate-induced, 222
peripheral, 1223b
cancer-related, 272
diabetic, 826–827, 826b
drug-related, 403
HIV-related, 403
leprosy, 348
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
sensorimotor, 403
sensory, 1194b
diabetes mellitus, 799, 831–833, 
832b–833b, 834f
see also Mononeuropathy; 
Polyneuropathy
Neuropeptides, 47f, 89
Neurosyphilis, 420, 1209, 1209b
Neurotoxic envenoming, 226
Neurotransmission/
neurotransmitters, 1141f
psychiatric disorders, 233
Neutral variants, 58
Neutrons, 102–103
Neutropenia, 1004
causes, 1004b
drug-induced, 1005b
fever in, 274, 302, 302b
HIV/AIDS, 405
Neutropenic fever, 274
Neutrophil chemotactic factor, 89b
Neutrophilia, 1005
asthma, 667–668
causes, 1004b
Neutrophilic dermatoses, 1299
Neutrophils, 72–74, 992f–993f, 995, 
1004f
asthma, 667–668
count, 1312b
function and dysfunction, 73f
older people, 1001b
toxic granulation, 72–73
Nevirapine, 407b
in pregnancy, 409
resistance, 408
NHL (non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma) 
see Lymphoma
Niacin (nicotinic acid; vitamin B3), 
128–129
deficiency, 128–129, 128f
dietary sources, 125b
hyperlipidaemia, 434
RNI, 125b
toxicity, 129
Nicardipine, angina, 587b
Nickel hypersensitivity, 88b, 
1284–1285
Niclosamide, 163
Nicorandil, 587, 864b
Nicotinamide see Niacin
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NAD), 45f, 128, 957
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate (NADP/
NADPH), 73
Nicotine replacement therapy,  
101b
Nicotinic acid see Niacin
Niemann-Pick disease, 433–434
Nifedipine
altitude illness, 107
angina, 586–587, 587b
unstable, 594
aortic regurgitation, 624
effect of old age, 36b
hypertension, 612
and neutropenia, 1005b
oesophageal disorders, 869
older people, 36b
Raynaud’s disease, 602–603
sphincter of Oddi dysfunction,  
987
Nifurtimox, trypanosomiasis, 164, 
360
Night blindness, 127
Night sweats, 295–296
Night terrors, 1175
Nightmares, 1175
Nikolsky sign, 1294
Nimodipine, subarachnoid 
haemorrhage, 1246–1247
Nipah virus, 328
NIPPV see Non-invasive positive 
pressure ventilation
Nitazoxanide, 164, 368–369
Nitrates
angina, 586, 594
duration of action, 586b
heart failure, 552
long-acting, prescription
oesophageal disorders, 541, 869
pulmonary oedema, 550
Index
1352
Nitric oxide (NO), 82, 185, 466, 
530–531
anal fissure, 919
in hepatopulmonary syndrome, 
975–976
respiratory support, 196
Nitrites, 209b, 512
Nitrofurantoin, 159
and pulmonary eosinophilia, 
713b–714b
urinary tract infection, 513b
Nitrogen narcosis, 109
Nitroimidazoles, 158
mechanism of action, 150b
Nitroprusside see Sodium 
nitroprusside
Nitroprusside reaction, 807
Nitrosamines, diabetogenic effect, 
804
‘Nits’, 1281
NK see Natural killer (NK) cells
NMDA blockers, pain management, 
288b
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate), 
dementia, 252
NNRTIs see Non-nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors
NNTB see Number needed to treat 
for benefit
NNTH see Number needed to treat 
for harm to occur
NO see Nitric oxide
Nocardia, 382
pneumonia, 401
Nocardiosis, 341
Nociceptive pain, 285
Nocturia, 472
Nodules
hepatic, 942–943, 943f
pulmonary, 660, 660b
cryptococcosis, 384
lung metastases, 274
rheumatoid, 712
rheumatoid
lung, 712, 712f
subcutaneous, 1097
skin, definition, 1251b
thyroid, 735f, 740
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD), 926, 944b, 
959–961, 960f
clinical features, 961
investigations, 961
liver function tests, 930b
pathophysiology, 960–961
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH), 960f, 961, 971b
Non-compliance, 35
Non-epileptic attack disorder 
(pseudoseizures), 1159, 
1185–1186
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma see 
Lymphoma, non-Hodgkin’s
Non-invasive positive pressure 
ventilation (NIPPV), 550, 
678b
Non-maleficence, 11
Non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors 
(NNRTIs), 407–408, 407b
adverse reactions, 409
Non-specific interstitial pneumonia 
(NSIP), 708b
Non-specific urethritis (NSU), 415, 
1107
Non-starch polysaccharides (NSPs; 
dietary fibre), 113
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs see NSAIDs
Nonsense mutations, 54f
Noradrenaline, 772
circulatory effects, 191b
Noradrenergic re-uptake inhibitors, 
241b, 244b
Norepinephrine see Noradrenaline
Norfloxacin, 157b
prophylactic, spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis, 941
urinary tract infection, 512
Normal distribution/range, 5, 5f
Normetadrenaline, 1311b
Normoblasts, 994, 999f
Norovirus, 327
Nortriptyline, pharmacokinetics, 25b
Norwalk agent, 327
Nosocomial (health care-acquired) 
infections
Clostridium difficile, 304b, 343–344, 
344f
control, 145b
MRSA, 134, 151b, 330–331, 687
pneumonia, 685–687
Notification
cholera, 344
diphtheria, 345
food poisoning, 341
Legionella pneumonia, 685
partner, STIs, 415, 421
plague, 338
whooping cough, 682
Novice-expert shift, 14b
NRTIs see Nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors
NSAIDs, 286
adjuvant analgesia, 288b
adverse reactions, 26b, 176b, 
1079b
gastrointestinal bleeding, 873, 
1021–1022
renal, 522
asthma association, 667–668
cancer cachexia, 290
contraindication
cirrhosis, 971b
renal insufficiency, 483
diabetes insipidus, 795
drug interactions, 28b
effect of old age, 36b
effect on renal function, 481b
hepatotoxicity, 971b
low back pain, 1073
musculoskeletal disorders, 
1078–1079, 1078f, 1079b
ankylosing spondylitis, 1107
gout, 1089
osteoarthritis, 1085
psoriatic arthritis, 1109
reactive arthritis, 1108
SLE, 1111–1112
pancreatitis, 894
and peptic ulcer, 856
poisoning, 213
recommendations for use, 1079b
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
sarcoidosis, 711
skin reactions, 1304b
small intestinal toxicity, 887
topical, 1079–1080
use in older people, 1079b
NSIP see Non-specific interstitial 
pneumonia
NSPs see Non-starch 
polysaccharides
NSU see Non-specific urethritis
Nuclear antigens, extractable, 
antibodies to, 468
Nucleic acid amplification tests 
(NAAT), 139–140, 141f, 415
Nucleocytoplasmic asynchrony, 1024
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NRTIs), 392f, 407b
adverse reactions, 409
resistance to, 408
Nucleosomes, 42
Nucleotide substitutions, 53, 54f
Null mutations, 58
Number connection test, 923f
Number needed to treat for benefit 
(NNTB), 32
Number needed to treat for harm to 
occur (NNTH), 32
Numbness, 1164–1165
Nutcracker oesophagus, 869
Nutrients
energy-yielding (macronutrients), 
110, 112–114
recommended intakes, 125b
inorganic, 130–132
Nutrition, 110–115, 110f
alcoholic liver disease, 959
critical illness, 198
cystic fibrosis, 681
enteral/parenteral see Feeding
overnutrition, 111–112
physiology, 110–114
pregnancy and lactation, 125b
stroke patients, 1243b
undernutrition, 111–112, 120–124
Nutritional status, 114–115
Nutritional support
artificial
acute pancreatitis, 892b
Crohn’s disease, 904–905
legal and ethical aspects, 124, 
124b
hospital patients, 122–124
see also Feeding, parenteral
Nutritional therapy, inflammatory 
bowel disease, 904–905
Nystagmus, 1145, 1171
balance disorders, 1186f
gaze-evoked, 1171
Nystatin, 160b
candidiasis, 160, 864
O
OA see Osteoarthritis
Obesity, 101, 115–120
abdominal, 115–116
aetiology, 116–117, 116b
assessment, 117
asthma and, 666
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
and, 116f, 581
body fat distribution, 115–116
complications, 115–116, 115b
diabetes, 116f
management, 117, 821
type 2, 806
increasing prevalence of, 116, 
116b
management, 117–120, 118f
diet, 118–119, 118b
drugs, 119
lifestyle advice, 118
surgery, 119–120, 119b, 120f
musculoskeletal disease, 1078
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, 
960
polycystic ovarian syndrome, 
764b
reversible causes, 117, 117b
susceptibility to, 116
Obesogenic environment, 116b
Obidoxime, 221
Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD), 243
Obstructive shock, 190
Occipital lobes, 1143
disorders, 1170b
functions, 1142b
effects of damage, 1142b
Occupational diseases/disorders
cancer, 266b
cramps, 1200
HIV infection/AIDS, 391b, 410
respiratory, 715–716
asthma, 666–667, 669, 715–716, 
715b, 716f
dust-related, 717b, 719–720, 
719b
lung cancer, 720
pneumonia, 720–721
Occupational therapist, 2b
Occupational therapy
musculoskeletal disorders, 1080
Parkinson’s disease, 1198
OCD (obsessive-compulsive 
disorder), 243
Ochrobactrum spp., 720
Octopus, blue-ringed, 225b
Octreotide
acromegaly, 793
carcinoid tumours, 761b
gastrointestinal obstruction, 290
scintigraphy, 785f
short bowel syndrome, 885
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 876
Ocular dysmetria, 1171
Ocular pain, 1157
Oculomotor (3rd cranial) nerve
damage to, 1171b
palsies, 1172b
tests, 1139b
Oculopharyngeal dystrophy, 1228b
Odds ratio, drug therapy, 32f
Odynophagia, 270b, 399
Oedema, 478
ascites, 478
causes, 478b
cerebral see Cerebral oedema
cytotoxic, 1237
dependent, 602b, 832b
famine, 120–121
generalised, 363
legs, 478
nephrotic syndrome, 475b, 
476–478
peripheral
differential diagnosis, 549b
heart failure, 549b
sodium retention, 434, 435f
pitting, 478
pulmonary see Pulmonary 
oedema
OER see Oxygen extraction ratio
Oesophageal candidiasis, HIV/
AIDS patients, 399, 399f
Oesophageal cytomegalovirus 
infection, HIV/AIDS 
patients, 399
Oesophageal variceal bleeding, 942, 
942f, 945
management, 947f
Oesophagitis, 868
CMV, HIV infection/AIDS, 399
eosinophilic, 868
reflux, 866, 866f
systemic sclerosis, 1113
Oesophagus
Barrett’s (columnar lined), 
866–867, 866f
carcinoma and, 866–867
diseases, 865–871
achalasia, 868–869, 869f
benign stricture, 867, 870, 870b
high-grade dysplasia, 867
motility disorders, 868–870
reflux, 865–868, 865f
tumours, 262f, 870–871
functional anatomy, 840–841, 840f
motility, 850
nutcracker, 869
pain, 541
perforation, 871
transection, varices, 928
Oestradiol, 1309b
Oestrogen
anti-androgen therapy, 765b
bone remodelling, 1062b
deficiency, 760b
hepatotoxicity, 971b
receptors, 268
Oestrogen replacement therapy
delayed puberty, 759
secondary amenorrhoea, 760
Turner’s syndrome, 766
Ofloxacin, 157b
leprosy, 349b
PID, 418
STIs
chlamydial infection, 423b
gonorrhoea, 422b
Index
1353
Ogilvie’s syndrome, 918, 918b
OGTT see Oral glucose tolerance 
test
OI see Osteogenesis imperfecta
Ointments, 1265b
Olanzapine
bipolar disorder, 245
schizophrenia, 249b
Older people
AKI, 483b
anaemia, 1034b
antimicrobial therapy, 154b
blackouts, 172
blood disorders, 1047b
blood tests, 1001b
cancer, 271b
cardiovascular disease
angina, 595b
aortic stenosis, 622b
atherosclerosis, 602b
atrial fibrillation, 566b
congestive heart failure, 551b
hypertension, 610b
infective endocarditis, 626b
myocardial infarction, 599b
clinical assessment, 166f
comorbidities, 170
critically ill, 204b
delirium, 173–175, 173b–174b
demography, 168, 168f
diabetes mellitus, 806b
management, 828b
dizziness, 173, 1158b
drug therapy, 175–176
adverse drug reactions, 
175–176, 176b
polypharmacy, 176b
endocrine system
adrenal glands, 779b
gonadal function, 766b
parathyroid glands, 770b
pituitary and hypothalamus, 
795b
thyroid gland, 755b
energy balance, 122b
environmental factors in disease, 
102b
falls, 172–173, 172b
fever, 296b
frailty in, 170, 170b
gastrointestinal disorders
acute abdominal pain, 862b
constipation, 918b
endoscopy, 850b
GORD, 868b
infectious diarrhoea, 306b
malabsorption, 883b
peptic ulcer, 875b
genetic disease and counselling, 
64b
geriatric assessment, 166–168
haematological function, 1001b
haematological malignancy, 
1047b
haemostasis and thrombosis, 
1008–1011
HIV/AIDS, 410b
hyperlipidaemia management, 
458b
hypernatraemia, 439, 439b
hypoglycaemia, 784b
hyponatraemia, 439, 439b
immune deficiency, 82b
incontinence, 175, 175f, 473b
investigation, 170–171
Comprehensive Geriatric 
Assessment, 170, 170b
decisions on, 170–171
liver disease, 980b
musculoskeletal disorders
bone infection, 1094b
gout, 1090b
osteoarthritis, 1085b
osteomalacia, 1125–1126
osteoporosis, 1124b
Paget’s disease, 1128–1129
rheumatoid arthritis, 
1097–1098
neurological disease/disorders
acute confusional state, 473b
dizziness, 173, 1158b
epilepsy, 1185b
examination, 234
Parkinson’s disease, 1166b, 
1194–1198
visual loss, 1169–1170
NSAID use, 1079b
oral health, 864b
pharmacokinetics in, 24b
physical examination, 167
podiatry, 177
poisoning/drug overdose, 208b
postural hypotension, 36b
prescribing in, 36b
presenting problems, 171–176
psychiatric disorders, 238b
rehabilitation, 176–177
renal replacement therapy, 491b
respiratory disease
COPD, 677b
infections, 686b
influenza vaccine, 320
interstitial lung disease, 714b
lung cancer, 730b
pleural disease, 730b
thromboembolic disease, 724b
respiratory function, 648b
sedation, 174–175
skin changes, 1254b
social assessment, 167
thermoregulation, 104b
urinary tract infection, 512b
vitamin deficiency, 127b
Oleander poisoning, 215
Olecranon bursitis, 1075b, 1099f
Olfactory (1st cranial) nerve, tests, 
1139b
Olfactory loss, 1169
Oligoarthritis, 1104, 1104b
associated extra-articular features
asymmetrical inflammatory, 1108
Oligoclonal bands, 1154
Oligodendrocytes, 1140–1141
Oligodendroglioma, 1213b
Oligopeptides, 842
Oliguria, 471–472
critically ill patients, 197
Olsalazine, 903b
Omalizumab, 91
Omega3 fatty acids, 113
Omeprazole
drug interactions, 28, 28b
H. pylori eradication, 874
renal toxicity, 479–481
Onchocerca volvulus, 372b, 374
life cycle, 374f
Onchocerciasis (river blindness), 
312b, 374–375
Onchocercoma, 374
Oncogenes, 59
Oncogenesis, 54b
Oncology see Cancer
Onychogryphosis, 1297
Onycholysis, psoriasis, 1287f
Onychomycosis, 398, 1280
O’Nyong-nyong virus, 329, 1095
Oophoritis, mumps, 319
Open reading frames (ORFs), 43
OPG see Osteoprotegerin
Ophthalmia neonatorum
chlamydial, 314b, 423
gonococcal, 314b, 422f
Ophthalmopathy, Graves’ disease, 
735f, 739b, 742f, 750–751, 
750f, 779b
Ophthalmoplegia, chronic 
progressive external, 1229b
Opiates/opioids
adverse reactions, 26b, 176b, 287, 
287b
drug interactions, 28b
effect of renal insufficiency, 36b
misuse, 219, 254
management, 219
myocardial infarction, 593–594
myths about, 286b
older people, 176b
osteoarthritis, 1085
pain management, palliative care, 
286
pancreatitis, 894
poisoning, 217b, 219
in respiratory failure, 664
sedation and analgesia, 202
withdrawal symptoms, 20b, 254
Opisthorchiasis/Opisthorchis 
felineus, 312b, 379b
Opisthotonus, 1210
Opsoclonus-myoclonus, 1194b
Opsonins/opsonisation, 73f
Optic (2nd cranial) nerve
disorders, 1170b
tests, 1139b
Optic atrophy, 1173, 1173f
Optic chiasm, disorders, 1170b
Optic disc disorders, 1170b
oedema see Papilloedema
swelling, 1173b
Optic neuritis, 1170b, 1194b
multiple sclerosis, 1190b
onchocerciasis, 374
and transverse myelitis 
(neuromyelitis optica), 1193
Optic neuropathy, Leber’s 
hereditary, 1229
OptiMal, 357
OPV (oral polio vaccine), 1207
Oral administration, 21
Oral allergy syndrome, 860
Oral cancer, 864, 864b
Oral cavity, organisms in, 137f
Oral contraception/contraceptives
acne treatment, 1282
drug interactions, 155, 694
in epilepsy, 1183–1184, 1185b
and hypertension, 607b
and migraine, 1176–1177
and porphyria, 459
skin reactions, 1304b
and venous thrombosis, 1009b, 
1247b
Oral disease, HIV-related, 398
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), 
809b
Oral hairy leukoplakia, 398
Oral hypoglycaemics, 821–824, 822b
poisoning, 216
Oral rehydration solution (ORS), 
307b
Orbit, imaging, 1149–1150, 1150f
Orchitis, mumps, 319
Orf, 1279
Organ donation, 96
Organelles, intracellular, 47f, 1238f
Organochlorine poisoning, 224b
Organophosphate-induced delayed 
polyneuropathy (OPIDN), 
222
Organophosphorus compounds, 
poisoning, 220–222, 220b, 
221f
Oriental sore see Leishmaniasis, 
cutaneous
Oriental spotted fever, 351b
Orientation, assessment, 234
Orlistat, 119, 119f
Ornidazole, 368
Oropharynx examination
HIV/AIDS, 388f
infectious diseases, 294f
Oroya fever, 352, 352b
Orphenadrine, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197
ORS see Oral rehydration solution
Orthopnoea, 543, 655
Orthoses, 1080
Oscillopsia, 1171
Oseltamivir, 153b, 161b, 162, 320
Osgood-Schlatter disease, 1076b
Osler’s nodes, 626
Osmolal gap, poisoning, 209b
Osmolality, 1310b
hyponatraemia, 437
refeeding diet, 122b
Osmolarity, 814, 1310b
Osmotic agents, 30
Osmotic diuretics, 435
Osteitis fibrosa
chronic renal failure, 486–487
hyperparathyroidism, 769
Osteoarthritis (OA; osteoarthrosis), 
1081–1086
BCP crystal deposition, 1086b
clinical features, 1082–1085,  
1082b
early-onset, 1084–1085, 1084b
erosive, 1085
investigations, 1085
management, 1085–1086, 1085b
nodal generalised, 1082–1083, 
1082b, 1083f
older people, 1085b
pathophysiology, 1081–1082, 
1082f
prevalence, 1060b
radiology, 1073b
risk factors, 1081f
see also specific sites
Osteoarthropathy, hypertrophic 
pulmonary, 701
Osteoblasts, 1061
bone remodelling, 1061f
tumours, 1131b
Osteochondritis
dissecans, 1075–1076
Osgood-Schlatter disease, 1076b
Scheuermann’s, 1130–1131
Osteochondroma, 1131b
Osteoclasts, 1061
bone remodelling, 1061f
osteopetrosis, 1131
Paget’s disease, 1129
Osteocytes, 1061
Osteodystrophy
hepatic, 963
renal, 486f
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), 62b, 
1131
Osteogenic sarcoma, 66–67
Osteoid, 486f, 1061f
Osteoid osteoma, 1131b
Osteolysis, 1064b, 1095
Osteoma, osteoid, 1131b
Osteomalacia, 1125–1128
after gastric resection, 851
biochemical abnormalities, 1066b
bone biopsy, 1127
causes, 1126b, 1128
chronic renal failure, 486–487
drug-induced, 1132b
hypophosphataemic, 1128
older people, 1125–1126
pain, 1125–1126
renal, 1128
vitamin D-deficient, 127
Osteomyelitis, 1095–1096
Osteonecrosis, 1130
drug-induced, 1123–1124, 1132b
pain, 1130
Osteopathy see Bone diseases
Osteopenia
biliary cirrhosis, 964
fractures in, 1071
hyperparathyroidism, 769
radiographic, 1127
Osteopetrosis, 1131
Osteophytes, 1064, 1219
Osteoporosis, 1120–1125
after gastric resection, 851
biochemical abnormalities, 1066b
bone mineral density 
measurement, 1122b
chronic renal failure, 486–487
and coeliac disease, 881–882
Index
1354
drug-induced, 1123b, 1132b
corticosteroids, 1120–1121
fractures, 1121f, 1123b
inflammatory bowel disease, 907
management, 1122–1125
men, 1120
older people, 1124b
post-menopausal, 766b, 1120
pregnancy-associated, 1121
prevalence, 1060b
primary biliary cirrhosis, 963–964
secondary, 1121b
Osteoprotegerin (OPG), 1062b
Osteosarcoma, 1132
Paget’s disease, 1129
Osteosclerosis
osteoarthritis, 1081–1082, 1084f
Paget’s disease, 1129
Osteotomy, 1080b
Ostium primum defect, 632–633
Otitis media, 108, 314, 332b, 346
Ovarian cancer, 280–281
incidence, 262f
investigations, 280
pathogenesis, 280–281
treatment, 280–281
Ovaries
failure, 759
oophoritis, 319
polycystic, 760, 764–765, 764b, 
764f
Overflow incontinence, 175, 473, 
1174
Overnutrition, response to, 111–112
Ovulation, 762
Oxacillin, 154b
Oxalate, 1311b
Oxazolidinones, mechanism of 
action, 150b
Oxcarbazepine, 1184b
Oxidative stress, 893f, 958f, 960, 
1028–1029
Oximes, 221
Oximetry, 653–654
asthma, 672–673
Oxycodone, 287
Oxygen
arterial blood (PaO2), 1308b
cascade, 182f
consumption, 184
oxygen delivery and, 184
delivery, 182
content, 182f–183f, 183–184
flow, 182–183
global, 184
regional distribution, 182
toxicity, 193
transport, 182, 183f
Oxygen dissociation curve see 
Oxyhaemoglobin 
dissociation curve
Oxygen extraction ratio (OER), 184
Oxygen saturation (SpO2), 1308b
at altitude, 106f
critically ill patients, 187–188
sleep apnoea/hypopnoea 
syndrome, 726f
sudden changes in, 187b
Oxygen therapy
air passengers, 108
altitude illness, 107
asthma, 672
carbon monoxide poisoning, 220
COPD, 676–677
critically ill patients, 193
decompression illness, 110
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 855
hyperbaric, carbon monoxide 
poisoning, 220
long-term, COPD, 676–677
organophosphorus poisoning, 
221
pneumonia, 684–685
pulmonary embolism, 723
respiratory failure, 665
toxic effects, 193
Oxyhaemoglobin dissociation 
curve, 182f–183f, 183–184, 
995f
at altitude, 106f
Oxytetracycline
acne, 1267, 1282
rosacea, 1283
P
P gene, 1295
Pabrinex, 128, 253–254
Pacemaker syndrome, 578
Pacemakers see Cardiac pacemakers
Pachyonychia congenita, 1299
Pacing
AV block, 573
dual-chamber, 578f
tachyarrhythmias, 564, 571
transcutaneous, 578
see also Cardiac pacemakers
Packed cell volume (PCV), 1312b
Paclitaxel, 280–281, 587–588
PAD see Peripheral arterial disease
Paget’s disease, 1091b
biochemical abnormalities, 1066b
management, 1129, 1130b
older people, 1128
pain, 1129
radionuclide bone scan, 1129f
PAI see Plasminogen activator 
inhibitor
Pain, 1147, 1147f
abdominal see Abdominal pain
acute, management, 286
assessment, 285–286
bone, 285b
bronchial carcinoma
chest see Angina; Chest pain
classification, 285
components, 286f
examination, 285–286
facial, 1156–1157
fibromyalgia, 1093
abnormal processing, 
1092–1093
headache, 1156–1157, 1176–1178
hepatobiliary disease
cholecystitis, 983–984
choledocholithiasis, 983–985
gallstones, 982
incident, 285b
investigations, 286
ischaemic, 285b
joints, 1074–1076
see also names of specific joints
liver capsule, 285b
loin, 471
low back see Low back pain
measurement, 285
mechanisms, 285
muscle, 1076, 1077b
musculoskeletal, 1071b, 
1074–1076
management see individual 
conditions
neck, 1060b, 1074, 1074b
neuropathic, 285, 285b, 288b, 1165
nociceptive, 285
ocular, 1157
osteoarthritis, 1082
hip, 1084
pancreatic cancer, 895
perception, 285, 1147f
pleural see Pleural pain
psychological aspects, 285
radicular, 1072f, 1073b
rating scales, 285
renal colic, 507–510
somatoform disorder, 245–247
wrist, 1075
see also specific conditions
Pain management/treatment, 
286–288
acute pain, 286
cancer, 286
non-pharmacological, 288
palliative care, 284–288
pharmacological, 286–288
see also Analgesia; Analgesics
Pain pathway, 285
PAL see Physical activity level
Palliative care, 283–292
chronic renal failure, 550
COPD, 284, 677
dying phase, 290–292
gastric cancer, 879
presenting problems, 284–290
anxiety and depression, 290
breathlessness, 289
cough, 289
delirium and terminal 
agitation, 290
gastrointestinal obstruction, 
290
nausea and vomiting, 289–290, 
289f
pain, 284–288
weight loss and weakness, 290
Palmar erythema, 734f, 740, 922f, 
943
Palmitate, 981–982
Palmoplantar pustulosis, 1288
Palpation
abdomen, 839b
precordium, 527b
respiratory disease, 644–646
Palpitations, 243, 556–557, 556b, 
556f
Pamidronate
bone metastases, 275
hypercalcaemia, 273
Paget’s disease, 1129, 1130b
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, 
1131
PAN (polyarteritis nodosa), 1117
Pancoast’s syndrome, 701
Pancolitis, 897–898
Pancreas, 844
annular, 894
congenital abnormalities, 894–895
diabetes mellitus, 799, 803
type 2, 806
diseases of, 889–896
divisum, 894
endocrine, 782–785
diseases, 783–784, 783b
function tests, 851b
structure and function, 802f, 844f
transplantation, 826
tumours, 895–896, 896f
endocrine, 896
incidence, 262f
Pancreatic enzymes, 844b
cystic fibrosis management, 681
Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, 
1025
Pancreatic polypeptide, 112f, 802f
Pancreatic pseudocyst, 891f
Pancreatic rests, 880
Pancreaticoduodenectomy, 986
Pancreatitis, 889–896
acute, 768b, 889–892
complications, 891b, 892f
management, 892
nutritional support, 892b
pathophysiology, 890–892, 
890b, 890f
pleural effusion, 662b
prognosis, 890b
autoimmune, 894
chronic, 892–894
causes, 893b
complications, 893b
investigations, 893, 893b, 894f
management, 894
pathophysiology, 893f
hereditary, 895, 971b
necrotising, 891–892, 892f
risk, hyperlipidaemia and, 454f
Pancreolauryl test, 851b
Pancytopenia, 363, 1008, 1008b
Panic disorder, 243
Pannus, 1096
Panton-Valentine leukocidin, 687, 
1277
Papilla of Vater, 937
Papillary carcinoma, thyroid, 754
Papillary muscle rupture, 597
Papillary necrosis see Renal 
papillary necrosis
Papillary renal cell cancer 
syndrome, 267b
Papilloedema, 1173, 1173f
haemorrhagic, 734f
Papilloma, basal cell, 1274, 1274f
Papillomaviruses, 1278–1279
see also Human papillomavirus
Papular pruritic eruption, 398
Papular urticaria, 374
Papule, definition, 1251b
Papulosquamous eruptions, 
1257–1258
Para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS), skin 
reactions, 1304b
Parabens, 1285b
Paracentesis, ascites, 940
Paracetamol, 286
adverse reactions, 27b
dosage regimen, 35b
fever, 296
hepatotoxicity, 933, 933f
migraine, 1177
musculoskeletal disorders, 1078, 
1103b
nephrotoxicity, 481b, 522b
osteoarthritis, 1085
palliative care, 286
pleural pain, 685
poisoning, 209b, 212
acute liver failure and, 212, 
934b
antidotes, 212, 212f
upper respiratory tract infection
Paracoccidiodomycosis, 386
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 386
Paraesthesia, 657, 1164–1165
diabetic neuropathy, 832
peripheral neuropathies, 1224b
Paraganglioma, 781–782
Paragonimiasis, 309b
Paragonimus spp., 163
Paragonimus westermani, 312b
Parainfluenza viruses, 328
Paraldehyde
disturbed behaviour, 237f
poisoning, 209b
Paralytic ileus, 890–892
Paralytic shellfish toxin, 308
Paramyotonia congenita, 1230b
Paramyxoviruses, 328
Paraneoplastic disease, 
neurological, 271–272, 272b, 
1193, 1194b, 1216
Paraparesis, 328–329, 403–404, 1168
Paraphasia, 1169
Paraphenylenediamine, 1285b
Paraplegia, hereditary spastic, 
1222b
Parapneumonic effusion, 661
Paraproteinaemias, 1045–1048
Paraproteins, 1025, 1044
Paraquat poisoning, 224b
Parasitic infections
and cancer, 266b
eosinophilia, 312b
HIV/AIDS patients, 399
nervous system, 1201b
see also specific infections
Parasitosis, delusional, 245
Parasomnias, 1187–1188
non-REM, 1187
Parathyroid glands, 766–771
diseases
classification, 767b
presenting problems, 767–769
functional anatomy and 
physiology, 766–767
older people, 770b
Index
1355
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 767b, 
770–771
bone remodelling, 1062b
hyperparathyroidism, 769b
osteoporosis, 1123b, 1124
reference range, 1309b
rickets/osteomalacia, 1127
serum, bone disease, 1066b
Parathyroid hormone-related 
protein, ectopic production, 
271b
Parathyroidectomy, 488, 770
Paratyphoid fever, 339–340
Parenteral administration, 21
Parenteral nutrition, 123–124
total see Total parenteral nutrition
Parietal lobes, 1142
disorders, 1170b
functions, 1142b
effects of damage, 1142b
Parinaud’s syndrome, 1148b
Parkinsonism, 1198
drug-induced, 249b, 1195b
see also specific syndromes
Parkinson’s disease, 1166b, 
1194–1198
causes, 1195b
clinical features, 1195, 1196b
non-motor symptoms, 1195
investigations, 1195–1196, 1196f
management, 1196–1198, 1197b
surgery, 1197
pathophysiology, 1195, 1195f
tremor, 1166b
Paromomycin, 164, 364, 368
Paronychia, 1297
Parotitis, 319, 864
Paroxetine, 244b
drug interactions, 28b
Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria, 
420
Paroxysmal nocturnal 
haemoglobinuria, 1031
Partial agonists, 18
Partial anterior circulation 
syndrome (PACS), 1241f
Partial thromboplastin time with 
kaolin (PTTK), 999–1000
Parvovirus B19, 315–316, 316b, 316f
and aplastic crisis, 1028, 1032
arthropathy, 316b
pregnancy, 314b
red cell aplasia, 404–405
Past-pointing, 1145
Pastes, 1265b
Pastia’s sign, 331, 332f
Pastoral care, 2b
Patau’s syndrome (trisomy 13), 
genetics, 56b
Patch, definition, 1251b
Patch tests, 1285
hypersensitivity, 1255
Paterson-Kelly syndrome, 870
Pathergy reaction, 1119
Pathogens
host-pathogen interaction, 134, 
137–138
successful, 137–138
transmission, 134f
Pathway medicine, 70
Patients
autonomy, 10–11
relationship with doctor, 2–4, 3f
communication, 4b
difficulties in, 2–4
ethical issues, 9–13
Pauciarticular disease see 
Oligoarthritis
Paul-Bunnell test, 321
PAVMs see Pulmonary 
arteriovenous malformations
PAWP see Pulmonary artery wedge 
pressure
PCI see Percutaneous coronary 
intervention
PCNSL see Primary CNS lymphoma
PCOS see Polycystic ovarian 
syndrome
PCP see Pneumocystis jirovecii
PCR see Polymerase chain reaction
PCT see Porphyria cutanea tarda
PCV see Packed cell volume; 
Pressure controlled 
ventilation
PDB see Paget’s disease
PDT see Photodynamic therapy
PE see Plasma exchange
Peak expiratory flow (PEF)
asthma, 668f, 672f
dyspnoea, 657
home monitoring, 652
morning dipping, 668f
Peak flow meters, 652, 668
Peanut allergy, 94
PECAM-1, 531–532
Pectins, 113b
Pectus carinatum (pigeon chest), 
731
Pectus excavatum (funnel chest), 
731
Pediculus humanus, 336
Pediculus humanus capitis, 1281
Pedigree, genetic information, 60
PEEP see Positive end-expiratory 
pressure
PEF see Peak expiratory flow
PEG see Percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy
Pegloticase, 1090
Pegvisomant, 793
Pegylated interferons, 161b, 
954b–955b
Pellagra, 128–129, 128f, 1260b
Pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction, 
510–511
Pelvic floor exercises, faecal 
incontinence, 918
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), 
418
Pemphigoid, bullous, 1292–1293, 
1293b, 1294f
Pemphigoid gestationis, 1259b, 
1293b
Pemphigus, 1294
paraneoplastic, 272
Pemphigus foliaceus, 1293b
Pemphigus vulgaris, 1293b
Penciclovir, herpesvirus infection, 
161–162, 161b
Pendred’s syndrome, 739f
Pendrin, 739f
Penetrance, genetic, 51–53
Penicillamine
adverse reactions
aplastic anaemia, 1048b
muscle weakness, 1077b, 1132b
nephrotoxicity, 522b
neutropenia, 1005b
oral ulceration, 864b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
pyridoxine deficiency, 129
and respiratory disease, 714b
rheumatic disease, 1101b, 1102
skin reactions, 1290, 1304b
Wilson’s disease, 974
Penicillin(s), 151b, 154b, 155
adverse reactions, 26, 27b
neutropenia, 1005b
pulmonary eosinophilia, 714b
allergy, 93b
anthrax, 347
cellulitis, 1277
diphtheria, 346
endocarditis, 628
leptospirosis, 338
listeriosis, 339
meningitis, 1203
nephrotoxicity, 522b
neurosyphilis, 1209
penicillinase-resistant, 155
in pregnancy, 154b
prophylactic, 79, 153b
resistance, 151
rheumatic fever, 615–616
sickle-cell disease, 1033
skin reactions, 1303b–1304b
syphilis, 421
tetanus, 1210b
tropical ulcer, 333
urinary tract infection, 512
see also Benzylpenicillin; Procaine 
penicillin
Penicillium marneffei, 385
Penile erection, 474
see also Erectile dysfunction
Penis, 466
Pentamidine
adverse reactions, 164
leishmaniasis, 364
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 
164
prophylactic, 153b
trypanosomiasis, 164, 359b
Pentavalent antimonials, 164
Pentoxifylline
alcoholic liver disease, 959, 959b
frostbite, 105
Pepper-pot skull, 769
Pepsin, 841–842
Pepsinogen, 841
Peptic ulcer, 872–876
complications, 875–876
management
adjunctive drug therapy, 874
surgery, 874–875
NSAID-induced, 873
older people, 875b
perforation, 862–863, 875
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 876
Peptide YY, 846b
Peptides, antimicrobial, 72
Peptostreptococcus spp., 332b
Perception(s)
abnormal, 234, 1167
delusional, 248, 248b
Percussion
abdomen, 839b
respiratory disease, 644–646
Percutaneous ablation, 
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
968
Percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI)
angina, 587–588, 587b–588b, 587f
myocardial infarction, 595, 595f, 
596b, 599
vs. CABG, 589b
Percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy (PEG), 123, 123f
Percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography (PTC), 931
Perforin, 75–76
Pergolide, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197b
Pericardial aspiration, 640
Pericardial (cardiac) tamponade, 
532, 545–546, 545b, 640
Pericardial disease, 639–641
Pericardial effusion, 261b, 640, 640f
tuberculous, 691
Pericardial friction rub, 562, 614–615
Pericardiocentesis, 640
Pericarditis
acute, 639–641
chronic renal failure, 483
constrictive, chronic, 641, 641b
myocardial infarction, 597
pain, 541
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
tuberculous, 640
Perimysium, 1063–1064
Perinephric abscess, 512
Periodic fever syndromes, 85, 1135
Periodic limb movement syndrome, 
1188
Periodic paralysis
hyperkalaemic, 1230b
hypokalaemic, 1230b
Periostitis, 420, 648
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD), 
600–603, 600b
best medical therapy, 601b
Peripheral nerves
diseases, 1223–1226
lesions, 1164
Peripheral nervous system
motor, 1144
paraneoplastic disorders, 1194b
sensory, 1144
Peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
cancer-related, 272
diabetic, 826–827, 826b
drug-related, 403
HIV-related, 403
leprosy, 348
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
sensorimotor, 403
Peripheral oedema
differential diagnosis, 549b
heart failure, 549b
sodium retention, 434, 435f
Peristalsis, 845
Peritoneal cavity, tumours, 919
Peritoneal dialysis, 490f, 492
automated, 492
continuous ambulatory (CAPD), 
492
problems, 493b
Peritoneo-venous shunt, ascites, 940
Peritonitis, 919
CAPD, 489b
spontaneous bacterial, 941, 941b
tuberculous, 691
Permethrin
louse infestation, 1281
malaria prevention, 358
scabies, 1280–1281
Pernicious anaemia, 1025
Peroxisome proliferator activated 
receptor (PPAR) α, 434
Peroxisomes, 47
Persistent generalised 
lymphadenopathy (PGL), 
395
Personal and professional 
development (PPD), 14–15, 
14b, 14f
Personality, 1148
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
and, 581
and psychiatric disorders, 233
Personality disorder(s), 255, 1175
prevalence, 232b
Pertussis see Whooping cough
Pes cavus, 1076
Pes planus, 1098
Pesticides, 219–223
PET see Positron emission 
tomography
Petechiae, 1007, 1007f
definition, 1251b
Pethidine, 287
renal colic, 509
Petit mal, 1179
Petroleum distillates, poisoning, 224b
Pets
and allergic rhinitis, 725
and asthma, 666–667
opportunistic infection in HIV/
AIDS, 406
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 267b, 
911b, 912, 912f
Peyer’s patches, 76, 843–844
PGL see Persistent generalised 
lymphadenopathy
pH monitoring
gastro-oesophageal reflux, 850
hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar 
state, 814
Phaeochromocytoma, 781–782, 781b, 
782f
Phaeohyphomycosis, 382–383
Phagocyte deficiencies, 78b, 79
Phagocytes, 72–74
Index
1356
Phagocytosis, 73f
Phagolysosomes, 73
Pharmacist, 2b
Pharmacodynamics, 18–21, 18f, 25b
dose-response curves, 19–20, 19f
drug targets, 18–19, 19f
mechanisms of action, 18–19
Pharmacogenomics, 69
Pharmacokinetics, 18f, 21–23, 21f
absorption, 21–22
distribution, 22
drug interactions, 24b–25b
elimination, 22–23
patient-specific factors, 23–24, 24b
in pregnancy, 37b
repeated dose regimens, 23, 23f
Pharmacovigilance, 27–28
Pharyngeal pouch, 868
Pharyngitis, 681
infectious mononucleosis, 320
rheumatic fever, 614
Phenelzine, 244b
Phenobarbital
effect of old age, 36b
epilepsy, 1184b
poisoning, 211b
status epilepticus, 1159b
Phenothiazines, 241b
hyperpigmentation from, 1296b
schizophrenia, 249b
skin reactions, 1304b
Phenotype, 68f
Phenoxybenzamine, 769
Phenoxymethylpenicillin, 154b
anthrax, 347
prophylactic, 153b
rheumatic fever, 615
Phentolamine, phaeochromocytoma, 
782
Phenylalanine, 114b
Phenylbutazone
aplastic anaemia, 1048b
pulmonary eosinophilia, 713b
Phenylketonuria, 449
genetic investigations, 64, 67b
Phenytoin
adverse reactions, 27b
ataxia, 1199b
drug interactions, 28b
epilepsy, 1184b
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
and peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
pharmacokinetics, 23
plasma concentrations, 39b
poisoning, 224b
prescribing, 38b
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
skin reactions, 1304b
status epilepticus, 1159b
therapeutic monitoring, 39b
Phialophora verrucosa, 381
Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome, 
1039
Phobias, 243
Phosphate
accumulation 
(hyperphosphataemia), 449
AKI, 480b
deficiency (hypophosphataemia), 
130, 448–449, 449b, 1066b, 
1128
enema, 917b, 946b
metabolism, 448
disorders of, 429b, 448–449
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1310b
serum, bone disease, 1066b
supplements, 1128
see also Hyperphosphataemia; 
Hypophosphataemia
Phosphenes, 1170
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors
anticoagulation, 1019b
erectile dysfunction, 474
pulmonary hypertension, 725
Phospholipase A, 49b, 138
Phospholipids, 160, 450
Phosphorus, 130
deficiency, 130
dietary sources, 131b
radioactive
polycythaemia, 1049
thrombocythaemia, 1049
RNI, 131b
see also Phosphate
Photochemotherapy, 1266–1267
psoriatic arthritis, 1109
Photocoagulation
laser, 830
retinal, 829–830
Photodynamic therapy (PDT), 848f, 
1269
cholangiocarcinoma, 986
oesophagitis, 849
oral cancer, 864
skin cancer, 1270b
Photopatch testing, skin disease, 
1255
Photosensitivity, 1260–1262, 1260b, 
1260f
drug-induced, 1260b, 1304b
porphyria, 1260b
Phototesting, skin disease, 1255–1256
Phototherapy, 1266–1267
atopic eczema, 1286
cutaneous lymphoma, 1272
pruritus, 1260
psoriasis, 1289b
vitiligo, 1295
Phrenic nerve paralysis, 702b, 705b
Phrygian cap, 988
Physical activity level (PAL), 111f
Physiotherapist, 2b
Physiotherapy
aspergillosis, 697
bronchiectasis, 679
cervical spondylosis, 1219
cystic fibrosis, 681
fractures, 1071
headache, 1176
leprosy, 350
low back pain, 1073
multiple sclerosis, 1160
muscular dystrophies, 1228–1229
musculoskeletal disorders, 1080
pain management, 288
palliative care, 288
Parkinson’s disease, 1198
pneumonia, 686–687
stress incontinence, 474
stroke, 1243b
Phytoestrogens, 129
Pick’s disease, 252f
PID see Pelvic inflammatory disease
Pigbel, 342
Pigeon chest, 731
Pigmentation
disorders of, 1295–1296
drug-induced, 1183b
Pigmented villonodular synovitis, 
1134
Piles (haemorrhoids), 918–919
Pimecrolimus, 1266
Pimozide, 249b
Pineal tumours, 1213b
‘Pink puffers’, 674–675
Pinta, 333, 333b
Pioglitazone, 823
Piperacillin, 154b
neutropenic fever, 274
Piperacillin-tazobactam, 151b
necrotising fasciitis, 305
neutropenic fever, 302
Piperazine, 163, 371
Piroxicam, 1079b
PIs see Protease inhibitors
Pituitary apoplexy, 789
Pituitary gland, 785–795, 786f
diseases
anterior pituitary hormone 
deficiency, 787b
classification, 786b
investigation, 786–787, 787b
older people, 795b
presenting problems, 787–791
tumours see Pituitary tumours
functional anatomy and 
physiology, 786–787
Pituitary hormones, 736
Pituitary tumours, 789–790, 1215
clinical assessment, 789
Cushing’s syndrome, 790b
investigations, 789
treatment, 789–790, 790b
visual field defect, 764b
Pityriasis lichenoides chronica,  
1289
Pityriasis rosea, 1289
rash, 1257b
Pityriasis rubra pilaris, 1264
Pityriasis versicolor, 1257b, 1280
PKD see Polycystic kidney disease, 
autosomal dominant
Plague, 309b, 338–339, 338f
bubonic, 338
immunisation, 339
pneumonic, 338
septicaemic, 338
Plane warts, 1278
Plant toxins, 308
Plantar fasciitis, 1107–1108
Plantar warts, 1278
Plaques
amyloid, 251–252
atheromatous, 496, 580
pleural, 714b, 718, 718f
skin
definition, 1251b
erythematous, 1257b, 1279
Plasma
fresh frozen, 1012b
osmolarity, 814
virus-inactivated, 1012b, 
1014–1015
viscosity, 85
Plasma derivatives, 1011
Plasma exchange (PE)
glomerulonephritis, 501–502
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1225b
myasthenia gravis, 1227b
peripheral neuropathies, 1225
pre-renal transplant, 492–493
systemic vasculitis, 520
thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, 1056
Plasma membrane see Cell 
membrane
Plasmapheresis, 95, 964
Plasmin, 998f
Plasminogen, 265f
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 
(PAI), 998f
Plasmodium falciparum infection, 353, 
354f, 355b
chloroquine resistance, 353
clinical features, 355, 356f
complications, 357b
intravascular haemolysis, 1031
diagnosis, 355
management, 356–357
Plasmodium malariae infection, 353, 
355, 355b
Plasmodium ovale infection, 353, 355, 
355b
Plasmodium spp., life cycle, 354, 
354f, 355b
Plasmodium vivax infection, 353, 355, 
355b
Platelet-activating factor, in allergy, 
89b
Platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF), 263–264
Platelets, 996–997
concentrate, 1012b
count, 1000b
high, 1008
low, 1007–1008
disorders, functional, 1050
formation, 993f
function, assessment, 1000
reference values, 1312b
structure, 997, 998f
transfusions
acute leukaemia, 1001, 1037b
myelodysplastic syndrome, 
1041
platelet functional disorders, 
1050
thrombocytopenia, 1008
Platinum-based chemotherapy, 
280–281, 704
Plethysmography, 653
Pleural aspiration, 661
Pleural biopsy, 661
bronchial carcinoma, 662b
tuberculosis, 668
Pleural disease, 728–730
asbestos-related, 718, 718f
bronchoscopy, 652
drug-induced, 714b
older people, 730b
Pleural effusion, 661–663
aortic dissection, 606–607, 606f
causes, 661b–662b
connective tissue disorders
febrile injecting drug user
heart failure, 549f, 662b
malignant, 261b, 275–276, 275b, 
662b, 702b
oedema, 478
pancreatitis, 662b
rheumatoid disease, 662b, 712
signs, 644–646
SLE, 662b
tuberculosis, 662b, 689f, 691f
Pleural pain
aspergillosis, 698
bronchial obstruction, 701
empyema, 663b
pneumonia, 685
Pleural plaques, 718, 718f
Pleural rub, 560
Pleural thickening, 718, 718f
Pleurisy
asbestos-related, 718
connective tissue disorders, 1111
tuberculous, 681b
Pleurodesis
bronchial carcinoma, 704
pneumothorax, 730
Plexopathy, 1223
brachial, 1225–1226
lumbosacral, 1226
Plumboporphyria, 460b
Plummer-Vinson syndrome, 870
Pluripotent stem cells, 69–70
PMFL see Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy
PMNs see Polymorphonuclear cells
PMR see Polymyalgia rheumatica
Pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis, 
920
Pneumococcus see Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
Pneumoconiosis, 716–718
Pneumocystis carinii see Pneumocystis 
jirovecii
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
acute leukaemia, 1038
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
HIV/AIDS patients, 400, 400b, 
401f
HSCT, 1017b
immunocompromised patients, 
687–688, 688b
prophylaxis, 406b
stem cell transplantation, 1017b
Pneumocytes, 646–647
Pneumonia, 658b, 682–688
aspirational, 687
malaria, 357b
bacterial, 401
clinical features, 683, 686
Index
1357
community-acquired, 682–685, 
683b
complications, 685b
cryptogenic organising 
(bronchiolitis obliterans), 
708b
differential diagnosis, 683b
eosinophilic, 708, 713
HIV/AIDS patients, 401
hospital-acquired (nosocomial), 
685–687
in immunocompromised patient, 
687–688, 688b
interstitial, 709
acute, 708b
desquamative, 708b
idiopathic, 706–709, 708b
lymphocytic, 708b
usual, 708b, 709f
investigations, 684, 684b, 686
ITU referral, 685b
lobar, 682, 684f
management, 684–686
antibiotic therapy, 685, 685b
middle lobe, signs, 644–646
necrotising, 138b
occupational, 720–721
Pneumocystis jiroveci see 
Pneumocystis jirovecii 
pneumonia
predisposing factors, 682b
prevention, 685–687
suppurative, 687, 687b
tuberculous, 690
viral, 319–320, 706b
Pneumonic plague, 338
Pneumonitis
hypersensitivity, 719–720, 720f
interstitial
lymphocytic, 401, 404
usual, 709f
radiation, 714
Pneumothorax, 645f, 728–730
after permanent pacing, 579
age distribution, 729f
air travel after, 108, 730
barotrauma, 109
classification, 729b
pain, 540, 729
signs, 644–646
spontaneous, 729f
management, 730f
older people, 730b
recurrent, 730
tension, 558, 664, 729
POCT see Point-of-care testing
Podiatry
diabetics, 834
older people, 177
Podocytes, 464
Podophyllin, 1279
Podophyllotoxin, 425
Poikilocytes, teardrop, 1048–1049
Point mutations, 53
Point-of-care testing (POCT), 428
Poiseuille’s Law, 530–531
Poisoning, 205–230
acute, 208
approach to patients, 208–212
assessment and investigations, 
209
chemicals and pesticides,  
219–223
clinical features, 207f
complications, 211b
drugs, 212–216
of misuse, 216–219
envenomation, 207–208, 207b, 
207f, 224–230, 225b–226b, 
226f
environmental, 223
evaluation, 206f
external decontamination, 208f
history taking, 206
laboratory screening, 209b
low toxicity substances, 209b
management, 210–212
antidotes, 212
gastrointestinal 
decontamination, 210, 210b
haemodialysis/
haemoperfusion, 211, 211b
lipid emulsion therapy, 211
supportive care, 212
urinary alkalinisation, 210–211
in old age, 208b
psychiatric assessment, 210
substances involved, 208b
triage and resuscitation, 208
see also Food poisoning; Venoms
Poliomyelitis, 1207
immunisation, 1207
incubation period, 145b, 1207
Pollens, 90–91, 1255, 1283
Pollution, atmospheric, 102
PolyA tail, 43, 43f
Polyangiitis
with granulomatosis (Wegener’s 
granulomatosis), 713
microscopic, 1118
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN), 1117
Polyarthritis, 1069–1071, 1069b, 1104b
associated extra-articular 
features, 1070b
joint involvement, 1070f
symmetrical, 1108
Polychondritis, relapsing, 1119
Polychromasia, 994
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD), 
autosomal dominant, 62b
Polycystic ovarian syndrome 
(PCOS), 760, 764–765, 764b, 
764f
acne, 764b
hirsutism, 763b
Polycythaemia, 107, 271b, 464–466, 
516
Polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV), 
1049
Polydipsia, 738b
diabetes insipidus, 794
hypercalcaemia, 767
hyponatraemia, 438
Polyenes, 160, 160b
Polyethylene glycol, 895, 917
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 
139–140
acute leukaemia, 1039–1040
genetic diseases, 60–62, 60f–61f
herpes simplex virus, 415, 1154
leishmaniasis, 367
meningitis, 1203f
pertussis, 682
viral haemorrhagic fever, 303b
viral hepatitis, 950
Whipple’s disease, 884
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, 
1259b
Polymorphic light eruption, 1260b
Polymorphisms, 58
restriction fragment length, 693
single nucleotide, 63
Polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs), 
154, 1205
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), 
1117–1118
conditions mimicking, 1117b
management, 1117–1118
prevalence, 1060b
Polymyositis see Dermatomyositis/
polymyositis
Polyneuropathy, 1223b, 1224
acute axonal, 1223b
acute inflammatory, 
demyelinating see 
Guillain-Barré syndrome
chronic, 1225
chronic axonal, 1223b
critical illness, 200
demyelinating, 1223b, 1225
organophosphate-induced 
delayed, 222
sensorimotor, 1194b
symmetrical sensory, diabetics, 
831–832
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, 1131
Polypectomy, colonoscopic, colonic 
polyps, 848f, 910
Polypeptides, 842, 844b
Polypharmacy, older people, 176b
Polyposis, juvenile, 911b, 912
Polyposis syndromes, 910–912,  
911b
see also Familial adenomatous 
polyposis
Polyps
colonic, 910–916
gastric, 911b
small bowel, 911b
Polyradiculitis, CMV, 404
Polysaccharides
non-starch (dietary fibre), 113b
starch, 113b
Polyuria, 472, 472b, 738b
diabetes insipidus, 794
hyperaldosteronism, 780
hypercalcaemia, 767
Pompe disease, 450b
Pompholyx, 1285
Poncet’s arthropathy, 692
Popcorn worker’s lung, 718
Popliteal cysts see Baker’s cysts
Popliteal nerve palsy, 832, 1099
Population health, 98f
Porcelain gallbladder, 983
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), 
460b, 1301, 1302f
Porphyrias, 458–460, 459f, 475b
acute intermittent, 460b
congenital erythropoietic, 460b
erythropoietic protoporphyria, 
460b
hereditary coproporphyria,  
460b
photosensitivity, 1260b
plumboporphyria, 460b
skin lesions, 1301–1302
variegate, 450b, 459f
Porphyrins, 460b
Portal circulation, 464
Portal hypertension, 945–948
classification, 945f
complications, 945b
Portal venous pressure, 946
reduction, 946
Portal venous thrombosis, 975
Portopulmonary hypertension, 976
Portosystemic encephalopathy see 
Hepatic encephalopathy
Portosystemic shunts, 928, 945,  
948
Posaconazole, 160, 160b
aspergillosis, 698–699
chromoblastomycosis, 381–382
coccidioidomycosis, 386
fusariosis, 384–385
mucormycosis, 699
mycetoma, 382
prophylactic, 153b
Positive end-expiratory pressure 
(PEEP), 195b
Positron emission tomography 
(PET)
cancer diagnosis, 269, 269f
gastrointestinal tract, 847b
lymphoma, 1043
myocardial, 539
nervous system, 1149b
respiratory disease, 651, 651f
Post-cholecystectomy syndrome, 
986–987, 987b
Post-herpetic neuralgia, 319, 1157
Post-myocardial infarction 
syndrome, 597
Post-partum ‘blues’, 256
Post-partum thyroiditis, 752, 756b
Post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), 242
Posterior circulation stroke (POCS), 
1241f
Posterior descending artery, 529
Postural drainage, bronchiectasis, 
679
Postural hypotension, 554, 556
hypopituitarism, 787–788, 788f
management, 556
older people, 36b
peripheral neuropathy, 
832b–833b, 1223
renal dysfunction, 479
Posture
examination, 1139b
Parkinson’s disease, 1196b, 1198
Potassium, 132
channelopathies, 1230b
daily requirements, 433b
depletion, diabetic ketoacidosis, 
814
dietary sources, 131b
disorders of balance, 429b–430b, 
439–443
intake, chronic renal failure, 488
refeeding diet, 122b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1308b
renal handling, 440, 440f
replacement, 813b
RNI, 131b
ROMK channel, 431
supplements, 447, 672
see also Hyperkalaemia; 
Hypokalaemia
Potassium channel activators, 
angina, 587
Potassium chloride
diabetic ketoacidosis, 813b
hypokalaemia, 442
Potassium iodide
erythema nodosum, 585
Graves’ disease, 749
sporotrichosis, 383
Potassium perchlorate, 752
Potassium permanganate, 1263
Potassium phosphate, 449
Potency, 20
Pott’s disease, 691–692
Poverty, health consequences, 
101–102, 101b
Poxviruses, 327
PPAR-α/γ agonists see 
Thiazolidinediones
PPD see Personal and professional 
development
Practice guidance, 14b
Practolol, nephrotoxicity, 522b
Prader-Willi syndrome, 116
genetics, 54b, 56b
Pralidoxime, 221
Pramipexole, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197b
Prasugrel, 1019b
Prayer sign, 798f
Praziquantel, 163
cysticercosis, 380
hydatid disease, 381
liver flukes, 163, 312
schistosomiasis, 378
Prazosin, 230, 612, 782
Pre-eclampsia, 521, 521b
Pre-implantation genetic testing, 
62–63
Pre-patellar bursitis, 1076b
Prednisolone
autoimmune hepatitis, 962–963
blood disorders
acute leukaemia, 1037b
autoimmune haemolysis, 1030
myeloma, 1047
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 
1045
thrombocytopenia, 1050
bullous pemphigoid, 1294b
cysticercosis, 380
Index
1358
dosage interval, 35b
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 887
Epstein-Barr virus, 321
equivalent dose, 776b
filariases, 374
Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 
750–751
histoplasmosis, 385–386
inflammatory bowel disease, 860, 
903b
leprosy reactions, 349b
liver transplant patients, 979
musculoskeletal disorders
giant cell arteritis, 1117–1118
myositis, 1115
polymyositis, 1115
rheumatoid arthritis, 1102
SLE, 1111–1112
onchocerciasis, 374
and osteoporosis, 1120–1121
pericarditis, 640
renal disease
acute interstitial nephritis, 503
glomerulonephritis, 499b–500b
lupus nephritis, 499b–500b
respiratory diseases
aspergillosis, 697
asthma, 650
chronic eosinophilic 
pneumonia, 713
COPD, 678
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 
720
interstitial lung disease, 709
sarcoidosis, 711
rheumatic fever, 615
syphilis, 421–422
thyroiditis, 748b, 752
trypanosomiasis, 360
tuberculous pericarditis
Pregabalin, 1184b
herpes zoster, 397
pain management, 288b
Pregnancy
air travel, 108
allergy, 94b
antimicrobial agents in, 154b
asthma, 671b
autoimmune disease, 94b
cholestasis, 977–978, 1259b
congenital heart disease and, 631, 
631b
cytomegalovirus infection, 314b
diabetes and, 807b, 817–818
dopamine agonist therapy, 792
dyslipidaemia, 458b
ectopic, 418, 423
folate deficiency/supplements, 
125b
genetic testing, 62–63, 63b
glycosuria, 817
haematological physiology,  
1022b
HELLP syndrome, 978
HIV treatment in, 409–410
hyperemesis gravidarum, 756b
hypothyroidism, 745
infections in, 313, 314b
inflammatory bowel disease, 
906–907, 906b
kidneys in, 520–521, 520b
listeriosis, 314b, 339
liver disease, 977–978
malaria, 314b
management, 358b
prophylaxis, 358b
Marfan’s syndrome, 603–604
neurological disease
epilepsy, 1184–1185, 1185b
multiple sclerosis, 1192b
nutrition, 125b
osteoporosis, 1121
pituitary tumours, 792
pre-eclampsia, 521, 521b
prenatal genetic testing, 62–63, 
63b
prescribing in, 36–37, 37b
pruritus, 1259b
psychiatric illness, 256–257, 256b
renal disease, 520–521
rhesus D negative women, 1014b
rheumatic disease, 1101b
rubella in, 314b
STIs, 414, 414b
anogenital warts, 421, 425
genital herpes, 425
syphilis, 421
thyroid disease, 743–745, 756b
toxaemia, 978
toxoplasmosis, 314b, 362
venous thromboembolism, 723b
Preload, 182–183, 547
heart failure, 551
increasing, 191, 547f
Premature beats, 564, 569
Prenatal genetic testing, 62–63, 63b
Prescribing, 18b, 33–40
abbreviations, 38b
choice of drug, 33–34, 33b
controlled drugs, 31
decision-making, 33–36
dosage regimen, 34
drug doses, 34
hepatic disease, 36, 36b
high-risk moments, 38b
hospitals, 37
junior doctors, 29
medication errors, 29–30, 
29b–30b, 30f
monitoring effects, 36, 39–40, 39b
older people, 36b
patient involvement, 34–35, 35b
pregnancy and breastfeeding, 
36–37, 37b
primary care, 37–39
renal disease, 36, 36b
stopping therapy, 36
topical drugs, 21–22, 1264–1266, 
1265b
writing, 35, 37–39, 38b
Pressure controlled ventilation 
(PCV), 183
Pressure sores, 1299–1300
stroke patients, 1243b
Pressure support ventilation (PSV), 
195f
Pressure-controlled ventilation 
(PCV), 183
Presyncope
cardiac, 554–556, 555b
differential diagnosis, 554–556, 
554f
investigations, 555f
Prevalence of disease, 99, 99b
Preventive medicine, 100
Prevotella spp., 137f
Prick tests, hypersensitivity, 1255
Primaquine, malaria, 357
Primary CNS lymphoma (PCNSL), 
402–403, 403f
Primary complex of Ranke, 688–689
Primidone, 1184b
Prion diseases, 250b, 329b, 1211
see also Transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies
Prions, 134–135, 329, 1211
Priority-setting, 11
Pro-carboxypeptidases, 844b
Pro-drugs, 22
Pro-elastase, 844b
Pro-insulin, 802f
Probenecid
gonorrhoea, 422b
gout, 1089–1090
neurosyphilis, 1209
Probiotics, 908–909
Problem-solving therapy, 241,  
242b
Procainamide
and lupus syndrome, 1132b
and neutropenia, 1005b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
Procaine penicillin
neurosyphilis, 1209
reaction to, 422
relapsing fever, 336
syphilis, 421
Procarbazine, 714b
Procarboxypeptidases, 842
Prochlorperazine, 877, 1186
Proctitis, 278
management, 886
men who have sex with men, 417
Proctocolitis, radiation, 885–886, 885b
Proctography, defecating, 918
Proctoscopy, 422
Proctosigmoiditis, 898f
Procyclidine, 205, 237–238
Progenitor cells, 992f
Progeria see Werner’s syndrome
Progesterones, reference range, 
1309b
Progestogens
in cancer treatment, 278
hormone replacement therapy, 
760, 1124–1125
and sebum secretion, 1281
secondary amenorrhoea, 764
Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy 
(PMFL), 402, 402f, 1207
Progressive supranuclear palsy, 
1198
Proguanil, 163
malaria, 163, 356
pharmacokinetics, 25b
Prokaryotes, 135
Prolactin
plasma/serum levels, 791
reference range, 1309b
Prolactinoma, 790b–791b, 791–792, 
792f
Proline, 114b
Prolymphocytic leukaemia, 1041
Promastigotes, 362
Promyelocytes, 993f
Propafenone, 565–566, 574, 575b
Propantheline, 1226–1227
Propionibacterium spp., 137f, 1281
Propranolol
anxiety disorder, 243
arrhythmias, 574–576
congestive gastropathy, 948
effect of old age, 36b
endocrine disease
thyrotoxic crisis, 742–743
thyrotoxicosis, 741–742
older people, 36b
phaeochromocytoma, 782
in renal/hepatic disease, 36b
variceal bleeding, 946, 946b
Proptosis, Graves’ disease, 741b, 
756b
Propylthiouracil, 748b, 749–750
Prosody, 1146
Prostacyclin (epoprostenol)
endothelial function, 531
haemostasis, 996f–997f
pulmonary hypertension, 725
secondary Raynaud’s 
phenomenon, 603
Prostaglandins
allergy, 75, 89b
over-production, 1132
pulmonary hypertension, 725
and renal blood flow, 522
prostaglandin E, and finger 
clubbing, 271
Prostaglandin E1, erectile 
dysfunction, 474
Prostaglandin E2, febrile response, 
138
Prostate, 466
benign hyperplasia, 472, 514–515
incontinence and, 473
biopsy, 518
International Prostate Symptom 
Score, 514b
Prostate cancer, 517–518
incidence, 262f
inheritance, 267b
management, 518, 518b
screening, 518
staging, 518
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA), 268, 
270b, 515, 761
Prostatic acid phosphatase, 268
Prostatitis, 515
bacterial, antibiotic therapy,  
513b
Protamine sulphate, 1019
Protease inhibitors (PIs), 407b, 955
Proteases, 673f, 842, 842f
26S Proteasomes, 46
Protein binding, 22, 1020
Protein C
activated, 1001b
inflammation, 185
in pregnancy, 1022b
deficiency, 1054–1055
pregnancy, 1022b
Protein S
deficiency, 1054–1055
pregnancy, 1022b
Protein-losing enteropathy, 886, 
886b
Proteinosis, alveolar, 714b–715b
Proteins, 114, 169
acute phase, 82
Bence Jones, 477–478
biliary transport, 927f
cell membrane, 47–48
cerebrospinal fluid, 1311b
cholesterol ester transfer, 452
degradation, 46–47
dietary
energy provided by, 110
recommended intake, 114b
digestion, 842, 843f
HFE, 972
IGF-BP3, 737f
monoclonal, 1045
plasma, 926, 995, 1025
production, 44–45
refeeding diet, 122b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1310b
restriction
chronic renal failure, 488
hepatic encephalopathy, 942
urea cycle disorders, 64–65
synthesis, 43
Tamm-Horsfall, 476
urinary, 807
Proteinuria, 476–478, 487–488
Bence Jones, 477–478
diabetic nephropathy, 807, 
830–831
investigations, 476b, 477–478, 
477f
orthostatic, 476
pregnancy, 978
tubular, 477
Proteoglycans, 1062
Proteus spp., 137f
bacterial meningitis, 1202b
urinary tract infection, 512
Prothrombin G20210A, 1055
Prothrombin time (PT), 926–927, 
999–1000, 1000b
disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, 1056b
gastrointestinal bleeding, 850
liver disease, 929, 931b
acute liver failure, 934b
alcoholic liver disease, 959b
reference values, 1312b
Proto-oncogenes, 59–60, 69
Protocols, 9
Proton pump, 841
Proton pump inhibitors
GORD, 867, 868f
nephrotoxicity, 502b
Index
1359
peptic ulcer/dyspepsia, bleeding 
peptic ulcers, 198
skin reactions, 1304b
variceal bleeding, 856b
Protoporphyria, erythropoietic, 
460b
Protozoal infections, 135, 353–369
blood and tissue parasites, 
353–362
gastrointestinal, 367–369
immune deficiency and, 78b
nervous system, 1201b
Proximal myotonic myopathy, 
1228b
Prozone phenomenon, 420–421
Prucalopride, 909
Prurigo
actinic, 1260b
gestationis, 1259b
Pruritus, 1258–1260, 1258b–1259b
in cancer patients, 272
HIV-associated, 398
pregnancy, 1259b
primary biliary cirrhosis, 964
sclerosing cholangitis, 965–966
Pruritus ani, 919, 919b
Pruritus vulvae, 418b, 809–810
PRV see Polycythaemia rubra vera
PSA see Prostate-specific antigen
Pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome, 773b
Pseudo-dementia, 1162
Pseudo-hallucinations, 237
Pseudo-puberty, precocious, 782
Pseudobulbar palsy, 1174b
Pseudocyst, pancreatic, 891f
Pseudofractures, 1127, 1127f
Pseudogout, 1090–1092
Pseudohypoparathyroidism, 768b, 
770–771
Pseudomonas spp.
cerebral abscess, 1208b
drug resistance, 152f
health care-associated infections, 
146f
osteomyelitis, 1095
respiratory infection
bronchiectasis, 679
cystic fibrosis, 680–681
pneumonia, 685–686
urinary tract infection, 512
urinary tract infection, 512
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 151b, 304b
bronchiectasis, 678–679
cystic fibrosis, 681b
pneumonia, 401
sepsis, 304b
Pseudomonas fluorescens, 303–304
Pseudoporphyria, 1260b, 1304b
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism, 
770
Pseudoseizures, 1159
Psilocybin, 254, 308
Psittacosis, incubation period, 145b
Psoralens, 1266–1267
hyperpigmentation from, 1296b
skin reactions, 1304b
see also PUVA
Psoriasis, 1286–1289
aetiology, 1286–1287
clinical features, 1287–1288, 1287f
erythrodermic, 1287f, 1288
exacerbating factors, 1286b
guttate, 1287f, 1288
histology, 1287f
inheritance, 1286
investigations, 1288, 1288b
management/treatment, 
1288–1289, 1288b–1289b
nails in, 1287f, 1288
pathogenesis, 1286–1287
plaque, 1287f, 1288
pustular, 1287f, 1288
rash, 1257b
Psoriatic arthritis, 1104b, 1108–1109, 
1109f
erosions, 1109
PSV see Pressure support 
ventilation
Psychiatric disorders, 231–257, 1175
aetiology, 232–233, 233b
biological, 232–233
psychological/behavioural, 233
social/environmental, 233
classification, 232, 232b
diagnosis, 233–234
Mental State Examination, 
233–234
psychiatric interview, 233–234, 
234b
emergencies, 238b
epidemiology, 232, 232b
genetics, 232–233
HIV-related, 404
law and, 257
older people, 238b
organic, 238b
patient’s understanding 
(‘insight’), 234
physical illness and, 232
presenting problems, 234–240
prevalence, 232b
psychological factors in medical 
illness, 240, 240b
puerperal, 256–257, 256b
self-poisoning and, 210
stress-related, 233, 242
treatments, 240–242
biological, 240–241
psychological, 241–242
social interventions, 242
see also specific disorders
Psychodynamic psychotherapy, 
241–242
Psychogenic attacks 
(pseudoseizures), 1159
Psychogenic pruritus, 1259b
Psychological factors
angina, 585
erectile dysfunction, 833
fibromyalgia, 1092f
irritable bowel syndrome, 909
low back pain, 1072–1073
in medical illness, 240, 240b
migraine, 1176–1177
non-ulcer dyspepsia, 877
pain, 286f
psoriasis, 1286b
psychiatric disorders, 240
Psychological treatment/
psychotherapy, 241–242
adjustment disorder, 242
alcohol misuse, 254
eating disorders, 256
erectile dysfunction, 474
general (supportive), 241–242
interpersonal, 242
pain management, 288
psychodynamic (interpretative), 
241–242
see also specific therapies
Psychopathic (antisocial) 
personality disorder, 255
Psychosis
affective, 245
organic, 248
prevalence, 232b
puerperal, 257
Psychotherapy see Psychological 
treatment/Psychotherapy
Psychotropic drugs, 241b
adverse reactions, 1005b
PT see Prothrombin time
PTC see Percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography
PTH see Parathyroid hormone
Pthirus pubis, 416b
Ptosis, 701, 1171, 1172b
PTSD see Post-traumatic stress 
disorder
PTTK see Partial thromboplastin 
time with kaolin
Puberty, delayed, 758–759, 758b
Pubic lice, 1281
Public health, 98
ethics, 10
Puerperal psychiatric disorders, 
256–257, 256b
Pulmonary abscess, 687
Pulmonary angiography, 723
CT, 722, 723f
Pulmonary arteriovenous 
malformations (PAVMs), 
1049
Pulmonary artery, cannulation/
catheterisation, critically ill 
patients, 185–186, 186f
Pulmonary artery pressure, 539, 
617b
Pulmonary artery wedge pressure 
(PAWP), 186f
mitral regurgitation, 619
monitoring, 185–186
myocardial infarction, 545
portopulmonary hypertension, 
976
Pulmonary atresia, 635b
Pulmonary circulation, 648, 651
Pulmonary embolism/
thromboembolism, 658b, 
721–724
acute, 545
and atrial fibrillation, 565
clinical features, 721–724, 721b, 
722f
critically ill patients, 192b
heart failure, 548
investigations, 722–723, 722f
management, 723–724
anticoagulants, 723
thrombolytic therapy, 723
pain, 540, 541b
prognosis, 724
stroke patients, 1243b
Pulmonary eosinophilia, 713–714, 
713b
drug-induced, 714b
tropical, 713
Pulmonary fibrosis, 644–646
idiopathic, 707–709, 709f
older people, 714b
respiratory function 
abnormalities, 644–646, 653b
rheumatoid arthritis, 712b, 1099
sarcoidosis, 711b
SLE, 712, 712b
systemic sclerosis, 712b, 713
Pulmonary function tests, 653f
asthma, 653b
bronchitis, 653b
COPD, 675, 675b
emphysema, 653b
pulmonary fibrosis, 644–646,  
653b
Pulmonary hypertension, 724–725
classification, 724b
congenital heart disease, 631
mitral stenosis, 616
primary, 724
pulmonary regurgitation, 625
systemic sclerosis, 1113
Pulmonary infarction, pleural 
effusion, 662b
Pulmonary nodules, 660, 660b
clinical/radiographic features, 
660b
cryptococcosis, 384
follow-up, 661b
lung metastases, 274
rheumatoid, 712
Pulmonary oedema, 658b
AKI, 482, 482f
chest X-ray, 482f
drug-induced, 714b
heart failure, 550f
high altitude, 107
malaria, 357b
management, 550
near-drowning, 108
non-cardiogenic, 714b
papillary muscle rupture, 597
renal artery stenosis, 494
sputum, 644f
symptoms, 657
Pulmonary plethora, 633
Pulmonary regurgitation, 625
Pulmonary stenosis, 625
incidence, 630b
Pulmonary syndrome, leptospirosis, 
337
Pulmonary–renal syndrome, 519
Pulse oximetry, 192b
Pulseless electrical activity, 557–558
Pulses, cardiovascular disease, 526f, 
527b
Pulsus paradoxus, 532
Punch-drunk syndrome, 250b
PUO see Pyrexia of unknown origin
Pupillary abnormalities, 1172,  
1172b
autonomic neuropathy, 832b
critically ill patients, 189, 198–199
Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 735b
neurosyphilis, 1209
older people, 1064b
Purines, 1087f
Purkinje network, 529–530
Purpura
definition, 1251b
drug-induced, 1304b
Henoch-Schönlein, 501, 1119
idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
(ITP)
non-thrombocytopenic, 1007b
petechial, 1007, 1007f
pinch, 1302
senile, 1056b
thrombotic thrombocytopenic, 
1056
Pustule, definition, 1251b
Pustuloderma, drug-induced, 1304b
Pustulosis
acute generalised exanthematous, 
1304b
drug-induced, 1304b
palmoplantar, 1288
PUVA, 1266
granuloma annulare, 1301
lichen planus, 1290
necrobiosis lipoidica, 1301
psoriasis, 1289b
psoriatic arthritis, 1109
vitiligo, 1295
Pyelography, 470
retrograde, 470f
Pyelonephritis
acute, 513–514
antibiotic therapy, 513b
chronic, 504–505
emphysematous, 514
pregnancy, 520
Pyeloplasty, 510–511
Pyloroplasty, 856
Pyoderma gangrenosum, 1299, 
1299f
Pyonephrosis, 509
Pyopneumothorax, 662–663
Pyramidal gait, 1168
Pyrantel pamoate, 163, 371
Pyrazinamide
adverse reactions, 694b
tuberculosis, 693, 694b
tuberculous meningitis, 1205
Pyrethroid insecticide poisoning, 
224b
Pyrexia see Fever
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO)
biopsy, 299b
bone marrow, 298–299
laparoscopy, 298–299
older people, 296b
see also Fever
Pyridostigmine, 1226–1228
Pyridoxal, 126, 126b
Pyridoxamine, 126
Index
1360
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 129
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 129
dietary sources, 125b
excess, 129
and peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
RNI, 125b
supplements, 129
tuberculosis, 694b
Pyrimethamine
malaria, 356
toxoplasmosis, 362
HIV-related, 402
Pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine see 
Fansidar
Pyrimidine 5’ nucleotidase 
deficiency, 1029
Pyrin, 85
Pyrophosphate arthritis, 1086b
Pyruvate kinase deficiency, 1029
Pyuria, sterile, 505
Q
Q fever, 309b, 352
endocarditis, 352, 626
Quality of life, 102b
Quality-adjusted life years (QALY), 
9, 32
Questions, medical interview, 4b
Quetiapine
bipolar disorder, 245
schizophrenia, 249b
Quinagolide, prolactinoma, 791b
Quincke’s sign, 623b
Quinidine
arrhythmias, 574
malaria, 356–357
and neutropenia, 1005b
poisoning, 211b
Quinine
babesiosis, 358
malaria, 163, 356–357
poisoning, 215
skin reactions, 1304b
Quinolones, 157, 157b
adverse reactions, 157
mechanism of action, 150b
pharmacokinetics, 157
in pregnancy, 154b
prophylactic, spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis, 941
skin reactions, 1304b
see also Fluoroquinolones
Quinupristin, 151b, 159
R
R protein, 1024–1025
RA see Rheumatoid arthritis
Rabies, 309b, 1206
immunisation, 1206
incubation period, 145b, 1206
prophylaxis, 1206
Radial nerve, entrapment, 1224b
Radial pulse, 632
respiratory disease, 644f
Radiation(s)
dose and exposure, 103
effects of exposure, 103
enteritis, 885–886, 885b
infrared, 1257b
ionising, 102–103, 102b
management of exposure, 103
mutagenic effects, 266b
natural background, 103
non-ionising, 67, 102
pneumonitis, 714
proctocolitis, 885–886, 885b
ultraviolet see Ultraviolet 
radiation
Radicular pain, 1072f, 1073b
Radiculography, 1149b
Radiculopathy, 1218–1223, 1226
cervical spondylotic, 1218–1219
HIV-related, 403–404
Radioallergosorbent test (RAST), 90
Radiofemoral delay, 630f
Radiofrequency ablation
arrhythmias, 576b, 577f
cardiovascular disease, 577–578
GORD, 867
liver metastases, 274–275
renal adenocarcinoma, 516
Radiography see X-rays
Radioiodine
multinodular goitre, 754
thyroid cancer, 754b
thyrotoxicosis, 733, 748b
Radioisotope imaging see 
Radionuclide imaging
Radioisotope tests, 
gastroenterology, 850–851, 
851b
Radioisotopes
cancer treatment, 278
exposure to, 103
Radiology see CT; MRI; X-rays
Radionuclide (radioisotope) 
imaging
bone, 1063f, 1065
cardiovascular, 539
nervous system, 1149b
Paget’s disease, 1129f
renal disease, 470–471, 471f
Radiotherapy, 277–278
acromegaly, 790b, 793
adverse reactions, 277f, 278
blood disorders
chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia, 1040
Hodgkin’s disease, 1043
multiple myeloma, 1047
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 
1044–1045
brain tumours, 1215
breast cancer, 280
bronchial carcinoma, 703–704
colorectal cancer, 915
conformal, 278
continuous hyperfractionated 
accelerated (CHART), 703
endometrial cancer, 281
fractionation, 278
late effects, 796, 1035b
lung damage, 714
mesothelioma, 719
oesophageal cancer, 870–871
oral cancer, 864
pain management, 288
palliative, 288
pituitary tumours, 792–793
prolactinoma, 792
prostate cancer, 518
skin cancer, 1269, 1271
Radon, lung cancer and, 660b
Raloxifene, osteoporosis, 1123b, 
1124–1125
Raltegravir, 407b
Ramichloridiium mackenzei
Ramipril
heart failure, 552b
hypertension, 611
myocardial infarction, 599
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, 319
Randomised clinical trials (RCTs), 
8b
Ranitidine
and neutropenia, 1005b
stress ulcer prophylaxis, 198
urticaria, 1291
RANK (receptor activator of nuclear 
κB), 49b
RANKL (receptor activator of 
nuclear κB ligand), 1062, 
1062b
Rapid immunochromatographic 
tests, 338
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test, 
420–421
Rapidly progressive 
glomerulonephritis (RPGN), 
471–472, 501–502
Rasagiline, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197
Rashes, 398, 1257–1258, 1257b
atopic eczema, 1257b, 1284b
butterfly (malar), 1110f
chickenpox, 317, 317f
clinical features, 1257b
dengue, 322b
dermatitis herpetiformis, 1294
dermatomyositis, 1115
distribution, 1257
drug eruption, 398, 1257b, 1303f
erythema migrans, 335f
erythematous, 1293
erythrovirus, 316f
in fever, 295b
genital, 415, 416b
haemorrhagic, 351b
hand, foot and mouth disease, 
326–327
herpes simplex, 326f
HIV-associated, 397b, 398, 409
infectious mononucleosis, 321f
lichen planus, 416b, 1257b
Lyme borreliosis (disease), 335f
macular/maculopapular, 351b
measles, 315f
meningococcal infection, 1203
morbilliform, 351b
petechiae, 1007, 1007f
photosensitivity, 1260f
pityriasis rosea, 1257b
pityriasis versicolor, 1257b
post-kala-azar leishmaniasis,  
365f
psoriasiform, 1257b, 1304b
psoriasis, 1257b
purpura see Purpura
rheumatic fever, 614
rubella, 315
scaly, 1257b
scarlet fever, 332f
shingles, 317f
SLE, 1110f
syphilis, 1257b
tinea corporis, 1257b
toxic shock syndrome, 1276
tropical diseases, 313b
typhoid, 339
typhus, 350–351
urticarial, 1291f
vesicular, 397
RAST (radioallergosorbent test), 90
Rat bite fever, 313f
Raynaud’s phenomenon/disease/
syndrome, 602–603, 1110, 
1110f, 1113
treatment, 1113
RB-ILD see Respiratory 
bronchiolitis-interstitial lung 
disease
RBBB see Right bundle branch block
RCA see Right coronary artery
Re-entry, 562f
Reactive airways dysfunction 
syndrome, 716
Reactive arthritis, 1107–1108,  
1107b
Reaven’s syndrome see Insulin 
resistance syndrome
Receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve, 6f
Receptor activator of nuclear κB see 
RANK
Receptor activator of nuclear κB 
ligand see RANKL
Receptor diseases, 44f
Receptors
B-cell, 77
cell membrane, 48–49
drugs acting on, 19b
Recombinant human DNAase 
(rhDNAase), cystic fibrosis, 
681b
Recombinant human erythropoietin, 
chronic renal failure, 488
Recombinant tissue plasminogen 
activator (rt-PA), stroke, 
1244, 1244b
Recompression, 110
Rectal administration, 21
Rectal examination, 839b
gastrointestinal disease, 860
prostate, 511, 515, 517–518
Rectum, 845f
disorders of, 910–920
neurological disease, 1175
tumours, 910–916
see also Anorectal; Colorectal 
cancer
Red cell enzymopathies, 1028–1029
Red cell membrane
defects, 1027–1028
structure, 994, 994f
Red cells, 994–995
agglutination, cold, 1030–1031
anaemia, 1021f
aplasia, 1032
blood film examination, 999f
concentrate, 1012b
count, 1312b
destruction, 995
effects of malaria, 354–355
formation, 993f, 994
fragments, 999f
haemolytic anaemia, 1026–1031, 
1026b, 1027f
lifespan, 994, 1312b
nucleated, 999f
sickled see Sickle-cell anaemia/
disease
structure and functions, 994–995, 
994f
transfusion, 1011b
(in)compatibility, 1012–1014
Red hepatisation, 682
Red man reaction, 158
5α-Reductase inhibitors, 515, 765b
Reduviid bugs, 309b
Reed-Sternberg cells, 1042f
Refeeding diet, 122b
Refeeding syndrome, 124
Reference nutrient intake, 124
Reference range, 5, 5f
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy, 1130, 
1130f
Reflex(es)
Bezold-Jarisch, 555–556
cough, 654
diabetes, 831–832
stretch, 1144, 1174
tendon, root values, 1139b
Reflux
bile, 875
duodenogastro-oesophageal, 
866–867
gastro-oesophageal, 865–868, 865f
Reflux nephropathy, 504–505
Regenerative medicine, 69–70
Regurgitation, 852–853
aortic, 527b, 623–624, 623b, 623f
chest X-ray, 535f
clinical features, 623–624, 623b
investigations, 624, 624b
mitral, 618–620, 618b, 619f
clinical features, 618–619, 618b
heart murmurs, 562b
investigations, 619, 619b
Rehabilitation
leprosy, 350
myocardial infarction, 598–599
older people, 176–177, 176b–177b
schizophrenia, 249
stroke, 1242–1243
Rehydration see Fluid replacement
Reiter’s cells, 1108
Reiter’s disease/syndrome see 
Reactive arthritis
Relapsing fevers
louse-borne, 336, 336f
tick-borne, 336
REM sleep behaviour disorder, 1187
Index
1361
Renal, see also Kidneys
Renal arteriography/venography, 
470
Renal artery stenosis, 494–495, 
494b–495b, 495f
Renal biopsy, 471, 471b
Renal colic, 507–510
Renal dialysis see Dialysis, renal
Renal disease, 461–523
adolescents, 521, 521b
atheroembolic, 469b, 496
chronic, 483–488
pruritus, 484
stages of, 467b
in connective tissue disease
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, 
1119
SLE, 1111
systemic sclerosis, 1113
cystic, 505–507
adult polycystic kidney 
disease, 505–507
autosomal dominant polycystic 
disease, 62b
medullary, 506–507
diabetics see Diabetic 
nephropathy
drug-induced, 522–523
drug-related, 522–523, 522b
genetic testing, 62b
glomerular, 480b–481b, 497–502, 
497f
HIV-related, 405
hypertension and, 609
infections, 511–514
investigation, 466–471
pregnancy, 520–521
prescribing in, 36–37, 36b, 523
presenting problems, 471–478
signs, 485f
tuberculosis, 692
tubulo-interstitial, 502–505
tumours/cancer, 262f
vascular, 494–497
see also Nephropathy
Renal failure
acute see Acute kidney injury
ascites, 940
bleeding, 1054
chronic, 483–488, 768b
causes, 484b
interstitial, 503–504
management, 487–488
osteodystrophy, 486f
osteomalacia, 1126b
referral, 487b
renal replacement therapy,  
491
screening tests, 483–484
critically ill patients, 197–198, 
197b
cystic disease see Renal disease, 
cystic
diabetics, 830
end-stage, 484b
heart failure, 549
hepatic cirrhosis, 944
investigations, 487, 487b
pregnancy, 520–521
pruritus, 1259b
pyelonephritis see Pyelonephritis
SLE, 1111
Renal function, 24b
Renal function tests, 466–471
Renal infarction, acute, 495
Renal insufficiency, effect on drug 
dosages, 36b
Renal osteodystrophy, 1066b
Renal papillary necrosis, 505
and NSAID ingestion, 522b
pyelonephritis and, 514
Renal pelvis
obstruction at, 469f, 472, 510–511
pyelonephritis, 513
stone in, 507–508
tumours, 515–516
Renal replacement therapy, 
488–494, 490f
AKI, 483
chronic renal failure, 488–494
critically ill patients, 197–198, 
197b
older people, 491b
preparation for, 489
see also specific types
Renal tract
obstruction, 483
see also specific areas
Renal transplantation see Kidney, 
transplantation
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA), 446, 
446b
Renal tubules, 464–466, 465f
acute necrosis see Acute tubular 
necrosis
collecting ducts, 432, 464–466
distal, 431–432
isolated defects, 510
loop of Henle, 431, 464–466
proximal, 430–431
Renin, 432, 772
activity, venous blood, 1309b
hyperaldosteronism see 
Hyperaldosteronism
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system, 432, 432f
in hypertension, 608
hypokalaemia, 440–441
stimulation of, 547
Repaglinide, 216, 823
Repeated dose regimens, 23, 23f
Reperfusion therapy, myocardial 
infarction, 594–596
Replicative immortality, 264
Reproductive diseases
classification, 758b
presenting problems, 758–764
see also specific conditions
Reproductive system, 756–766
female, 757, 757f
male, 756f, 757
older people, 766b
Research ethics, 10
Residual volume (RV), 653b
Resins
bile acid sequestering, 434
ion-exchange, 442–443, 443b
Resistance, vascular see Vascular 
resistance
Resistin, 115–116
Respect for persons and autonomy, 
10–11
Respiration
Cheyne-Stokes, 544
haemodynamic effects, 532, 532b
Kussmaul, 484
see also Breathing
Respiratory acidosis, 445b, 447
Respiratory alkalosis, 445b, 447
respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial 
lung disease (RB-ILD), 708b
Respiratory burst, 73
Respiratory chain complexes, 46b
Respiratory disease, 643–732
air travel and, 108
chest pain, 658
common infecting organisms, 
688b
drug-induced, 714, 714b
HIV-related, 400–401
investigations, 649–654
physical signs, 644–646
presenting problems, 654–666
tumours, 699–706
Respiratory distress syndrome, 
acute see Acute respiratory 
distress syndrome
Respiratory failure, 663–666
assessment, 192b
blood gases in, 664b
critically ill patients, 191–197, 
192b
home ventilation, 665
management, 664
pathophysiology, 663–664
type I, 651–652, 664
type II, 664–666, 664b
Respiratory function
monitoring, critically ill patients, 
187–188
older people, 648b
tests, 652–654, 653b, 653f
Respiratory infections, 681–699
asthma and, 667
bacterial, 345–347
cystic fibrosis, 681
fungal, 697–699
HIV-related, 400–401
older people, 686b
pneumonia, 682–688
rheumatoid disease, 712
SARS, 310b, 682–683
stroke patients, 1243b
upper respiratory tract, 681–682
viral, 328
Respiratory rate, 195b
Respiratory support
critically ill patients, 193–197
non-invasive, 193–194, 193f
weaning from, 183, 194
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), 
146f, 328
Respiratory system
applied anatomy and physiology, 
646–649, 646f
clinical examination, 644–646
common infecting organisms, 
688b
infections see Respiratory 
infections
older people, 648b
tumours, 699–706
Restless legs syndrome, 485–486, 
1187–1188, 1188b
Restraint, disturbed patients, 238
Restriction fragment length 
polymorphisms (RFPLs), 693
Resuscitation
allergic reaction, 90
cardiopulmonary, 204b
critically ill patient, 188–189
drowning, 108
fluid, 185, 189, 331–332, 1011b
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 855
hypothermia, 105
poisoning, 208
Resynchronisation therapy, cardiac, 
553
RET proto-oncogene, 795
Reteplase (rPA), 595
Reticular formation, brainstem, 
1144f
Reticulin, 530–531, 1048–1049
Reticulocytes, 993f
reference values, 1312b
Reticulocytosis, 994
Retina
degeneration, 1194b
detachment, 828, 1170
microaneurysms, 609
visual field loss, 1170b
Retinal haemorrhage
high-altitude, 107
hypertension, 609, 609f
see also Diabetic retinopathy
Retinal pigment epithelium, 
congenital hypertrophy, 
911–912, 911b
Retinitis
cytomegalovirus, 388f
HIV-related, 404
Retinitis pigmentosa, 886, 1199b
Retinoblastoma, 66–67, 267b
Retinochoroiditis, toxoplasmosis, 
361f
all-trans-Retinoic acid, 1266
13-cis-Retinoic acid (isotretinoin), 
37b, 1267
Retinoids, 126, 1267
acne vulgaris, 1282
adverse reactions, 1267
skin reactions, 1304b
and hyperlipidaemia, 455
in pregnancy, 37b
psoriasis, 1289b
psoriatic arthritis, 1109
retinol see Vitamin A
warts, 1278–1279
Retinopathy
cancer-related, 272
diabetic, 799f, 828–830, 828b,  
829f
pregnancy and, 818
hypertensive, 609, 609b, 609f
Retroperitoneal fibrosis, 511
drug-induced, 522b
Retroviruses, 134–135, 328–329
and leukaemia, 1035b
see also HIV infection/AIDS
Reverse transcriptase inhibitors
non-nucleoside, 407–409, 407b
nucleoside, 392f, 407b, 408–409
Reverse transcriptase (RT), 162, 391
Reversibility test, 668f
Reye’s syndrome, 319–320
RF see Rheumatoid factor
RFPLs see Restriction fragment 
length polymorphisms
Rhabdomyolysis, 106, 442, 456
Rhabdoviruses, 1206
Rhesus D blood group, 1014, 1014b
Rheumatic fever, 614–616, 614f
chemoprophylaxis, 153b, 615–616
investigations, 615b
Jones criteria, 614b, 614f
respiratory complications, 712b
Rheumatic heart disease, 614–616
chronic, 616
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
1096–1103
clinical features, 1097–1100, 
1098f–1099f
cardiopulmonary involvement, 
1099
cutaneous and vascular, 
1098–1099
erosions, 1097f
extra-articular, 1098–1100, 
1098b
neurological complications, 
1099, 1099f
ocular involvement, 1099
connective tissue disorders, 712b
diagnostic criteria, 1097b
HLA associations, 1096
investigations, 1100, 1100b, 1100f
management, 1100–1103
biological therapy, 1102–1103
corticosteroids, 1102
DMARDs, 1102
surgery, 1103
older people, 1097–1098
pathophysiology, 1096–1097, 
1097f
polymyalgia, 1097–1098
pregnancy, 1101b
prevalence, 1060b, 1096
Rheumatoid disease
HIV-related, 404
pleural effusion, 662b
respiratory involvement, 662b, 
712, 712f
Rheumatoid factor (RF), 1067,  
1067b
Rheumatoid nodules
lung, 712, 712f
subcutaneous, 1097
Rheumatology see Musculoskeletal 
disease
Rhinitis, allergic (vasomotor), 725
Rhinocladiella mackenziei, 382–383
Rhinosinusitis, 682
Rhinoviruses, 328
Rhizomucor spp., 384
Index
1362
Rhizopus spp., 384
Rhodesiense trypanosomiasis, 359
Rhodococcus equi, 401
Rhodopsin, 49
Rib fractures, 730b
Ribavirin
hepatitis C, 161b, 162, 955
Lassa fever, 325, 325b
viral haemorrhagic fevers, 325
viral hepatitis, 955
HIV/AIDS patients, 400
Riboflavin (vitamin B2), 128
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 128
dietary sources, 125b
RNI, 125b
Ribonuclear protein, antibodies to, 
1067–1068
Ribonucleic acid see RNA
Ribosomes, 43f
Ribozymes, 295
Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale 
(RASS), 202b
Richter’s transformation, 1040–1041
Rickets, 127, 1125–1128
biochemical abnormalities,  
1066b
causes, 1126b
hypophosphataemic, 1066b, 1128
renal, 1128
vitamin D-resistant, 1128
Rickettsial fevers, 350–352, 351b
Rickety rosary, 1126–1127
Riedel’s thyroiditis, 755
Rifampicin, 151b
adverse reactions, 694, 694b
bartonellosis, 352–353
brucellosis, 334b
Buruli ulcer, 333
dark urine, 475b, 694
drug interactions, 28
endocarditis, 628, 628b
hepatotoxicity, 36b, 971b
HIV/AIDS patients
infective endocarditis, 628
leprosy, 349b, 350
meningitis, 1204b
nocardiosis, 341
pneumonia, 685b
primary biliary cirrhosis, 964
prophylactic, 153b
pruritus, 964
Q fever, 352
resistance, 151–152, 693
rickettsial fevers, 352
tuberculosis, 693, 694b
Rifamycin, mechanism of action, 
150b
Rifaximin, 909, 942
RIFLE criteria, 481b
Rift Valley fever, 325b
Right atrial pressure (RAP), 
critically ill patients, 179
Right bundle branch block (RBBB), 
533b, 560b, 571, 573, 573f
atrial septal defect, 633
causes, 573b
Right coronary artery (RCA), 529, 
529f
bypass graft, 588f
occlusion, 595f
Right ventricle, 528f, 630f
Right ventricular cardiomyopathy, 
arrhythmogenic, 637f, 638
Right ventricular dilatation, 535, 
624, 624b
Rigidity
cog wheel, 1145
lead pipe, 1145
Parkinson’s disease, 1196b
tetanus, 1210
Rigors, 295–296
Riluzole, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, 1201b
Rimantadine, 161b, 162
Rimonabant, 119
Ringer-lactate, 344–345
Ringworm, 1279
Risedronate
osteoporosis, 1123, 1123b
Paget’s disease, 1129, 1130b
Risk
attributable, 99b
cause and effect, 99
estimation and communication, 7, 
7f
relative, 99b
susceptibility to, 102b
Risk measurement, 99
descriptive epidemiology, 99b
genetic diseases, 68f
Risperidone
bipolar disorder, 245
schizophrenia, 249b
Risus sardonicus, 1210
Ritonavir, 153b
Rituximab, 278
ANCA-associated vasculitis, 
520b, 1118
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 
1041b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1103, 1103b
Rivaroxaban, indications, 567, 1018b
Rivastigmine
Alzheimer’s disease, 252
Parkinson-associated dementia, 
1196
River blindness (onchocerciasis), 
374–375
RNA
degradation, 43–44
editing, 43–44
messenger (mRNA), 42
microRNA (miRNA), 43–44
mtRNA, 45–46
ncRNA, 43–44
ribosomal (rRNA), 43–44
splicing, 43–44
synthesis, 43f
transfer (tRNA), 43–45
RNA polymerase II, 42
RNI see Reference nutrient intake
Robertsonian translocations, 57f
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 350, 
351b
Rodent ulcer, 1270
Rodenticide poisoning, 224b
Roflumethiazide, 611
Rokitansky–Aschoff sinuses, 988
Romaña’s sign, 360
Romberg test, 1138f
Ropinirole, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197b
Rosacea, 1260b, 1283, 1283f
Roseola infantum, 316
Rosiglitazone, 823, 1121
Ross River virus, 329, 1095
Rotator cuff lesions, 1074–1075, 
1074b
Rotavirus, 327–328
Rotigotine, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197b
Rotor’s syndrome, 937b
Roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), 
312b, 371
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 119b
rPA see Reteplase
RPGN see Rapidly progressive 
glomerulonephritis
RPR see Rapid plasma reagin test
RSV see Respiratory syncytial virus
RT see Reverse transcriptase
rt-PA see Recombinant tissue 
plasminogen activator
RTA see Renal tubular acidosis
Rubber allergy, 1284–1285
Rubella (German measles), 315
arthritis, 1095
congenital malformations and, 
315b
immunisation, 315
incubation period, 145b, 310b, 
315
maternal infection, 314b
period of infectivity, 144b, 315
Rubeosis iridis, 828
‘Rum fits’, 253
Russell’s sign, 256
Ruxolitinib, 1049
RV see Residual volume
Ryanodine receptor 
channelopathies, 1230b
S
SA node see Sinoatrial node
Sabin-Feldman dye test, 361–362
Saccades, 1171
Sacroiliitis
and ankylosing spondylitis, 
1105–1106, 1106b
in brucellosis, 334f
and inflammatory bowel disease, 
902f
inflammatory joint disease, 1107f
pain, 1070f
St John’s wort, drug interactions, 
28b
St Vitus dance, 615
Salbutamol
COPD, 21–22, 675
dosage regimen, 35b
drug interactions, 28b
hyperkalaemia, 443b
palliative care, 289
scombrotoxic fish poisoning, 308
Salicylate
plasma concentration, 213
poisoning, 209b, 212–213
skin reactions, 1304b
Salicylic acid
molluscum contagiosum, 1279
warts, 1278b
Saline
composition, 433b
gastroenteritis, 307
heat cramps, 106
hypercalcaemia, 273
hyperkalaemia, 443b
hypernatraemia, 439
hyperphosphataemia, 449
hypertonic, 652
hypovolaemia, 433b
isotonic, 814
Salivary glands
diseases of, 863–864
enlargement, 864b
Salmeterol
asthma, 670–671
COPD, 675
Salmonella
food poisoning/gastroenteritis, 
342, 342b
HIV/AIDS patients, 406
Salmonella enteritidis, 342
Salmonella paratyphi, 339
Salmonella typhi, 151b, 339
Salmonella typhimurium, 342
Salmonellosis, 309b
Salt see Sodium
Salt-losing nephropathy, 504, 859f
Salt-wasting disease, 782
Sand fleas, 381
Sandflies, 309b
bartonellosis, 352b
leishmaniasis, 362
Sandhoff’s disease, 451b
Sanfilippo’s syndrome, 433–434
Saphenous vein grafts, 588
SAPS see Simplified Acute 
Physiology Score
SARA see Sexually acquired reactive 
arthropathy
Sarcoidosis
lung, 709–711, 710f
management, 711, 711b
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1132
presentation, 710b
skin lesions, 1301
systemic involvement, 710f
Sarcoma
Ewing’s, 1131b
osteogenic, 66–67
see also Kaposi’s sarcoma
Sarcomere, cardiac, 530
Sarcoptes scabiei, 1280
SARS see Severe acute respiratory 
syndrome
Sausage digit, 1109f
Saxagliptin, 824
Saxitoxin, 308
Saxophone player’s lung, 719b
SBP see Spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis
Scabies, 1280–1281, 1280f
HIV/AIDS, 397b
Norwegian, 1280–1281
pruritus, 1280
Scaling, 1251b
Scalp
fungal infections, 1280
head lice, 1281
psoriasis, 1288
ringworm, 1279
tinea capitis, 1280
Scapula, winging, 1138f
Scarlet fever
incubation period, 145b, 310b
period of infectivity, 144b
streptococcal, 331, 332f
Scars, definition, 1251b
Scedosporium apiospermum, 382
SCF see Stem cell factor
Schatzki ring, 870
Scheuermann’s osteochondritis, 
1130–1131
Schilling test, 1025
Schirmer tear test, 1114
Schistosoma, 376f
Schistosoma haematobium, 376–377, 
377b, 378f
Schistosoma intercalatum, 376–378
Schistosoma japonicum, 376–378, 
377b
Schistosoma mansoni, 376–377, 377b
Schistosoma mekongi, 376–378
Schistosomiasis, 309b, 312b,  
376–378
geographical distribution, 377f
incubation period, 310b
pathology, 377b
Schizoaffective disorder, 245
Schizophrenia, 247–249
acute, 247
aetiology, 247–249
diagnosis, 245, 247–248
differential diagnosis, 248, 248b
genetic factors, 232–233
management, 241b, 248–249
prognosis, 249
Schmidt’s syndrome, 796, 796b
sibling risk, 68b
symptoms, 248b
auditory hallucinations, 237
thought disorder, 234
Schmidt’s syndrome, 796, 796b
Schumm’s test, 1026–1027
Schwann cells, 1140–1141
Sciatica, 1219
Scintigraphy
meta-iodobenzyl guanidine, 781
musculoskeletal disease, 1065
neuro-endocrine tumours, 785f
thyroid, 746
see also Radionuclide 
(radioisotope) imaging
SCLE see Subacute cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus
Scleritis, rheumatoid arthritis, 1099
Sclerodactyly, 1112
Scleroderma see Systemic sclerosis
Scleromalacia, rheumatoid arthritis, 
1099
Index
1363
Sclerosing bone dysplasia, 1131
Sclerosing cholangitis
liver function tests, 930b
primary, 965–966, 966f, 980b
diseases associated with, 965b
secondary, 965, 965b
Sclerosis, systemic see Systemic 
sclerosis
Sclerosteosis, 1131
Sclerostin, 1062b
Sclerotherapy, variceal bleeding, 
928
Sclerotic bodies, 381–383
Scombrotoxic fish poisoning, 308
Scorpion stings, 227b, 229b
Scotoma, 1170b, 1172b
Screening, 6–7
aortic aneurysms, 605b
cancer
breast cancer, 271b, 279
cervical cancer, 281
colorectal, 916
prostate cancer, 518
chronic liver disease, 928, 929b
ciliary dysfunction syndrome, 
679
cost-effectiveness, 7b
cystic fibrosis, 58b, 680–681
cystic kidney disease, 506
diabetes, 807
diabetic nephropathy, 831, 831b
diabetic retinopathy, 829
Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21), 
63b
genetic, 64
hepatocellular carcinoma, 968
microalbuminuria, 831b
poisoning, 209b
Scrub typhus, 350–351, 351b
Scurvy, 129, 130b, 1050
Sebaceous glands, 1253–1254
Sebocytes, 1253–1254
Seborrhoeic eczema/dermatitis, 
1284
HIV/AIDS, 397
management, 1286
Seborrhoeic warts, 1274, 1274f
Sebum, 1253–1254
acne vulgaris, 1281
Secretin, 846b
Sedation
aggressive behaviour, 237–238
critically ill patients, 202–203, 202b
older people, 174–175
Sedative misuse, 217b, 254–255, 
254b
Sedatives, effect of old age, 36b
75SeHCAT test, 851b
Seizures, 1159
alcohol withdrawal, 20b
brain tumour, 1213
cocaine-induced, 217b
distinction from syncope, 1158b
epilepsy see Epilepsy
malaria, 357b
poisoning, 211b
stroke patients, 1237
Selectins, 531–532
Selective noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs), 
poisoning, 214
Selective oestrogen receptor 
modulators (SERMs), 
1124–1125
Selective serotonin re-uptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs), 244, 244b
poisoning, 214
withdrawal symptoms, 20b
Selectivity, 18
Selegiline, Parkinson’s disease, 1197
Selenium, 132, 738
deficiency, 132
dietary sources, 131b
excess, 132
Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 751b
RNI, 131b
Selenium sulphide shampoo, 397
Selenosis, 130
Self-harm (SH), 238–240
older people, 238b
patient assessment, 239b, 239f
see also Drugs, overdose/
poisoning
Sellar tumours, 789
Seminoma, 270b
Senescence see Age/ageing; Older 
people
Sengstaken-Blakemore tube, 928, 
947f
Senna, 475b, 917b
Sensorimotor polyneuropathy, 
1194b
Sensory ataxia, 1209b
Sensory disturbances, 1164–1165, 
1164f
diabetes see Diabetic neuropathy
Sensory neuropathy, 1194b
Sensory system examination, 1138f
Sentinel lymph node biopsy, 1274
Sentinel pile, 919
Sepsis, 83, 190, 200–201, 304–305
AKI, 479f, 480b, 483
causes, 304b
definition, 184b
hyperdynamic, 183
management, 201, 201b
meningococcal, 295f, 1203b
musculoskeletal disease
see also individual conditions
neutropenic, 274
renal transplant patients, 493
risk factors, 200b
Sepsis syndrome, 548
Septic arthritis, 1094–1095
emergency management, 1095b
synovial fluid analysis, 1094
Septic shock, 83
circulatory effects, 185
definition, 184b
treatment/management, 201
Septicaemia, meningococcal,  
1203b
Septicaemic plague, 338
Sequestration crisis, 1032
SERMs see Selective oestrogen 
receptor modulators
Seroconversion, 141
Serology, 141
AKI, 480b
eosinophilia, 312b
gastrointestinal infection, 850
Helicobacter pylori infection, 850
pyrexia of unknown origin, 299b, 
310b
respiratory disease, 652
viral hepatitis, 950–952
Seronegative spondarthritis, 1060b
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 
5-HT), 289f, 755
excess in irritable bowel 
syndrome, 907
Serotonin agonists, irritable bowel 
syndrome, 907
Serotonin selective (specific) 
re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
214, 244
adverse reactions, 176b
overdose, 214
Serotonin syndrome, 213b, 244
Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs), 241b,  
244b
Serratia spp., 136f
Serratia marscescens
Sertraline, 244b
Serum sickness, 88b
antivenins, 230
diphtheria antitoxin, 346
schistosomiasis, 377b
Severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS), 682–683
incubation period, 310b
Severe combined immune 
deficiency, 80
Sex chromosomes, 42
abnormalities, 50–51
see also X chromosome; Y 
chromosome
Sex hormone replacement therapy 
see Hormone replacement 
therapy
Sex hormones, see individual 
hormones
Sexual activity, and headache,  
1178
Sexual dysfunction, 1174–1175
diabetics, 833
see also Erectile dysfunction
Sexually acquired reactive 
arthropathy (SARA), 423
Sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs), 411–426
approach to patients, 414–415, 
414b
bacterial, 419–423
children, 414–415
clinical examination
men, 413–414
women, 412
contact tracing (partner 
notification), 419
HIV testing, 412
investigations
men, 412b
women, 413b
management goals, 413b
men who have sex with men, 
412b, 417
in pregnancy, 414, 414b
presenting problems
men, 415–417, 415f
women, 417–419
prevention, 419
those at particular risk, 413b
viral, 423–426
see also specific STIs
Sézary syndrome, 1264
SGLT2 inhibitors, 822b, 824
SH see Standard heparin
SH (self-harm) see Self-harm
Shagreen patches, 1302
Shampoo
ketoconazole, 1280
selenium sulphide, 397
Sheehan’s syndrome, 787b, 789
Shellfish toxin, paralytic, 308
Sheltered accommodation, 249
Sheltered employment, 249
Shigella
diarrhoea, 306, 399
dysentery/shigellosis, 345
reactive arthritis and, 345
Shingles see Herpes zoster
Shivering, 103b, 104f
Shock, 190–191
anaphylactic, 190
assessment and complications, 
190
cardiogenic, 190
clinical features, 181b
dengue shock syndrome, 322
early, 191
hypovolaemic, 190
late, 191
malaria, 357b
management, 190–191, 191b
neurogenic, 190
obstructive, 190
septic see Septic shock
toxic shock syndrome, 295f, 
331–332, 331f
‘Shock’ liver, 198
Short bowel syndrome, 884–885, 
884b–885b
Short stature
Turner’s syndrome, 754b, 766
see also Dwarfism; Growth 
retardation
Shoulder
frozen (capsulitis), 1074–1075
pain, 1074–1075, 1074b, 1074f
stroke patients, 1243b
tendinitis, 1074b, 1074f
Shrinking lungs, 712, 712b
Shuffling gait, 172b, 1168
Shunts
arteriovenous, 548, 631
Blalock-Taussig, 635
intracardiac, 539, 560
left-to-right, 535–536, 561–562, 
597, 631
peritoneo-venous, 940
persistent ductus arteriosus, 631, 
631f
portosystemic, 928
reversed, 632
right-to-left, 631
TIPSS, 931, 940, 947f–948f
SI units, 1308
SIADH see Syndrome of 
inappropriate secretion of 
ADH
Siberian tick typhus, 351b
Sibutramine, 119
Sick euthyroidism, 746
Sick sinus syndrome, 563–564, 563b, 
563f, 575b
Sickle chest syndrome, 1032
Sickle-cell anaemia/disease, 
1032–1034, 1033f
inheritance, 1032
nephropathy, 505
Sickle-cell trait, 1032
Siderosis, 717b, 718
Sieverts (Sv), 103
Sigmoidoscopy, 848
amoebiasis, 368
Clostridium difficile infection, 344
colorectal cancer, 916
familial adenomatous polyposis, 
912
inflammatory bowel disease, 899b
irritable bowel syndrome, 908
schistosomiasis, 378
Sildenafil, 474, 725
Silicosis, 717, 717b, 717f
Silicotuberculosis, 717
Simplified Acute Physiology Score 
(SAPS), 204
Simulium spp., onchocerciasis, 374
SIMV see Synchronised intermittent 
mandatory ventilation
Simvastatin
chronic renal disease, 488b
dosage interval, 35b
drug history, 26b
effect of hepatic impairment
prescribing, 38b
stroke prevention, 1245f
Sindbis virus, 329
Sinemet, 1196
Single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs; snips), 63
Single photon emission tomography 
(SPECT), 1149
Sinoatrial disease, 563–564, 563b, 
563f, 575b
Sinoatrial (SA) node, 529–530, 529f
rhythms, 563–564
Sinus, definition, 1251b
Sinus bradycardia, 563, 563b
ECG, 563f
myocardial infarction, 590–591
Sinus rhythms, 563
Sinus tachycardia, 563, 563b
Sinusitis, 682
Sipple’s syndrome, 795b
SIRS (systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome), 190, 
304
definition, 184b
pancreatitis, 891b
Sister Joseph’s nodule, 280
Sitagliptin, 824
Index
1364
Sitosterolaemia, 455–456, 456b
Situation ethics, 10
Sixth disease, 316
Sjögren’s syndrome, 84b, 1114, 
1114b
secondary, 1099
Skeletal muscle, 1063–1064
Skin
anatomy and physiology, 
1252–1254
antisepsis, 147b
biopsy, 1255, 1268
blood supply, 1254
cancer manifestations, 267b, 272
changes in older people, 1254b
epidermal appendages, 
1252–1254
examination
cancer, 261b
diabetes, 798–800
endocrine disease, 734f
gastrointestinal disease, 838f
infectious disease, 295f
renal/urinary tract disease, 
462f–463f
functions, 1254, 1254b
infestations, 1275–1281
microbiology, 1255
nerves, 1254
rheumatic fever, 614f
in systemic disease, 1299b
temperature, critically ill patients, 
187
tumours, malignant see Skin 
cancer
Skin cancer, 1269–1275
changing mole and, 1274–1275
non-melanoma, 1266, 1270–1274, 
1270b
pathogenesis, 1269–1270
see also names of specific tumours
Skin diseases/disorders, 1249–1305
acute skin failure, 1264
clinical examination, 1250–1252, 
1251b
colour abnormalities, 1263
diagnosis/investigations, 
1254–1256
in general medicine, 1299–1305
genetic see specific disorders
HIV-related, 396–398
infections see Skin infections
leishmaniasis
cutaneous, 365–366, 366b, 366f
post-kala-azar, 365, 365f
leprosy, 347–350
presenting problems, 1256–1264
SLE, 1110
systemic sclerosis, 1112–1113
terminology, 1251b
treatment
surgical, 1268
systemic, 1267–1268
topical, 1264–1266, 1265b
tropical diseases, 304b, 312–313, 
313b
tumours see Skin cancer
Skin grafts, vitiligo, 1295
Skin infections, 295b, 305, 
1275–1281
bacterial, 1275–1278
diabetes, 809, 833
fungal, 1279–1280
tropics, 312–313, 313b, 313f
viral, 1278–1279
Skin snips, 312b
Skin tags, 1275
Skin tests
asthma, 669
patch tests, 1255, 1285
prick tests, 90
respiratory disease, 652
tuberculosis, 695, 695b, 695f
Skinfold thickness, 115
Slapped cheek syndrome, 315–316, 
316f
SLE see Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Sleep, 1148
Sleep apnoea/hypopnoea 
syndrome, 726–727, 726f
Sleep disorders, 1187–1188
Sleep disturbance, 1175
fibromyalgia, 1092
Sleep paralysis, 1175
Sleepiness
Epworth scale, 726b, 1187
persistent, differential diagnosis, 
727b
see also Somnolence
Sleeping sickness (African 
trypanosomiasis), 309b, 
358–360, 359f
Sleeve gastrectomy, 119b
Small interfering RNA (siRNA), 31b
Small intestine
bacterial overgrowth, 882–883, 
882b
biopsy, coeliac disease, 881, 881f
chronic pseudo-obstruction, 886, 
886b
Crohn’s disease see Crohn’s 
disease
diseases/disorders, 880–889
coeliac disease see Coeliac 
disease
vitamin B12 deficiency see 
Vitamin B12, deficiency
functional anatomy, 841–844, 841f
immunoproliferative disease, 889
infections, 888
ischaemia, 909–910
motility disorders, 886
obstruction, 862
older people, 883b
protective function, 843–844, 844f
radiation enteritis, 885–886, 885b
resection, 884–885
transplantation, 885
tumours, 888–889
ulceration, 887, 887b
Small-vessel vasculitis, 496
Smallpox, 327
Smell, disturbance of, 1169
Smith–Magenis syndrome, genetics, 
56b
Smoking
atherosclerotic vascular disease, 
581
and autoimmune disease, 87
and bone mineral density, 1120
and cardiovascular risk, 582f
cessation, 101b
cocaine, 218
COPD, 675b, 676f
effects on health, 100–101
Graves’ disease and, 748
and idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis, 708b
lung cancer and, 266b, 267
myocardial infarction, 
management, 598
older people, 169, 527b
passive, 98f, 100
peptic ulcers and, 873
pharmacokinetics and, 24b
rheumatoid arthritis and, 1096
Snail track ulcers, 419–420
Snake bites, 225–226, 225b, 
227b–229b
Snoring, 726
SNPs see Single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms
Social factors
atherosclerotic disease, 581
psychiatric disorders, 233
Social isolation, 233
Social worker, 2b
Sodium, 132
channelopathies, 1230b
daily requirements, 433b
depletion, 432–434, 433b
diabetic diet, 821
dietary sources, 131b
disorders of, 429b–430b, 430–436
presenting problems, 432–434
excess/retention, 434, 434b, 435f
drugs and, 940b
renal retention, 476
intake, chronic renal failure, 488
reabsorption, 464
refeeding diet, 122b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1308b
renal handling, 430–432, 430f
renal retention, 477b
restriction, ascites, 940
retention, 940b
RNI, 131b
transport regulation, 432, 432f
see also Hypernatraemia; 
Hyponatremia
Sodium aurothiomalate (gold), 1102
Sodium bicarbonate
diabetic ketoacidosis, 812
drug interactions, 28b
renal failure
AKI, 482b
chronic, 488
salicylate poisoning, 213
urinary alkalinisation, 210
Sodium calcium edetate, 224b
Sodium chloride
dietary, 132
see also Saline
Sodium cromoglicate, 90
allergic rhinitis, 725
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 887
food allergy, 888
Sodium ipodate, 742–743
Sodium nitroprusside
aortic dissection, 607
hypertension, 612
phaeochromocytoma, 782
Sodium phosphate, 448–449
Sodium stibogluconate, 164, 364
Sodium valproate, 241b
bipolar disorder, 245
epilepsy, 1182b, 1184b
in pregnancy, 1185b
hepatotoxicity, 978b
migraine prevention, 1177
and neutropenia, 1005b
poisoning, 209b, 224b
sodium retention, 940b
status epilepticus, 1159b
Sodium-potassium pump see 
Na,K-activated ATPase
Soft tissue infections, 305
bacterial, 332b
clostridial, 305
necrotising, 305, 305b, 305f
Soft tissue release, 1080b
Solar urticaria, 1260b
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, 919
Solvent inhalation, 254
Somatic disorders, medically 
unexplained see Somatic 
symptoms
Somatic mutations, 59
Somatic symptoms, medically 
unexplained, 236, 236b, 236f, 
238b
Somatic syndromes, functional, 236, 
236b
Somatisation disorder, 236b, 245
Somatoform autonomic 
dysfunction, 246
Somatoform disorders, 245–247
prevalence, 232b
Somatoform pain disorder, 246
Somatosensory system, 1146–1148, 
1147f
Somatostatin, 841, 846b
Somatostatin analogues
acromegaly, 793
see also specific drugs
Somatostatin receptor scan (SRS), 
851b
Somatostatinomas, 785b
Somnolence
daytime, 726
idiopathic hypersomnolence, 727
Sorafenib, 968–969
Sorbitol, 888
Sotalol, 575b
arrhythmias, 576
South American botfly, 381
Space of Disse, 925
Space-occupying lesions, 402–403
Sparganosis, 381
Spastic catch, 1145
Spastic paraplegia, hereditary, 
1222b
Spasticity, 1145
Specialist nurse, 2b
SPECT see Single photon emission 
tomography
Spectinomycin, 151b, 159, 422b
Spectrin, 994f, 1028
Spectrophotometry, 428b
Spectroscopy, mass, 428b
Speech and language therapist, 2b
Speech therapy in Parkinson’s 
disease, 1198
Speech/speech disorders, 1146, 
1146f, 1168–1169, 1169f
assessment, psychiatric interview, 
233
stroke, 1236
Spermatogenesis, 756f
Spherocytes, 994, 999f
Spherocytosis, hereditary, 1028
Sphincter of Oddi, 926
dysfunction, 987, 987b
Sphincterotomy
biliary, 848f, 985
endoscopic, 983b, 987, 988b
pancreatic, 987
Sphincters
anal, 473, 845f
bladder, 272, 466
control, 1148
neurological deficit, 272b
urethral, 136–137, 473
Sphygmomanometry, 608
Spider bites, 228b
Spider naevi, 922f, 962, 975–976
Spider telangiectasia, 943
Spina bifida, 1222b
Spinal cord, 1144
compression, 1220–1222, 
1220b–1221b
cancer patients, 272
cauda equina syndrome,  
1073b
cervical, 1218f, 1221f
lumbar, 1155–1175, 1219b
thoracic, 1221b
degeneration, vitamin B12 
deficiency and, 1024b
disorders, 1218–1222
intrinsic, 1222, 1222b
lesions
bladder dysfunction, 1156b, 
1175b
sensory loss, 1164f, 1165
tumours, 1220b
Spinal epidural abscess, 1209
Spinal muscular atrophies, 1201
inheritance, 58b
Spinal muscular atrophy, 1201
Spinal root lesions see 
Radiculopathy
Spinal stenosis, 1220
Spine
bamboo, 1105–1106, 1107f
cervical
disorders, 1218–1219
epidural abscess, 1209
imaging, 1150, 1151f
spondylosis, 1218–1219
spondylotic myelopathy, 1219
Index
1365
spondylotic radiculopathy, 
1218–1219
subluxation, 1099, 1099f
lumbar
disorders, 1219–1220
imaging, 1150, 1151f
see also Lumbar
osteoarthritis, 1084
thoracic, imaging, 1150, 1151f
tuberculosis, 693
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 56b
Spinocerebellar ataxia, 65, 1199b
genetics, 56b
Spiramycin, toxoplasmosis, 362
Spirillum minus, 313b
Spirometry
asthma, 668
COPD, 675b
Spironolactone, 765b
adverse reactions, gynaecomastia, 
940
ascites, 940
heart failure, 551
mineralocorticoid excess, 781
Splanchnic ischaemia, 198
Splanchnic vasodilatation, 939
Spleen, 76
clinical examination, 991b
enlarged see Splenomegaly
see also Haematopoiesis
Splenectomy, 1028b
autoimmune haemolysis, 1030
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 
1040
hereditary spherocytosis, 1028
myelofibrosis, 1049
thrombocytopenia, 1050
Splenomegaly, 1006
causes, 1006b
chronic myeloid leukaemia, 1039
portal hypertension, 945
primary biliary cirrhosis,  
963–964
see also specific conditions
Splice site mutations, 55f
Splicing, 43–44, 43f
Splinter haemorrhage, 1070b, 1298
Splints, 1080
Spondarthritis, seronegative, 1060b
Spondylitis
ankylosing see Ankylosing 
spondylitis
inflammatory, 1105b
psoriatic, 1114
Spondyloarthropathies, 
seronegative, 1104–1109, 
1105b
Spondylolisthesis, 1133
Spondylolysis, 1133
Spondylosis
cervical, 1218f
lumbar, 1219–1220
Spondylotic myelopathy, cervical, 
1219
Spondylotic radiculopathy, cervical, 
1218–1219
Spongiosis, 1283
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis 
(SBP), 941, 941b
Sporadic fatal insomnia, 329b
Sporothrix schenckii, 383
Sporotrichosis, 383
Sporozoites, malaria, 354
Spreading depression of Leão, 
1176–1177
Sputum, 644f
bronchial carcinoma, 703f
bronchiectasis, 678
cytology, 652
investigations, 652
pneumonia, 683
pulmonary oedema, 644f
Squamous cell carcinoma
oesophagus, 870b
skin, 1271, 1271f
SRS see Somatostatin receptor scan
SSPE see Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis
SSRIs see Serotonin selective 
(specific) re-uptake 
inhibitors
SSSS see Staphylococcal infections, 
scalded skin syndrome)
Stamping gait, 172b, 1168
Standard Early Warning System 
(SEWS), 181b
Standard heparin (SH), 1018–1019
Stannosis, 717b, 718
Staphylococcal infections
bone and joint, 329–331
endocarditis, 624b, 625
food poisoning, 341
pneumonia, 682–683
scalded skin syndrome, 1276, 
1276f
skin, 329–331
soft tissue, 332b
toxic shock syndrome, 331, 331f
urinary tract, 512
see also specific infections
Staphylococcus aureus, 137f, 138b, 
151b, 304b
acute leukaemia, 1001
bacterial meningitis, 1202b
cannula-related infection, 330f
cystic fibrosis, 681
eczema, 1284b
endocarditis, 625, 626b
folliculitis, 1276–1277
food poisoning, 306, 341
glycopeptide intermediate, 
330–331
HIV/AIDS, 401
immunocompromised patients, 
78b, 688b
impetigo, 1275
infections caused by, 330f
meningitis, 1202b
meticillin-resistant see MRSA
pneumonia
bacterial, 401
community-acquired, 682–683, 
683b
hospital-acquired, 687
septic arthritis, 1094
skin and soft tissue infections, 
329, 330f
vancomycin-resistant, 330–331
wound infections, 330, 330f
Staphylococcus caprae, 329
Staphylococcus epidermidis
endocarditis, 626
skin and soft tissue infections, 
329
urinary tract infection, 512
Staphylococcus intermedius, 329
Staphylococcus lugdensis, 329
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, 329
Staphylococcus schleiferi, 329
Starches
dietary, 112, 113b
hydrolysis, 842
resistant, 113, 344–345
Starling’s Law, 182, 530, 547f
Starvation, 120–121
infections associated with, 121b
Statins
acute limb ischaemia, 603
atherosclerotic disease 
prevention, 583b
diabetic dyslipidaemia, 811, 831b
dosage regimen, 35b
drug reactions, 1303b
hepatotoxicity, 971b
hyperlipidaemia, 434, 457b
familial, 455b
in older people, 458b
hypertension, 613
and myalgia, 1132b
myocardial infarction prevention, 
39
NAFLD, 961
and peripheral neuropathy, 1077b
pharmacodynamics, 25b
renal artery stenosis, 495
stroke prevention, 1245b
Statistics, 7
reference ranges, 1307–1308
risk, 7b
Status epilepticus, 1159, 1159b, 1185
Stavudine (d4T), 396f, 403, 409f
Steady state, 23
Steatohepatitis, non-alcoholic 
(NASH), 960f, 961, 971b
Steatorrhoea
cystic fibrosis, 680
malabsorption, 964
pancreatitis, 892–893
small bowel disorders, 883, 885
Steatosis, 959–960, 971
Stellate cells, 845
hepatic fibrosis, 843f
pancreatic, 893f
Stem cell factor (SCF), 992–993
Stem cells
diabetes treatment, 826
haematopoietic see 
Haematopoietic stem cells
plasticity, 993–994
pluripotent, 69–70
therapeutic use, 31b
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, 146f, 
681
Stents/stenting
aortic dissection, 606f
bronchial carcinoma, 704
colorectal cancer, 915f
coronary artery, 496f
drug-eluting, 587–588
endobronchial, 704
oesophageal carcinoma, 871
pancreatic cancer, 895
pancreatitis, 894b
percutaneous coronary 
intervention, 587
renal artery, 470
renal artery stenosis, 495b
superior vena cava obstruction, 
273
thrombosis, 590b
tracheal, 728
ureteric, 511
Stercobilin, 927
Stercobilinogen, 927
Steroids
anabolic, 970
synthesis of, 772f
see also Corticosteroids
Stevens–Johnson syndrome, 398
Stiff-person syndrome, 1194b
Still’s disease
adult-onset, 1104
see also Juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis
Stimulant misuse, 217–218, 217b, 
254
Stings
insect, 94
scorpion, 227b, 229b
see also Envenomation
STIs see Sexually transmitted 
infections
Stockings, compression, 556
Stokes-Adams attacks, 572
Stomach
diseases, 871–880
emptying, 850, 851b
defective, 866
erosions, 854f
functional anatomy, 840f
outlet obstruction, 875–876, 875b
surgery see Surgery, 
gastrointestinal
tumours/carcinoma, 877–880, 
877f, 878b
after gastric resection, 846
incidence, 262f
ulcers, 872–876
watermelon, 1113
see also Gastric
Stomatitis
angular, 128, 838–840, 899–900
herpetic, 326f
Stones see Calculi (stones)
Stool cultures, 849
Storage disorders, 65
Stratum corneum, 1252
Strawberry gallbladder, 987–988
Strawberry tongue, 331, 332f
Streptococcal infections
bone and joint, 331–332, 332b
endocarditis, 626b
in pregnancy, 314b
rheumatic fever, 614–616, 614f
skin, 331–332, 332b
toxic shock syndrome, 295f, 
331–332
urinary tract, 499b–500b
glomerulonephritis, 501
infection, 512
Streptococci, 136f
α-haemolytic, 136f
anaerobic, 300
β-haemolytic, 136f
group A, 305
group B, 314b
meningitis, 1202
Streptococcus agalactiae, 332b
Streptococcus anginosus, 137f
Streptococcus bovis, 332b
endocarditis, 303
Streptococcus constellatus, 137f
Streptococcus intermedius, 137f
Streptococcus lugdenensis, 626
Streptococcus milleri, 625
Streptococcus mitis, 332b
Streptococcus mutans, 332b
Streptococcus pneumoniae 
(pneumococcus), 137f, 151b, 
304b, 332b, 346, 687
bacterial meningitis, 1202b, 1204b
endocarditis, 625
immunisation, 346
pneumonia, 401, 682, 682f
Streptococcus pyogenes, 137f, 151b, 
332b
endocarditis, 625
pneumonia, 687
Streptococcus salivarius, 332b
Streptococcus sanguis, 332b
Streptococcus suis, bacterial 
meningitis, 1204b
Streptococcus viridans endocarditis, 
625
Streptogramins, 159
mechanism of action, 150b
Streptokinase, Budd-Chiari 
syndrome, 976
Streptomyces, 382
Streptomycin
adverse reactions, 694b
Buruli ulcer, 333
infective endocarditis, 628b
nocardiosis, 341
plague, 338–339
tuberculosis, 693
HIV/AIDS patients
tularaemia, 340
Stress
acute reaction, 242
adjustment disorder, 242
atherosclerotic vascular disease 
and
diabetes and, 809, 812
oxidative, 893f, 958f, 960, 
1028–1029
post-traumatic stress disorder, 242
psychiatric disorders and, 233, 242
Stress incontinence, 175, 473
Stress testing
echocardiography, 537, 554
exercise ECG, 529f, 534, 567f, 584f
Stressors, 233
Stretch reflex, 1144, 1174
Index
1366
Stria
corticosteroid-induced, 1265f
definition, 1251b
Strictures, endoscopic techniques 
for management see 
Endoscopy
Stridor
bronchial carcinoma, 701
connective tissue disorders, 712b
cough, 654, 654b
hypocalcaemia, 768
laryngeal obstruction, 728
tracheal obstruction, 657f, 728
String test, 369
Stroke, 1231–1247
anatomy and physiology, 
1234–1235, 1234f–1235f
clinical assessment, 1232f–1233f, 
1233b
clinical classification, 1234f
clinical features, 1232f, 1236–1237, 
1239–1240, 1240b, 1241f
ataxia, 1237
coma, 1237
headache, 1237
seizure, 1237
speech disturbance, 1236
visual deficit, 1237
visuo-spatial dysfunction, 1237
weakness, 1236
completed, 1240
complications, 1243b
differential diagnosis, 1240b
HIV/AIDS patients, 403
investigations, 1235–1236, 
1240–1242, 1240b, 1242b
blood tests, 1236
cardiovascular, 1236, 1242
lumbar puncture, 1236
neuroimaging, 1235–1236, 
1235f, 1241–1242, 1242b
vascular imaging, 1235–1236, 
1236f, 1242
management, 1242–1246, 
1243b–1244b
aspirin, 1244
carotid endarterectomy/
angioplasty, 1244–1246
coagulation abnormalities, 1244
heparin, 1244
supportive care, 1242–1244
thrombolysis, 1244
pathophysiology, 1237–1239
cerebral infarction, 1237–1239, 
1238f
intracerebral haemorrhage, 
1238f–1239f, 1239, 1239b
progressing (in evolution), 1240
risk factors, 1237b, 1241
atrial fibrillation, 567b
hypertension, 609–610
management, 1244
migraine, 1177
secondary prevention, 1245f
Stroke mimics, 1240b
Stroke units, 1243b
Stroke volume, 190, 530
Stroke work, ventricular, 183
Strongyloides hyperinfection 
syndrome, 370
Strongyloides stercoralis, 304b, 309b, 
312b, 370
Strongyloidiasis, 312b, 370–371, 
370b
Strontium ranelate, osteoporosis, 
1123b, 1124
Struvite stones, 507
Subacromial bursitis, 1074b
Subacute cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus (SCLE), 1110
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis 
(SSPE), 314, 1207
Subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
1246–1247
clinical features, 1246
investigations, 1246, 1246f
management, 1246–1247
see also Stroke
Subcalcaneal bursitis, 1076
Subclavian steal, 602
Subcutaneous administration, 21
Subdural empyema, 1209
Subdural haematoma, 1218
Sublingual administration, 21
Substance misuse, 240, 240b, 
254–255
see also Drug misuse
Substance P, 1079–1080, 1092–1093
Subungual melanoma, 1273
Succinate dehydrogenase, 46b
Sucralfate, 851
Sudden death
athletes, 638
cardiac causes, 557–560, 557b, 
583b
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
638, 638b
raised ICP, 1212
Sugars
dietary, 113b
recommended intake, 114b
Suicide
assisted, 9–10
attempted, 238–239
poisoning see Poisoning
depression and, 235
older people, 238b
risk/risk factors, 235b
see also Self-harm
Sulfadiazine
prophylactic, 153b
rheumatic fever, 615–616
toxoplasmosis, 362
HIV-related, 402
Sulfadoxine, 158
and neutropenia, 1005b
Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine see 
Fansidar
Sulfamethoxazole, melioidosis, 340
Sulfasalazine
ankylosing spondylitis, 1107
haemolysis from, 1031
inflammatory bowel disease, 860, 
903b
and pulmonary eosinophilia, 
713b
rheumatic disease, 1101b, 1102
Sulfinpyrazone, gout, 1089–1090
Sulindac, 911–912
Sulphonamides
mechanism of action, 150b
in pregnancy, 154b
skin reactions, 1304b
Sulphonylureas, 822b, 823
effect of hepatic impairment,  
36b
effect of renal insufficiency, 36b
hypoglycaemia and, 783f, 810
skin reactions, 1304b
and weight gain, 117b
Sulphur, 132
Sulpiride, 249b
Sumatriptan, migraine, 1177
Sunbeds, and skin cancer, 1269b
Sunburn, 1260f
SUNCT, 1178, 1178b
Sunitinib, 516, 785
Sunlight, 1260
sensitivity to, 1260, 1286b
skin cancer and, 1272–1273
Sunscreens, 1262
albinism, 1296
photosensitivity, 1261–1262
protection levels, 1262
role in skin cancer, 1270b
vitiligo, 1295
Superior vena cava, 260f, 528f, 630f
malignant invasion, 705b
obstruction, 186b
malignant, 260f, 261b, 273, 
273b, 701
thrombosis, 940
Superior vena cava syndrome, 604
Superoxide dismutase, 82, 1200
Supranuclear palsy, progressive, 
1198
Supraventricular tachycardia, 
567–569, 567f
Suramin, trypanosomiasis, 164, 359, 
359b
Surfactant, 108, 192, 646–647
Surgery
acute abdomen, 861–863
bariatric, 119–120, 119b, 120f
brain tumours, 1214–1215
cancer, 276
cardiac risk, 600, 600b
cholecystitis, 984
dermatological, 1268
diabetes and, 818–820, 819b, 819f
endocrine disease
Cushing’s syndrome/disease
hyperparathyroidism, 488, 770
epilepsy, 1184
gastrointestinal
achalasia, 869
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
colorectal cancer, 915
gastric cancer, 879
inflammatory bowel disease, 
905–906
peptic ulcer, 874–875, 874b
upper acute haemorrhage, 856
haemophiliacs, 1051
infective endocarditis, 628, 629b
musculoskeletal disorders, 1080, 
1080b
osteoarthritis, 1086
osteoporosis, 1125
rheumatoid arthritis, 1103
obesity, 119–120, 119b, 120f
Parkinson’s disease, 1197
pituitary tumours, 789–790, 792
portosystemic shunt, 928
prostatic disease, 518
respiratory disease
bronchial carcinoma, 703
bronchiectasis, 679
COPD, 677
tuberculosis, 694
solid tumours see individual 
tumour types
stone disease, 985
valve replacement, 629
Surrogate endpoints, 39
Suxamethonium
allergy, 92b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
Swabs, bacterial/viral see various 
conditions
Swallowing, difficulty in see 
Dysphagia
Swan neck deformity of fingers, 
1098, 1098f
Sweat glands, 1254
Sweating
excessive, 295–296
diabetic neuropathy, 833b
Swine influenza, 320
Sydenham’s chorea (St Vitus 
dance), 615
Sympathetic nervous system
activation, 547
sodium transport regulation, 432
Synacthen test (ACTH stimulation 
test), 778b
Synaptic transmission, 1141
Synchronised intermittent 
mandatory ventilation 
(SIMV), 183, 195f
Syncope, 554–556, 1159
aortic stenosis, 620
cardiac, 554–555, 555b, 1159
congenital heart disease, 631
differential diagnosis, 554–556, 
554f, 1158b
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 
854b
heat, 106
investigations, 555f
neurocardiogenic, 554–556
older people, 172
situational, 555
vasovagal, 555–556, 555b
Syndesmophytes, 1064, 1064b
Syndrome of inappropriate 
secretion of ADH (SIADH), 
438b
cancer patients, 271b
Syndrome X see Insulin resistance 
syndrome
Synergistic gangrene, 305, 305b
Synovectomy, 1080b
medical (radiation), 1134
rheumatoid arthritis, 1080b, 1103
Synovial biopsy, 1068
Synovial fluid, 1063, 1064f
gout, 1089
pseudogout, 1090–1092
septic arthritis, 1094
Synovial joints, 1062–1063
structure, 1063f
Synovial membrane, 1063
Synoviocytes, 1063
Synovitis
acute (pseudogout), 1090–1092
pigmented villonodular, 1134
rheumatoid arthritis, 1100
seronegative spondarthritis, 
1060b
Synovium, 1063
loose bodies, 1064
needle trauma, 1064
osteoarthritis, 1082
Syphilis, 332, 419–422
acquired, 419–420, 419f
benign tertiary, 420
cardiovascular, 420
classification, 419b
congenital, 420–422, 421b
dementia, 420, 1209, 1209b
early, 419–420
HIV/AIDS, 402–403
investigations, 420–421, 421b
late, 420
latent, 420
management, 421–422
neurosyphilis, 420, 1209, 1209b
in pregnancy, 314b, 421
primary, 419
quaternary, 420
secondary, 419–420, 1257b
treatment reactions, 421–422
Syringomyelia, 1133, 1133f, 1165, 
1222b
Systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome see SIRS
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE), 1109–1112
autoantibodies, 1110
clinical features, 1110–1111
management, 1111–1112
pathophysiology, 1110–1112
pleural effusion, 662b, 1111
renal involvement, 520, 1111
respiratory complications, 712, 
712b, 1111
sibling risk, 68b
Systemic sclerosis, AKI, 480b–481b
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), 
1091b, 1112–1113, 1300
diffuse, 1112
oesophagitis, 1113
renal involvement, 496, 1113
respiratory complications, 712b, 
713, 1113
small bowel disease, 1113
Systolic dysfunction, 535
T
T lymphocytes (T cells), 78
combined B/T lymphocyte 
deficiencies, 80
cytotoxic (CD8+), 78
Index
1367
deficiencies, 78b, 80, 80f
gastrointestinal tract, 843–844
helper (CD4+), 78, 394f
HIV infection/AIDS, 391–392
hypersensitivity pneumonitis,  
720
liver, 925f
lymphoma, 1043
cutaneous, 1264
enteropathy-associated, 882
multiple sclerosis, 1188
skin, 1252
psoriasis, 1287f
T3 see Triiodothyronine
T4 see Thyroxine
Tabes dorsalis, 1209b
Tachyarrhythmias
atrial, 564–567
ventricular, 569–571, 570b, 570f
Tachycardia
atrial, 564
AV nodal re-entry, 567–569,  
568f
Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome, 568–569, 568f
orthrodromic, 568f
sinus, 563, 563b
supraventricular, 567–569, 567f
ventricular, 569–570, 570b, 570f
Tachyphylaxis, 20
Tacrolimus, 96b
eczema, 1266
myositis, 1115
nephrotoxicity, 522b
thrombocytopenia, 1050
transplant patients, 96b
liver transplant, 979
lung transplant, 666
Tactoids, 1032
Taenia asiatica, 378–379
Taenia echinococcus, 309b, 312b, 378, 
380–381
Taenia saginata, 312b, 378–379
Taenia solium, 309b, 312b, 378–379
life cycle, 379f
Takayasu’s disease, 1116
Tamm-Horsfall protein, 476
Tamoxifen
breast cancer, 280, 280b
desmoid tumour, 911–912
gynaecomastia, 763
hepatotoxicity, 971
retroperitoneal fibrosis, 511
Tamponade
balloon, variceal bleeding, 928, 
947f
cardiac/pericardial, 532, 545–546, 
545b, 640
Tamsulosin, 515
Tandem repeat mutations, 55,  
56b
Tangier disease, 455–456, 456b
Tapeworms (cestodes), 312b, 
378–381
Tar preparations, psoriasis, 1289b
Tardive dyskinesia, 248
drug-induced, 26, 249b, 877
Target cells, 999f
Tarsal tunnel syndrome, 1099
Tarui disease, 450b
Tay-Sachs disease, 451b
Tazobactam see 
Piperacillin-tazobactam
TBG see Thyroxine-binding 
globulin
TBNA see Transbronchial needle 
aspiration
TBW see Total body water
3TC see Lamivudine
TCAs see Tricyclic antidepressants
Teardrop poikilocytes, 1048–1049
Teichopsia, 1170
Teicoplanin, 151b, 157–158
adverse reactions, 158
neutropenic fever, 274
pharmacokinetics, 158
Telangiectasia
definition, 1251b
hereditary haemorrhagic, 1007, 
1049
spider, liver disease, 943
Telaprevir, 161b, 162, 955
Telbivudine, 161b, 162, 953b
Teleological ethics, 10, 13
Teletherapy, 277
Telithromycin, 156
Telomerase, 264
Telomeres, 168–169
Temperature
body, 103
cold injury, 105, 105f
extremes of, 103–106
heat-related illness, 105–106
hypothermia, 104–105, 104b,  
104f
peripheral/skin, circulation 
monitoring, 187
stroke patients, 1243b
thermoregulation, 103–104, 103b
Temporal artery biopsy, 1068
pyrexia of unknown origin, 299b
Temporal coning, 1212–1213, 1212f
Temporal lobes, 1142–1143
disorders, 1170b
functions, 1142b
effects of damage, 1142b
Tendinitis
Achilles, 1107–1108
hip, 1075b
shoulder, 1074b, 1074f
Tendon reflexes, root values, 1139b
Tendons
repair, 1080b
transfer, 1080b
xanthomas, 454f, 455
Tenecteplase (TNK), 595
Tennis elbow, 1075b
Tenofovir, 153b, 407b
hepatitis B, 161b, 162, 953, 953b
Tenosynovectomy, 1080
Tenosynovitis, 1075
De Quervain’s, 1075
flexor (trigger finger), 1134
psoriatic arthritis, 1108
SLE, 1110
TENS (transcutaneous electrical 
nerve stimulation), 288
Tensilon test, 1226
Tension-type headache, 1176
Teratogens, 27, 37b
Terbinafine, 160, 160b
chromoblastomycosis, 381–382
onychomycosis, 1280
skin disease, 1267
skin reactions, 1304b
sporotrichosis, 383
Terbutaline
asthma, 669
COPD, 675
Terfenadine, drug interactions, 28b
Teriparatide, 1124
Terlipressin, 940–941, 946
Terminal agitation, 290
Terminal illness see Palliative care
Terrorism see Bioterrorism
Testis
epididymo-orchitis, 319
undescended, 759
Testosterone
bone remodelling, 1062b
deficiency, osteoporosis, 1120
reference range, 1309b
Testosterone therapy
delayed puberty, 759
hypogonadism, 761, 761b
osteoporosis, 1124–1125
Tests see Investigations
Tetanus, 138b, 1209–1210, 1210b
chemoprophylaxis, 1210
prevention/immunisation, 1210
wound, 1210
Tetany, 768
Tetrabenazine, 1195b, 1198
Tetracosactide test (ACTH 
stimulation test), 778b
Tetracycline(s), 151b, 158
adverse reactions, 158
bartonellosis, 352–353
cholera, 345
dosage regimen, 35b
drug interactions, 28b
hepatotoxicity, 971
mechanism of action, 150b
pharmacokinetics, 158
plague, 338–339
in pregnancy, 37b, 154b
relapsing fever, 336
rickettsial fevers, 352
skin reactions, 1260b, 1304b
small bowel bacterial 
overgrowth, 883
trachoma, 353
tropical sprue, 882
Tetralogy of Fallot, 634–635, 634f
acyanotic, 635
incidence, 630b
Tetraparesis, 1099, 1162b
TF see Tissue factor
TFPI see Tissue factor pathway 
inhibitor
Tg (thyroglobulin) see Thyroglobin
TG (triglyceride) see Triglyceride
TGF-β, 724, 925f
Thalamus, 1143
Thalassaemias, 1032, 1034–1035
Thalidomide
Behçet’s syndrome, 1119
leprosy reactions, 349b
myeloma, 1047
and peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
sarcoidosis, 711
teratogenesis, 1047
Thallium poisoning, 308
Thanatophoric dysplasia, 59
Theophylline
asthma, 670f, 671
COPD, 676
effect of old age, 36b
plasma concentrations, 39b
poisoning, 209b, 224b
prescription, 38b
therapeutic monitoring, 39b
Therapeutic drug monitoring, 36, 
39–40, 39b, 154
Therapeutic efficacy, 19–20
Therapeutic goals, 33
Therapeutic index, 19f, 20
Therapeutic privilege, 10
Thermodilution, cardiac output 
measurement, 539
Thermogenesis, diet-induced, 110, 
111f
Thermoregulation, 103–104, 103b
older people, 104b
Thermotherapy, benign prostatic 
hyperplasia, 515
Thiabendazole, 163
Thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP), 
127–128
Thiamin (vitamin B1), 127–128, 
253–254
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 128
dietary sources, 125b
RNI, 125b
Thiazides
adverse reactions, 436b
diabetes insipidus, 795
hypertension, 611, 613b
and hyponatraemia, 437b, 439b
mode of action, 435
skin reactions, 1260b, 1304b
Thiazolidinediones, 822b, 823
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, 
961
and osteoporosis, 1121
polycystic ovary syndrome, 764
Thienobenzodiazepines, 249b
Thiopurine methyltransferase, 903b
Thiopurines, inflammatory bowel 
disease, 903b
Thioxanthenes, 249b
Thirst
diabetes insipidus, 794–795
water balance disorders, 433b
Thomsen’s disease, 1230b
Thoracic aortic aneurysms, 604
Thoracic duct obstruction, pleural 
effusion, 662b
Thoracic kyphoscoliosis, 731
Thoracic outlet syndrome, 1225b
Thorax, examination, respiratory 
disease, 645f
Thought, passivity of, 247–248
Thought content, assessment, 234
Threadworm (Enterobius 
vermicularis), 371, 371f
Threonine, 114b
Throat, sore see Laryngitis; 
Pharyngitis
Thrombasthenia, Glanzmann’s, 1050
Thrombin, 996f–998f
Thrombin inhibitors, 1019b
Thromboangiitis obliterans, 603–605
Thrombocythaemia, essential, 1049
Thrombocytopenia, 1007–1008, 1050
causes, 1007b
heparin-induced (HIT), 1019
hepatobiliary disease, 929
HIV/AIDS, 394, 405
older people, 1056b
Thrombocytopenic purpura
idiopathic, 1050
thrombotic, 496, 1056
Thrombocytosis, 1008
causes, 1008b
clonal, 1008b
leukaemia, 1039
reactive, 1008b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1099–1100
Thromboembolism
atrial fibrillation, 566–567
heart failure, 549
older people, 1056b
pulmonary see Pulmonary 
embolism/
thromboembolism
venous see Venous thrombosis/
thromboembolism
Thrombolytic therapy
myocardial infarction, 595–596
pulmonary embolism, 723
relative contraindications, 596b
stroke, 1244
Thrombophilia, investigation, 1001b
Thrombopoietin (Tpo), 992–993
Thrombosis
acute limb ischaemia, 603, 603b
older people, 1056b
venous see Venous thrombosis/
thromboembolism
Thrombospondin, 264
Thrombotic disorders, 1001, 
1054–1056
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura (TTP), 496, 1056
Thromboxanes
allergy, 89b
thromboxane A, 113, 996f–997f
Thrush, 381
oral, 864
Thumb, Z deformity, 1128
Thymectomy, myasthenia gravis, 
1227b
Thymine, 42
Thymus, 76
Thyroglobulin antibodies, 741b
Thyroglobulin (Tg), 738, 739f
as tumour marker, 270b
Thyroid autoantibodies, 741b
Thyroid disease
autoimmune, 743b, 747–751
classification, 738b
Index
1368
clinical features, 741b
congenital, 755–756
investigations, 738–740
iodine-associated, 752
malignant see Thyroid neoplasia
pregnancy, 756b
presenting problems, 740–747
Thyroid function tests
asymptomatic abnormal results, 
745–746
hypothyroidism, 739b
interpretation, 739b
obese patients, 117
pregnancy, 745
thyrotoxicosis, 739b
and thyroxine therapy, 743–744
transient thyroiditis, 743b
Thyroid gland, 738–756
enlargement, 746–747, 746b
see also Goitre
examination, 735b
functional anatomy/physiology, 
738–740, 739f
in old age, 755b
scintigraphy, 746
ultrasound, 747
Thyroid hormones, 738–740, 739f
bone remodelling, 1062b
dyshormonogenesis, 744f
in pregnancy, 745
replacement
hypopituitarism, 788–789
hypothyroidism, 743–745
neonates, 749–750
resistance, 756
Thyroid neoplasia, 754–755, 754b
anaplastic carcinoma and 
lymphoma, 755
differentiated carcinoma, 754–755
medullary carcinoma, 755
toxic adenoma, 754
Thyroid nodule, solitary, 746
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies, 741b
Thyroid storm, 742–743
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; 
thyrotrophin), 736, 738–740
deficiency, hypopituitarism, 787b
reference range, 1309b
Thyroid-stimulating hormone-
receptor antibodies (TRAb), 
741b, 747–748
Thyroid-stimulating 
immunoglobulins, 747–748
Thyroidectomy
and hypoparathyroidism, 743b
partial/subtotal, Graves’ disease, 
748b, 749
prophylactic, 63, 795
thyroid cancer, 754–755
Thyroiditis
Hashimoto’s, 751
post-partum, 752, 756b
Riedel’s, 755
subacute (de Quervain’s), 
751–752
transient, 741b, 751–752
Thyrotoxic crisis, 742–743
Thyrotoxicosis, 740–743
amiodarone and, 740b, 742f, 752
atrial fibrillation, 742
causes, 740b
clinical features, 740, 741b
differential diagnosis, 742f
factitious, 740–741
goitre, 740, 740b
Graves’ disease, 740, 740b, 
747–750, 748f
management, 748–749, 748b
investigations, 740–741
iodine-associated, 740b
laboratory abnormalities, 741b
low-uptake, 740–741
management, 741–743
musculoskeletal manifestations, 
1132
neonatal, 749–750
older people, 755b
pregnancy, 749–750, 756b
subclinical, 739b, 742, 745–746
T3:T4 ratio, 740–741
toxic adenoma, 742f, 754
Thyrotrophin see Thyroid-
stimulating hormone
Thyrotrophin-releasing hormone 
(TRH), 737f, 738–740
Thyrotrophin-releasing hormone 
(TRH) receptor, 49b
Thyroxine (T4), 737f, 738, 739f
dose adjustments, 745b
hypothyroidism management, 
743–744
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 751
ischaemic heart disease 
patients, 744–745
reference range, 1309b
therapeutic monitoring, 39b
Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), 
738
Tiagabine, 1184b
TIAs see Transient ischaemic attacks
TIBC see Total iron binding capacity
Tibial compartment syndrome, 
anterior, 1135
Tibolone, osteoporosis, 1123b, 
1124–1125
Tic douloureux, 1178
Ticarcillin, 154b
Tick-borne diseases, 309b
babesiosis, 358
encephalitis, 309b
Lyme disease, 309b, 334–336, 
335f, 1209
relapsing fever, 336
rickettsial/typhus, 350–352, 351b
tularaemia, 340
viral haemorrhagic fevers, 309b, 
311f, 324–325
Tics, 1166b, 1167
Tidal volume, 195b
Tietze’s syndrome, 541b, 659b
Tigecycline, 151b, 158
Tiludronate, Paget’s disease, 1129, 
1130b
Tin oxide, 717b
Tinea capitis, 1280
Tinea corporis, 1279
rash, 1257b
Tinea cruris, 1279
Tinea incognito, 1279f
Tinea pedis, 1279–1280
Tinidazole, 158, 368
Tiotropium bromide, 675
TIPSS (transjugular intrahepatic 
portasystemic shunts), 931, 
940, 947f–948f
Tirofiban
myocardial infarction, 594
platelet inhibition, 594, 997
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor 
(TFPI), 185
Tissue factor (TF), 185, 265f
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 
595
recombinant, stroke, 1244b
Tizanidine, 1192b
TLC see Total lung capacity
TLCO (gas transfer factor for 
carbon monoxide), 653b
TNF see Tumour necrosis factor
TNF-receptor-associated proteins 
(TRAFs), 48–49, 48f
TNFR1 receptor, 49b
TNK see Tenecteplase
TNM classification of tumours, 268b
Tobramycin
cystic fibrosis, 681b
dosing interval, 153b
Tocilizumab, 1103, 1103b
Tocopherol see Vitamin E
Toes
cock-up deformities, 1098
ingrowing toenails, 1297
Tolbutamide, 216
Tolcapone, Parkinson’s disease, 
1197
Tolerance, 20
Toll-like receptors, 843
Tolterodine, 175f, 1175b
Tongue
biting, 1158b
strawberry, 331, 332f
Tonsillar coning, 1212–1213, 1213f
Tonsillitis, 321
membranous, 345b
streptococcal, 331
Tonsils, 76f, 345
Tophi, gout, 1088–1089, 1088f
Topical administration, 21–22, 
1264–1266, 1265b
Topiramate, 1184b
idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension, 1218
Topotecan, 280–281
Torsades de pointes, 570–571, 571b, 
571f
Torticollis, 1166–1167, 1200
Total anterior circulation syndrome 
(TACS), 1241f
Total body water (TBW), 429
Total iron binding capacity (TIBC), 
1023
Total lung capacity (TLC), 653b
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN)
acute pancreatitis, 892b
gastroparesis, 877
short bowel syndrome, 885
Tourette’s syndrome, 1166b, 1167
Toxaemia, pregnancy, 978
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 1292, 
1292b, 1292f, 1304b
Toxic megacolon, 900
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS), 138b, 
1276
staphylococcal, 331, 331f
streptococcal, 295f, 331–332
Toxins
bacterial, 138b, 1209–1211
botulinum toxin see Botulinum 
toxin
chemical, 308
ciguatera fish poisoning, 308
scombrotoxic fish poisoning, 
308
shellfish, 308
food poisoning, 308
gastrointestinal decontamination, 
210
marine sources, 308
plant, 308
renal effects, 197
routes of exposure, 208f
venoms, 225
Toxocara canis, 312b
Toxocariasis, 312b
Toxoplasma gondii, 361
HIV-related, 402
life cycle, 361f
Toxoplasmosis, 361–362
acquired, 361
cerebral, HIV-related, 402, 403f
congenital, 361
pregnancy, 314b, 362
prophylaxis, 406b
tPA see Tissue plasminogen 
activator
TPN see Total parenteral nutrition
Tpo see Thrombopoietin
TPP see Thiamin pyrophosphate
TRAb see TSH-receptor antibodies
Trace elements, absorption, 843
Trachea, obstruction, 728
Tracheal intubation see 
Endotracheal intubation
Tracheitis, 654b
Tracheo-oesophageal fistula, 728
Tracheostomy, 194, 195b
Trachoma, 353, 353f
Trachyonychia, 1298
TRAFs see TNF-receptor-associated 
proteins
Tramadol, 1078
Tranexamic acid, 1050
Tranquillisers, effect of old age, 36b
Transaminases see 
Aminotransferases
Transaminitis, 198
Transarterial chemo-embolisation 
(TACE), hepatocellular 
carcinoma, 968
Transbronchial needle aspiration 
(TBNA), 651
Transcobalamin II, 1024–1025
Transcription, DNA, 42–43
Transcription factor diseases, 44f
Transcription factors, 42
Transcutaneous nerve stimulation 
see TENS
Transcutaneous PCO2, 188
Transdermal administration, 21
Transfer coefficient for carbon 
monoxide (KCO), 653b
Transference, 241–242
Transferrin, 1023
older people, 1034b
reduced levels, 1023
saturation, 972, 1312b
Transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-α, 263
Transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-β, 1049
Transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs), 
1240
sensory loss, 1164
visual loss, 1170
see also Stroke
Transjugular intrahepatic 
portasystemic shunts 
(TIPSS), 931, 940, 947f–948f
Translation, 44–45
Translocations
chromosomes, 57f, 879–880, 1044
Robertsonian, 57f
Transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies (TSEs), 
329, 1211
Transplantation, 94–96
bone marrow see Haematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation
complications of 
immunosuppression, 95–96
graft rejection, 94–95, 95b
heart, 553
heart-lung, 665–666
islet cells, 826
kidney see Kidneys, 
transplantation
liver see Liver, transplantation
living donors, 96
lung, 665–666, 665b
organ donation, 96
pancreas, 826
pre-transplant investigations, 95
small intestine, 885
stem cell see Stem cells, 
transplantation
Transposition of great arteries, 635b
incidence, 630b
Transrectal ultrasound scan (TRUS) 
of prostate, 515
Transurethral resection of prostate 
(TURP), 515
Transverse myelitis, 1193, 1193b, 
1222b
Tranylcypromine, 244b
TRAPS see Tumour necrosis 
factor-associated periodic 
syndrome
Trastuzumab, 279, 879
Trauma
head, 1218
psychiatric disorders, 242
Travellers
eosinophilia
fever in, 309–310, 309b–310b
Index
1369
health needs, 309b
immunisations, 309b
incubation times and illnesses, 
310b
Traveller’s diarrhoea, 310–311, 311b
Treadmill testing, 534
Trefoil factor family, 841
Trematodes see Flukes
Tremor, 1165–1166, 1166b, 1199
causes/characteristics, 1166b
drug-induced, 1200b
dystonic, 1166b
essential, 1166b, 1199
flapping (asterixis), 923b
functional, 1166b
intention, 1145
Parkinson’s disease, 1166b, 1196b
resting, 1163
Trench fever, 352
Trench foot, 105
Treponema pallidum, 151b, 414b, 415, 
418
see also Syphilis
Treponema pertenue, 332
Treponema vincentii, 333
Treponemal (specific) antibody 
tests, 421b
Treponematoses, 332–333
endemic, 332–333
see also Syphilis
Tretinoin, acne, 1282
TRH see Thyrotrophin-releasing 
hormone
Triamcinolone, 864, 1102, 1282
Triamterene, 435
Triatoma infestans, 360
Triazoles, 159–160, 160b
Tricalcium phosphate, 1091
Tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle, 128
Trichiasis, 353
Trichinella spiralis, 312b, 375
Trichinosis (trichinellosis), 375
Trichloroacetic acid, 1279
Trichomonas vaginalis, 415
Trichomoniasis, genital, 417b
Trichophyton interdigitale, 1279–1280, 
1279f
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, 
1279–1280
Trichophyton rubrum, 1279, 1279f
Trichophyton tonsurans, 1280
Trichophyton verrucosum, 1280
Trichuris trichiura (whipworm), 
371–372
Triclabendazole, 379b
Tricuspid regurgitation, 624–625, 
624b
Tricuspid stenosis, 624
Tricuspid valve
atresia, 635b
balloon valvuloplasty, 624
repair/replacement, 625
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), 
241b, 244, 244b
irritable bowel syndrome, 909
pain management, 288b
poisoning, 209b, 213–214
Trientine dihydrochloride, Wilson’s 
disease, 974
Trigeminal (5th cranial) nerve, tests, 
1139b
Trigeminal neuralgia, 1157, 1178
Trigger finger (flexor tenosynovitis), 
1134
diabetes, 799b
Triglycerides
measurement, 453
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Trihexyphenidyl, Parkinson’s 
disease, 1197
Triiodothyronine (T3), 121, 737f, 
739f
myxoedema coma management, 
745
reference range, 1309b
Trimethoprim
adverse reactions, 158
brucellosis, 334b
mechanism of action, 150b
melioidosis, 340
in pregnancy, 154b, 334b
urinary tract infection, 513b
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole see 
Co-trimoxazole
Triple X syndrome, 56b
Triplet repeat disorders, 65
Triptans, 21, 1177
Trismus, 1210
Trisomy 13 (Patau’s syndrome),  
56b
Trisomy 18 (Edwards’ syndrome), 
56b
Trisomy 21 (Down’s syndrome)
genetics, 56b
screening, 63b
Trochanteric bursitis, 1075b, 1075f
Trochlear (4th cranial) nerve, 1139b
damage to, 1171b
Troisier’s sign, 878
Tropheryma whipplei, 134, 141, 883
Tropical diseases, 308–313
diarrhoea, 310–311, 311b
eosinophilia, 311–312, 312b
fever and, 309–310, 309b–310b
patterns in tropical countries
skin, 304b, 312–313, 313b
see also names of specific diseases
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia, 
713
Tropical sprue, 882
Tropical ulcer, 333
Tropomyosin, 530
Troponins, 535
acute coronary syndromes, 600b
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
Trousseau’s sign, 447, 768
Truncus arteriosus, 629
TRUS (transrectal ultrasound scan) 
of prostate, 515
Truth-telling, 10
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense, 359
Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense, 359
Trypanosoma cruzi, 868–869
Trypanosomiasis
African (sleeping sickness), 309b, 
358–360, 359f
American (Chagas disease), 309b, 
360–361
incubation period, 145b
treatment, 163–164
Trypsin, 842
Trypsinogen, 844b
Tryptase, 1310b
Tryptophan, 114b
TSEs see Transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies
Tsetse fly, 309b
TSH see Thyroid-stimulating 
hormone
TSS see Toxic shock syndrome
TTP see Thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura
Tube drainage, intercostal, 663, 730, 
730f
Tube feeding see Feeding, enteral
Tuberculin test, tuberculosis, 662b, 
690–691, 697
Tuberculoma, 403
Tuberculosis, 688–696
abdominal, 691, 888
bone and joints, 1096
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
HIV/AIDS patients, 406
clinical features, 689–690, 689f, 
690b–691b
complications, 691b
diagnosis, 692–693, 693b, 693f
drug resistance, 696, 696b
empyema, 691f
epidemiology, 688–696
extra-pulmonary, 690–692, 692f
fever, 396
HIV-related, 396, 400–401, 401f, 
696
prevention, 406
immunisation, 696
incubation period, 145b, 310b
latent, 695
management, 693–694, 694b
directly observed therapy, 695
HIV/AIDS patients, 401
meningitis see Tuberculous 
meningitis
miliary, 689–690
cryptic, 690b
multi-drug resistant, 696
natural history, 690b
older people, 686b
pathology/pathogenesis,  
688–689
pleural effusion, 662b, 691f
post-primary pulmonary, 690
prevalence, 689f
prevention, 694–696
prognosis, 696
progressive, 688–689, 690b
pulmonary, 662b, 689, 689f, 691b
renal/urinary tract, 514, 692
risk factors, 690b
spinal cord, 693
Tuberculous meningitis, 1204–1205, 
1205b
Tuberculous pericarditis, 640
Tuberculous peritonitis, 691
Tuberous sclerosis, 1302
pulmonary, 715b
Tubular necrosis, acute see Acute 
tubular necrosis
Tubulins, 48
Tubulo-interstitial diseases,  
502–505
Tularaemia, 309b, 340
Tumbu fly, 381
Tumour lysis syndrome, 449
Tumour markers, 269, 270b
prostate cancer, 268, 270b, 515, 
761
Tumour necrosis factor α (TNF-α), 
74b
bone remodelling, 1062b
rheumatoid arthritis, 1097f
Tumour necrosis factor (TNF), 
receptor, 48f
Tumour necrosis factor-associated 
periodic syndrome (TRAPS), 
85
Tumour suppressor genes, 59
Tumours
HIV-related, 405
malignant see Cancer
neuro-endocrine, 784–785, 785b, 
785f
see also Cancer; and specific types 
and sites
Tunga penetrans, 381
Tungiasis, 381
Turbidimetry, 428b
Turcot’s syndrome, 911–912
Turner’s syndrome, 765–766, 765f
genetics, 56b
TURP see Transurethral resection of 
prostate
Twisting points see Torsade de 
pointes
Typhoid fever, 339–340, 339b
complications, 340b
immunisation, 340
incubation period, 145b, 310b
Typhus fever, 309b, 350–352
endemic, 351–352, 351b
epidemic, 351, 351b
incubation period, 310b
scrub typhus, 350–351, 351b
Tyrosine, 114b, 739f
Tyrosine kinase, receptor, 47f, 49b, 
1005
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, 785b, 
1039b
TZD drugs see Thiazolidinediones
U
Ubiquitin, 46
UDCA see Ursodeoxycholic acid
UIP see Usual interstitial pneumonia
UK Prospective Diabetes Study 
(UKPDS), 821–822, 828
Ulcerative colitis
arthritis
and cancer, 266b
childhood, 906
clinical features, 899, 899b
comparison with Crohn’s disease, 
897b
complications, 900–901,  
901f–902f
differential diagnosis, 900b
investigations, 901–902
management, 904b
medical, 903–904
surgical, 905–906, 905b
pathophysiology, 897–898, 899f
pregnancy, 906–907, 906b
sclerosing cholangitis and, 965
Ulcers, 270b
amoebic, 367, 368f
aphthous, 863–864, 864b
Buruli, 333
Chiclero’s, 366
dendritic, 326
digital, 1113
foot, diabetics, 834–835
genital
men, 415–416, 416f
women, 418
leg, 1262–1263, 1262b, 
1262f–1263f
leishmaniasis, 366f
leprosy, 347–348
Marjolin’s, 1095–1096, 1263
mouth, 398
neuropathic, 834f
oesophageal, 868
oral, 1111, 1119
peptic see Peptic ulcers
rodent, 1270
skin
definition, 1251b
leg ulcers, 1262–1263
small intestine, 887, 887b
solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, 
919
tropical, 333
Ulnar nerve
entrapment, 1080b, 1099, 1224b
palsy, 832
Ultrafiltration, 430, 464
failure, 493b
Ultrasound
cancer diagnosis, 269
Doppler see Doppler ultrasound
echocardiography see 
Echocardiography
endocrine disease
polycystic ovary, 764f
thyroid gland, 747
endoscopic, 985f
gastrointestinal tract, 846, 847b, 
847f
oesophageal cancer, 871f
pancreatitis, 891
hepatobiliary disease, 930, 930f
cholangitis, 985f
gallstones, 847f, 930f
NAFLD, 961
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
967–968
musculoskeletal disease, 1065
synovitis, 1065f
nervous system, 1149b
prenatal, 63b
renal, 468–469, 469f, 480b
renal artery stenosis, 494–495
Index
1370
respiratory disease, 651, 663f
pleural disease/pleural 
effusion, 663f
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR), 102, 1269
photosensitivity, 1260, 1260f
psoriasis, 1289b
ultraviolet B, 1289b
PUVA see PUVA
skin cancer and, 266b
ultraviolet A, 1266
ultraviolet B, 1266, 1289b
Wood’s light, 1255
Undernutrition, 111–112, 120–124
causes, 121b
classification, 120b
in hospital, 122–124, 122f
response to, 111–112
Upper limb, chronic arterial disease, 
602
Uracil, 43
Uraemia
haemolytic uraemic syndrome, 
138b, 468, 495–496
see also Renal failure
Urea, 430b
AKI, 480b
blood levels, 1308b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1308b
Urea breath tests, 851b
Helicobacter pylori infection, 
850–851
Urea and electrolytes (U&Es) test, 
430b
gastrointestinal bleeding, 855
Ureidopenicillins, 154b
Ureter, 466
colic, 507–508
diseases of, 510–511
ectopic, 510
megaureter, 510
obstruction, 508f
stones, 507–508
Ureteropyelogram, retrograde, 517
Ureterovaginal fistula, 473
Urethral discharge, 415, 415f
Urethral syndrome, 511–512
Urethritis
chlamydial, 415, 1104, 1108
gonococcal, 415
non-specific, 415, 1107
reactive arthritis, 1107
subclinical, 416b
Urge incontinence, 175, 473, 1174
Uric acid (urate)
crystals, 507b
gout, 1087
lowering, 1089b
pool, 1087f
raised, 1087b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1310b
Uricosuric drugs, 1089–1090
Urinalysis, 468
AKI, 480b
reference values, 1311b
Urinary diversion, 517
Urinary incontinence see 
Incontinence
Urinary tract
calculi, 507–510
clinical examination, 462–464
collecting system
diseases, 510–511
imaging, 469f–470f
congenital abnormalities, 510–511
tumours, 515–519
Urinary tract disease
investigation, 466–471
presenting problems, 471–478
Urinary tract infection (UTI), 
511–514
clinical features, 511–512
investigation, 512, 512b
management, 512, 513b
older people, 512b
pathophysiology, 511, 511b
prophylaxis, 513b
recurrent, 512–513
risk factors, 511b
stroke patients, 1243b
tuberculosis, 692
vesico-ureteric reflux and, 511b
Urine
alkalinisation, 210–211
black, 1026–1027
microscopy, 463b, 480b
output measurement, critically ill 
patients, 187
red/dark, 475b
retention
acute, 514–515
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 
472, 514–515
chronic, 515
volume, 471–472
see also Anuria; Oliguria
Urine testing
diabetes, 807–808
glycaemic control assessment, 811
Urobilin, 927
Urobilinogen, 927
Urography, intravenous see 
Intravenous urography
Urokinase, 265f, 998f
Urothelial tumours, 516–517, 517f
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)
gallstones, 983b
primary biliary cirrhosis, 964, 
964b
Urticaria (nettle rash; hives), 
1290–1291, 1290b, 1291f
drug-induced, 1291, 1304b
papular, 374
pathogenesis, 1291f
solar, 1260b
Ustekinumab, 1109
Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), 
708b, 709f
Uterine tumours, 262f
Uterocele, 510
UTI see Urinary tract infection
Uveitis
acute anterior, ankylosing 
spondylitis, 1105
brucellosis, 334f
HTLV-1-associated, 328–329
immune recovery, 404
reactive arthritis, 1108
treatment, 338
Weil’s disease, 337
UVR see Ultraviolet radiation
V
vacA see Vacuolating cytotoxin
Vaccines/vaccination, 148–149, 149b
anthrax, 149b
antibody deficiencies, 81–82
BCG, 696
chickenpox, 318
cholera, 345
COPD patients, 676f, 677
diphtheria, 346
guidelines, 149b
Haemophilus influenzae, 149b
hepatitis, 149b, 1051–1052
HIV, 410
in HIV/AIDS patients, 407
human papillomavirus, 425, 425b
influenza, 320
HIV/AIDS patients, 407
older people, 320
Japanese B encephalitis, 328
leprosy, 350
Lyme disease, 336
malaria, 358
meningococcal infection, 
1203–1204
MMR, 319
mumps, 319
plague, 339
pneumococcal pneumonia, 346
poliomyelitis, 1207
rabies, 1206
rotavirus, 327–328
rubella, 315
tetanus, 1210
tick-borne encephalitis, 309b
typhoid, 340
use of, 149
varicella, 318
viral hepatitis, 954b
whooping cough (pertussis), 149b
yellow fever, 324
see also Immunisation
Vaccinia virus, 327
Vacuolating cytotoxin (vacA), 873f
VAD see Ventricular assist devices
Vagina
discharge, 417–419, 417b, 417f
see also Vulvovaginal conditions
Vaginosis, bacterial, 417, 417b, 417f
Vagotomy, peptic ulcer, 875
Vagus (10th cranial) nerve, tests, 
1139b
Valaciclovir
herpes simplex infection, 318b
herpes virus infection, 161–162, 
161b
genital, 424–425
Valganciclovir
CMV, 322, 406b
herpesvirus infection, 161b, 406b
Valine, 114b
Valproate see Sodium valproate
Valsartan
heart failure, 552b
hypertension, 611–612
myocardial infarction, 599
Valves of Heister, 926
Valvular heart disease, 546, 613–629
causes, 546b, 614b
infective endocarditis, 625–629
prevention, 628–629
rheumatic, 614–616
risks of non-cardiac surgery, 600, 
600b
valve replacement, 629
see also names of individual valves 
and diseases
Valvuloplasty
aortic, 621–623
mitral, 618, 618b
Van Buchem’s disease, 1131
Vancomycin, 151b, 157–158
acute leukaemia, 1001
adverse reactions, 158
Clostridium difficile infection, 344
infective endocarditis, 301, 628
meningitis, 1204b
neutropenic sepsis, 274
pharmacokinetics, 158
respiratory disease, 686
skin reactions, 1304b
therapeutic monitoring, 39b
toxic shock syndrome, 331
Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (VRSA), 330–331
Vandetanib, 755
Vanishing bile duct syndrome, 966, 
980
Variability of disease, 99
Variceal bleeding, 942, 942f
cirrhosis, 942, 942f
management, 946–948, 946b, 947f
portal hypertension, 945
prevention, 946, 946b, 948b
Variceal ligation, 848f
Varicella, pneumonia, 650b
Varicella zoster virus 
immunoglobulin (VZIG), 
318, 318b
Varicella zoster virus (VZV), 317b, 
317f
HIV infection/AIDS, 404
HSCT, 1017b
immunisation, 149b, 318
pregnancy, 314b
stem cell transplantation, 1017b
treatment, 317b–318b
Varices
gastrointestinal haemorrhage,  
942
oesophageal, 942, 942f, 945
rectal, 945
Varicose veins, 1262–1263
Variegate porphyria, 450b, 459f
Variola, 327
Vascular dementia, 250b
Vascular disease, 600–613
atherosclerotic see Atherosclerosis
diabetics, 602, 602b, 826–827, 827f
diffuse, 250
liver, 975–977
peripheral, 600–603, 600b
pulmonary, 721–725
renal, 494–497
Vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF), 264
Vascular imaging, 1235–1236, 1236f, 
1242
Vascular malformations, 
gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage, 849f
Vascular resistance
portal hypertension, 945
in pregnancy, 520
pulmonary, 548, 553, 616, 630f
systemic, 201, 530–531
Vasculitis, 1115–1119, 1116f, 1299
ANCA-associated, 1118
cerebral, 1174b, 1190
cryoglobulinaemic, 1119
cutaneous, 680b
drug-induced, 1132b, 1304b
leg ulceration, 1263
renal arteries, 494
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098–1099
small-vessel, 496
systemic, 1116b, 1117f
renal involvement, 519–520
urticarial, 1290
see also individual conditions
Vaso-occlusive crisis, 1032–1033
Vasoactive drugs, circulatory 
effects, 191b
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide 
(VIP), 846b
Vasodilatation, 190
splanchnic, 939
Vasodilators
angina, 589
heart failure, 552
hypertension, 612
myocardial infarction, 545b
valvular heart disease, 619–620
Vasomotor rhinitis, 725
Vasopressin see Antidiuretic 
hormone
VC see Vital capacity
VDRL see Venereal Diseases 
Research Laboratory test
VDRR see Vitamin D-resistant 
rickets
Vegans, 114
vitamin B deficiency, 1025
Velocardiofacial syndrome, 56b, 66
Venae cavae, 528, 528f
see also Inferior vena cava; 
Superior vena cava
Venereal Diseases Research 
Laboratory (VDRL) test, 
251b, 420–421
Venesection
haemochromatosis, 972–973
polycythaemia rubra vera, 1049
Venlafaxine, 244b
Veno-occlusive disease, liver, 976
Venography
cerebral, 1247
hepatic portal, 931, 976
venous thrombosis, 1010, 1247
Index
1371
Venomous animals, 225–226, 225b, 
227b, 229b
Venoms, 225
effects, 225b
insect, allergy to, 94
marine animals, 228b
scorpions, 227b, 229b
snakes, 225–226, 225b, 227b–229b
spiders, 228b
see also Envenomation
Venous disease
cerebral, 1247
leg ulcers, 1263, 1263f
Venous hypertension, 1262
Venous pulse
distinction from arterial pulse, 
527b
jugular, 527b
Venous thrombosis/
thromboembolism (VTE), 
721–724, 1008–1011
air travellers, 108
at high altitude, 107
causes, 1009f
clinical features, 721–724, 721b, 
1008–1011
investigation, 722–723, 1010, 
1010f
management, 723–724, 1010–1011, 
1011b
anticoagulants, 723
caval filters, 724
thrombolytic therapy, 723
older people, 724b
predisposing factors, 1009b
pregnancy, 723b
prevention, 1020–1021, 1020b
prognosis, 724
retinal vein, 609f
risk factors, 721b
stroke patients, 1243b
Wells score, 1010b
Ventilation
mechanical (artificial), 195f
advanced strategies, 196
ARDS, 196b
asthma, 672
conditions requiring, 194b
COPD, 678b
critically ill patients, 194, 194b
envenomation, 230
high-frequency oscillatory,  
196
mandatory modes, 195–196
prone, 196
respiratory failure
settings, 195, 195b
withdrawal, 183, 196–197, 197b
non-invasive, 194, 195f
COPD exacerbations, 678, 678b
non-invasive positive pressure 
ventilation
respiratory failure, 665
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch,  
648
older people, 648b
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) lung 
scanning, pulmonary 
embolism, 722
Ventricles
heart, 534f
see also Left ventricle; Right 
ventricle
Ventricular aneurysm, 597–598
Ventricular assist devices (VAD), 
553
Ventricular contractility, reduced, 
546b
Ventricular ectopic beats, 569, 569f
Ventricular fibrillation (VF)
cardiac arrest, 557, 557f
myocardial infarction, 596
Ventricular inflow obstruction,  
546b
Ventricular outflow obstruction, 
546b
Ventricular remodelling, 597–598, 
597f
Ventricular rupture, 597
Ventricular septal defect, 633–634, 
634f
heart murmurs, 562b
incidence, 630b
tetralogy of Fallot, 634–635, 634f
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, 
569–571
Ventricular tachycardia (VT), 
569–570, 570b, 570f
poisoning, 211b
pulseless, 557–558
Ventricular volume overload, 546b
Ventriculitis, 1205
Ventriculography, left, 538–539
VER see Visual evoked responses
Verapamil
angina, 586–587, 587b, 594
aortic dissection, 607
arrhythmias, 565–566, 575b, 576
cluster headache, 1177
hypertension, 612
tachyarrhythmias
atrial fibrillation, 565–566
atrial flutter, 564
Verbal rating scale for pain, 285
Verocytotoxigenic Escherichia coli 
(VTEC), 343f, 496
Verotoxin, 495–496
Verrucae, 1278
Verruga peruana, 352, 352b
Vertebral fracture, 1071b
Vertebroplasty, 1080b, 1125, 1125b
Vertigo, 173, 1157, 1167–1168
benign paroxysmal positional, 
1186, 1186f
Very low-density lipoproteins 
(VLDL), 451
Vesicle, definition, 1251b
Vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR), 505f
Vesicovaginal fistula, 473
vestibular disorders, 1186
Vestibular failure, acute, 1186
Vestibular neuronitis, 853f, 1158f
Vestibulitis, 418b
Vestibulocochlear (8th cranial) 
nerve, tests, 1139b
VF see Ventricular fibrillation
Vibrio cholerae, 138b, 306, 344
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 345
Vibrio vulnificus, 305
Vildagliptin, 824
Villi, intestinal, atrophy, 881b
Vimentin, 48
Vinblastine, Hodgkin’s disease, 1043
Vinca alkaloids see Vinblastine; 
Vincristine
Vincristine
bronchial carcinoma, 704
leukaemia, 1037b
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 1045
and peripheral neuropathy, 1223b
VIP see Vasoactive intestinal 
polypeptide
Viper venom time, dilute Russell, 
1055
VIPomas, 785b
Viral arthritis, 1095
Viral haemorrhagic fevers, 309b, 
311f, 324–325
Viral hepatitis, 948–955
causes, 948b
complications, 949b
HIV-related, 400
icteric, 955
immunisation, 954b
haemophiliacs, 1051–1052
HIV/AIDS patients, 407
non-A, non-B, 954
non-A, non-B, non-C (NANBNC), 
955
transmission, 950b
blood products, 1011–1012
sexual, 426
treatment, 161b, 162
see also under individual hepatitis 
viruses
Viral infections, 314–329
antiviral agents, 161, 161b, 1267
see also Antiretroviral drugs
arthritis, 1095
and cancer, 266b
diabetes type 1 and, 804
gastrointestinal, 327–328
haemorrhagic fevers, 324–325, 
325b
immune deficiency and, 78b
nervous system
encephalitis, 1205–1206
meningitis, 1201–1202
with neurological involvement, 
328–329
respiratory tract, 328
pneumonia, 319–320, 706b
upper, 681–682
with rheumatological 
involvement, 329
sexually transmitted, 423–426
see also specific infections
skin, 325–327, 1278–1279
HIV/AIDS, 397
systemic
with exanthem, 314–319
without exanthem, 319–325
TSEs, 329, 1211
see also specific infections/infectious 
diseases
Viral load
hepatitis B, 951f
HIV, 393–394, 408
Viral warts see Warts, viral
Virchow’s gland, 838f
Virilisation, 763, 1282
Virions, HIV, 391
Virtue ethics, 10
Viruses, 134–135
bioterrorism, 145
incubation periods, 310b
life cycle, 135f
oncogenic, HIV/AIDS, 391–392
Vision
diabetics, 828
double (diplopia), 1169–1170
loss
diabetics, 828
leprosy, 348–349
older people, 166f
quinine overdose, 215
see also Blindness
Visual analogue rating scale for 
pain, 285
Visual disorders, 1169–1173
giant cell arteritis, 1117
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 
1118f
Graves’ disease, 735f, 739b, 
750–751, 750f
positive visual phenomena, 1170
stroke, 1237
Visual evoked responses (VER), 
1153f
Visual field defect, 1170b
pituitary tumours, 764b
Visual fields, examination by 
confrontation, 735f
Visual Infusion Phlebitis score,  
330b
Visual loss, 1169–1170
Visual pathways, 1145–1146, 
1145f–1146f
Visuo-spatial dysfunction, 1237
Vital capacity (VC), 648b, 653f
forced (FVC), 653b
Vitamins, 124–130
absorption, 843
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiencies, 124–126
older people, 127b
dietary sources, 125b
excess, 127
fat-soluble, 126–127
reference nutrient intake, 125b
storage, 927
water-soluble, 127–129
see also specific vitamins
Vitamin A (retinol), 126–127
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 126f, 127
dietary sources, 125b
excess, 127
RNI, 125b
supplements, 127
toxicity, 127
Vitamin B1 see Thiamin
Vitamin B2 see Riboflavin
Vitamin B3 see Niacin
Vitamin B6 see Pyridoxine
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin), 129
absorption, 1024–1025
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 1024–1025, 1222b
causes, 1025
management, 1026
neurological consequences, 
129, 1024b, 1223b
older people, 127b
pregnancy, 1022b
small bowel disease, 1025
dietary sources, 125b
older people, 127b
reference values, 1312b
RNI, 125b
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid), 129
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 129, 130b, 1050
dietary sources, 125b
RNI, 125b
Vitamin D, 127
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 127, 768b, 1126–1127
older people, 127b
reference range, 1310b
rickets/osteomalacia 
management, 1127
dietary sources, 125b
excess, 127
metabolism, 127, 1127f
osteoporosis, 1123b, 1124
reference values, venous blood, 
1310b
RNI, 125b, 127
supplements, stone disease and
Vitamin D analogues, 
hypoparathyroidism, 
770–771
Vitamin D and calcium 
supplements, osteoporosis 
prophylaxis, 1124
Vitamin D-deficient osteomalacia, 
1126–1127
Vitamin D-resistant rickets (VDRR), 
1128
Vitamin E, 127
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
deficiency, 127
dietary sources, 125b
RNI, 125b
Vitamin K, 127
antagonists, 1019b
anticoagulant poisoning, 224b
biochemical assessment of status, 
126b
blood coagulation, 127
deficiency, 127
dietary sources, 125b
RNI, 125b
supplements, epilepsy in 
pregnancy, 1185b
Vitiligo, 272, 777, 1295, 1295f
Vitrectomy, 830
Index
1372
VLDL see Very low-density 
lipoproteins
Voiding see Micturition
Volume of distribution, 22
Vomiting, 853
causes, 306b, 853f
cyclical vomiting syndrome,  
877
palliative care, 289–290, 289f
peptic ulcer, 875–876
psychogenic, 877
Von Gierke disease, 450b
Von Hippel-Lindau disease/
syndrome, 267b, 1216
Von Willebrand disease, 1053–1054, 
1053b
Von Willebrand factor, 1053
Voriconazole, 160, 160b
acute leukaemia patients, 1001
aspergillosis, 698–699
candidiasis, 383
fusariosis, 384
mycetoma, 382
neutropenic fever, 274
paracoccidioidomycosis, 386
VRSA see Vancomycin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus
VT see Ventricular tachycardia
VTE see Venous thromboembolism
VTEC see Verocytotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli
Vulva
chronic pain, 418–419, 418b
pruritus, 418–419, 418b
schistosomal papilloma, 377
Vulvodynia, 418b
VUR see Vesico-ureteric reflux
VZV see Varicella zoster virus
W
Waddling gait, 172b
Waist circumference, 115, 117
Waldenström’s 
macroglobulinaemia, 1045
Wallenberg’s syndrome, 1148b
Warfarin, 1019–1020
adverse reactions, 176b, 1020
antiphospholipid syndrome,  
1055
atrial fibrillation, 567b, 594, 742
drug interactions, 28b
indications, 1018b
monitoring, 1000
older people, 36b, 566b, 724b
overdose, 224b
pharmacokinetics, 25b
in pregnancy, 37b, 723b
pulmonary embolism, 723
SLE, 1112
stroke prevention, 1245f
venous thromboembolism, 723, 
1004, 1011b
in pregnancy, 723b
Warfarin-like rodenticides, 224b
Warm autoimmune haemolysis, 
1029–1030
Warts
seborrhoeic, 397
viral, 1278–1279, 1278f
(ano)genital, 425–426
Water
absorption/secretion, 842–843, 
843f
daily requirements, 433b
depletion, 432–434, 433b
see also Dehydration
disorders of balance, 429–430, 
429b, 436–439
distribution, 428b, 429
excess, 434b
inhalation, 108
investigations, 429–430
reabsorption, 884–885
renal handling, 436–437
restriction, ascites, 940
total body (TBW), 429
Water deprivation test, 795b
Waterbrash, 866
Watermelon stomach, 1113
Wax baths, 1080
WBC see White cells
Weakness, 1162–1163, 1162b
facial, 1163
limb, 1228b
muscle, 1076, 1077b
palliative care, 290
stroke, 1236
Weal, definition, 1251b
Weber’s syndrome, 1148, 1148b
Wegener’s granulomatosis see 
Granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis
Weight gain, 117b
see also Obesity
Weight loss, 859–860
after gastric resection, 875
anorexia nervosa, 255–256, 256b, 
1121
cancer patients, 271, 271b
causes, 121b, 859f, 860b
diabetes, 804, 806
HIV/AIDS, 396, 396f
investigations, 860
palliative care, 290
pancreatitis, 892–893
rheumatoid arthritis, 1098
Weight reduction
diabetics, 821
diets, 118–119, 118b
musculoskeletal disease, 1078
obesity, 117–120
Weil-Felix reaction, 142
Weil’s disease, 337
Wells scoring system, venous 
thrombosis, 1010b
Wenckebach’s phenomenon, 572f
Werner’s syndrome, 50, 795b
Wernicke-Korsakoff disease/
syndrome, 253
prevention, 253–254
Wernicke’s aphasia, 1169f
Wernicke’s area, 1142–1143, 1146
Wernicke’s encephalopathy, 128
West Nile encephalitis, 328, 1205
West Nile virus, 328
Western blot test, 141–142
WG see Wegener’s granulomatosis
Wheeze, asthma, 667
Whipple’s disease, 883–884, 883b
Whipple’s triad, 783, 783f
Whipworm (Trichuris trichiura), 
371–372
White cells, 995–996
count, 1026b
acute fever without localising 
signs, 310b
differential, 1312b
high see Leucocytosis
low see Leucopenia
viral hepatitis, 948–949
formation, 995
polymorphonuclear see 
Neutrophils
reference values, 1312b
structure and function, 999f
White spirit, poisoning, 224b
Whiteheads, 1281
Whitlow, herpetic, 326f
WHO see World Health 
Organization
Whole bowel irrigation, 210, 210b
Whooping cough (pertussis), 682
chemoprophylaxis, 153b
immunisation, 149b
incubation period, 145b, 310b
period of infectivity, 144b
Wickham’s striae, 1289–1290
Williams syndrome, 66
genetics, 56b
Wills, living, 171
Wilms’ tumour, 267b
Wilson’s disease, 132, 973–974
inheritance, 973
investigations, 974
liver disease, 973
liver function tests, 930b
neurological aspects, 974, 1198
Windkessel effect, 530
Winterbottom’s sign, 359
Withdrawal effects, 20–21, 20b
Wolbachia spp., 372
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) 
syndrome, 568–569, 568f
Wood’s light, 1255
World Health Organization  
(WHO)
analgesic ladder, 286–287, 287f
ICD-10, 232
macronutrient recommendations, 
114b
refeeding diet, 122b
Worms see Helminthic infections; 
and specific types of 
infection
Wound dressings, 1266, 1266b
Wound infections
staphylococcal, 330, 330f
tetanus, 1210
WPW syndrome see Wolff-
Parkinson-White (WPW) 
syndrome
Wrist
fracture, 1120f
pain, 1075
Writer’s cramp, 1166–1167
Wuchereria bancrofti, 312b, 372, 372b, 
372f, 713
X
X chromosome, 50–51
abnormalities see individual 
conditions
inactivation disorders, 54b
mutations, 53
see also X-linked
X-linked diseases
haemophilia A, 1051–1053
hypophosphataemic rickets 
(XLH), 1128
X-linked inheritance, 53
X-linked mental handicap (XLMH), 
66
X-rays
ankylosing spondylitis, 1106f
body packers, 219f
brain tumours, 1215
cancer diagnosis, 269
cardiovascular system see Chest 
radiography/X-ray
Charcot foot, 834f
chest see Chest 
radiography/X-ray
gastrointestinal disease, 845–846, 
847b, 847f
achalasia, 869f
contrast studies, 846
inflammatory bowel disease, 
901–902, 901f
hepatobiliary disease, 948f
hyperparathyroidism, 769–770
musculoskeletal disorders, 1064, 
1064b
algodystrophy, 1130f
ankylosing spondylitis,  
1106f
bone fractures, 1071, 1120f
bony metastases, 275
Charcot joint, 1133f
chondrocalcinosis, 1090f
gout, 1067b, 1089f
osteoarthritis, 1083f–1084f
osteomalacia, 1127f
osteoporosis, 1120f
osteosarcoma, 1132
Paget’s disease, 1129f
reactive arthritis, 1108
supraspinatus tendon 
calcification, 1091f
nervous system, 1149b, 1150f
properties, 102b
renal, 62b
respiratory system see Chest 
radiography/X-ray
skull, 1150f
spine, 1134f, 1151f, 1220
see also DEXA
Xa inhibitors, 1019b
Xanthelasma
biliary disease, 937b
hyperlipidaemia, 454f
Xanthomas, 1302
biliary cirrhosis, 963–964
hyperlipidaemia, 454f
tendon, 454f, 455
Xanthomatosis, cerebrotendinous, 
456b
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), 67, 
267b, 1260b
Xerophthalmia, 127
Xerostomia, 1114
XLH see X-linked 
hypophosphataemic rickets
Y
Y chromosomes, 50–51
microdeletions, 761
Yaws, 332–333, 333b
Yellow Card scheme, 27
Yellow fever, 322f, 323–324, 325b
immunisation, 324
incubation period, 325b
Yersinia enterocolitica, 344
Yersinia pestis, 304b, 338
Young’s syndrome, 648
Z
Zanamivir, 161b, 162, 320
Zellweger’s syndrome, 47
Zero-order kinetics, 23
Zidovudine (ZDV), 407b
adverse reactions, 409
anaemia, 404–405
lipodystrophy, 409f
neutropenia, 405, 1005b
effect of renal insufficiency
HIV/AIDS, 407, 407b
muscle pain/weakness, 1077b
onychomycosis, 398
Zinc, 131–132
deficiency, 131–132
dietary sources, 131b
refeeding diet, 122b
reference values
urine, 1311b
venous blood, 1310b
RNI, 131b
Zinc phosphide poisoning, 223
Zinc therapy, Wilson’s disease,  
974
Zoledronate
osteoporosis, 1123b, 1125
Paget’s disease, 1129, 1130b
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 876
Zoonoses
transmission, 144
viral haemorrhagic fevers, 
324–325
Zoster sine herpete, 318
Instructions for online access 
Thank you for your purchase. Please note that your purchase of this Elsevier eBook also includes access to 
an online version. Please click here (or go to ebooks.elsevier.com) to request an activation code and 
registration instructions in order to gain access to the web version. 
