1
~-Blocking Agents
Lionel H. Opie • Philip A. Poole-Wilson
"Cardiac fJadrenergic signaling apfUlratus controls conlrllCliliry. ~
DORN AND MOLJ(ENTIN, 2004'
~.Adrenergic receptor antagonist agents remain a cornerstone in the
therapy of all stages of ischemic heart disease. with the exception
of Prinzmetal's vasospastic variant angina.
~-Blockade is standard
therapy for effon angina, mixed effort and rest angina, and unstable
angina. I3-Blockers decrease mortality in acute-phase myocardial
infarction and in the postinfaret period. p-BJockers retain their posi-
tion among basic therapies for numerous other conditions including
hypertension, serious arrhythmias. and cardiomyopathy (Table 1-1).
To this extensive list must be added the now firmly established role
of I:S-blockers, cautiously titrated upward, in reducing mortality in
heart failure.
MECHANISMS
The f3,~Adrenoceptor and Signal Transduction
Situated on the cardiac sarcolemma, the
~,-receptor is part of the
adenylyl (adenyl) cyclase system (Fig. 1-1). The G-protein system links
the receptor to adenylyl cyclase (AC), when the G-protein is in the
stimulatol)' configuration (G, or G",). The link is interrupted by the
inhibitol)' form (G; or Gw)' the formation of which results from mus-
carinic stimulation following vagal activation. When activated, adeny-
lyl cyclase produces cyclic
AMP from
ATP. Cyclic AMP is the
intracellular second messenger of~,-stimulation; among its actions is
the 'opening" of calcium channels to increase the rate and force of
myocardial contraction (the positive inotropic effect) and increased
reuptake of cytosolic calcium into the sarcoplasmic reticulum (relax-
ing or lusitropic effect; Fig. 1-2). In the sinus node the pacemaker
current is increased (positive chronotropic effect), while the rate of
conduction is accelerated (positive dromotropic effect). The effect
of a given
~-blocking agellt depends on the way it is absorbed, the
binding to plasma proteins, the generation of metabolites, and the
extent to which it inhibits the 13-receptor (lock-and-key fit).
f31-Receptors
Classically the 13-receptors are divided into the ~l-receptors found in
heart muscle and the Pl-receptors of bronchial and vascular smooth
muscle. If the 13-blocking drug selectively interacts better with the P,-
than with the ~!-receptors, then such a firseleelive blocker is less likely
to interact with the !3,-receptors in the bronchial tree, thereby giving
a degree of protection from the tendency of nonselective P-blockers
to cause pulmonary complications. There are sizable populations,
about 20% to 25%, of p,-receptors in the myocardium, with relative
upregulation to about 50% in heart failure. Cardiac !3,-receptors,
like the Il,-receptor, link to the stimulatory G, protein. They also link
to the inhibitory protein, G;' with the possibility of protective Gi-
mediated ~rreceptoreffects. Hypothetically, this inhibitory path could
help to limit the adverse effects of excess
~1-receptor catecholamine
stimulation. Inverse agorlism is a complex and still nascent concept
Table 1-1
Indications for Ii-Blockade and US FOA-Approved Orugs
Indications for ji-BIOCkade
1. Ischemic Heart Disease
Angina pe<toris
Silent ischemia
A/I,ll, early phase
AMI, follow.up
Perioperativt' ischemia
2. Hypertension
Hypertension, systemic
Hypertension, severe. urgent
Hypertension with LVH
Hypertension, isolated systolic
Pheochromocytoma (already
receiving a-blockade)
Hypertension, severe
~rioperative
3. Arrhyttlmias
Excess urgent sinus tachycardia
Tachycardias (sinus, svr and VT)
Supraventricular, perioperative
Recurrences ofNib, Ail
Control of ventricular rate in llfib,
Aft
Digitalis-induced tachyarrhythmias
Anesthetic arrhythmias
PVC control
Serious ventricular tachycardia
4. Congestive Heart Failure
5. Cardiomyopa1hy
Hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy
6. Other CardioYasctJlar indications
Neurocardiogenic syncope,
aortk dissection,
Marfan's syndrome. mitral valve
prolapse congenital QT
prolongation,
lerralogy of Fallot,. fetal
tachycardia
7. CenlnlJ Indications
Anxiety
Essential tremor
Migraine prophylaxis
Aloohol wilhdrawal
8. EndocrIne
Thyrotoxicosis (arrhythmias)
9, Gastrointestinal
Esophageal varices
10. Glaucoma (local use)
US FDA-Approved Drugs
Propranolol, nadolol, atenolol,
mctoprolol
None
Alenolol. mctoprolol
Propranolol, timoloL
metoprolol, carvcdilol
(Bisoprolol. atenolol)
Acebulolol, atenolol,
bisoprolol. labctalol,
metoprolol, nadolol.
pindolol, propranolol,
timolol
Labelalol
Prefer angiotensin receptor
blocker
No Outcome studies, prefer
diuretic, CCB
Propranolol
€smolol
Esmolol
Propranolol
Esmolol
Salalol
Propranolol
Propranolol
Propranolol
Acebutolol, propranolol
Sotalol
CarvediJoL metoprolol
(bisoprolol)
Propranolol
(Propranolol; ? all)
(Propranolol)
Propranolol
Propranolol. nadolol, timolol
(Propranolol, atenalol)
Propranolol
(Propranolol)
Timolol, betaxolol, carteolol.
levobunolol, metipranoJol
( ) _ Wellte5ted but not FDA approved; Alib. atrial Iibrillation; All_ atrial Huner;
CCB ~ calcium channel blocker; I'VC .. premature ventricular contra~tiOI\s; SVl" ..
supra",mricuiar tachycardia; vr. '-enuirular l~chycardia.
2
CHAPTER 1
{3-Blocking Agenl.l
•
3
I ACh
Cholinergic
/3-RECEPTORS
Opia 2005
~ I ~-adfBnerglc agonlsts I
~
,,~,
~1,2
'\.
~1·adrenergic
blockade
•,,
PKA/
AlP
(B
~~~,/ Ca2+it
POE e
CA~P- ~ ~
Positively inofr.opic
inhibitors
t
tachycardia
AMP
dromotropic
Flgur. 1-1 The p-adrenergic receptor is coupled to adenyl (adenylyl)
cyclase (Ae) via the activated stimulatory G·protein, G,. Consequent for·
mation of the second messenger, cyclic AMP (cAMP), activates protein
kinase A (I'KA) to phosphorylate (I') the calcium channel to increase
calcium ion entry. Activity of adenyl cyclase can be decreased by the
inhibitory subunits of the ACh·associated inhibitory G·protein, G;. Cyclic
AMP is broken down by phosphodiesterase (POE) so that POE-inhibitor
drugs have a sympathomimetic effect. Acurrent hypothesis is that the ~,.
receptor stimulation additionally signals via the inhibitory G-protein, G;,
thereby modulating the harm of excess adrenergic activity. ACh " acetyl-
choline. (Figure C LH Gpie, 2005.)
whereby, counterintuitively,
a p,-blocker could have stimulatory
effects on the G;-coupled fonn of the
~!-receptor in myocytes from
failing human heans.'
/33-Receptors
Although the role of these receptors is well established in adipose
tissue, their existence and function in the heart are not yet fully
accepted. The proposal is that signals transmitted by these receptors
exen a negative inotropic effect in heart failure by increasing the
production of nitric oxide.'
Widespread Effects of {J-Receptof Blockade
During physiologic p-adrenergic stimulation, the increased contractile
activity, resulting from the greater and faster rise of cytosolic calcium,
is coupled to increased breakdown of AT!' by the myosin ATPase
(Fig. 1-2). The increased rate of relaxation is linked to increased activity
of the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium uptake pump,
SERCA-2. Thus the uptake of calcium is enhanced with a more rapid
rate of fall of eytosolic calcium, thereby accelerating relaxation.
Increased cyclic AM I' also increases the phosphOIylation of troponin-
[, so that the interaction between the myosin heads and actin ends
more rapidly. Therefore, the ~-blocked hean not only will beat more
slowly because of inhibition ofthe depolarizing currents in the sino-
atrial node but will also have a decreased force of contraction and
a decreased rate of relaxation. Metabolically,
~-blockade switches
the hean from using oxygen-wasting fatty acids toward oxygen-
conserving glucose. 4 All these oxygen-conserving properties are of special
imponance in the therapy of ischemic heart disease. Inhibition of
lipolysis in adipose tissue explains why gain of body mass may be a
side effea of chronic P-blocker therapy.
4
•
I
Mechanisms
P-ADRENERGIC EFFECTS ON CONTRACTION
Opie 2005
p·ADRENERGIC AGONfSTS
ffi•,,
,
cAMP
via PL
Relaxation t
~"imt
J
Caz+
.·GJ
ffi
PKA
"
P
~
PL
/'-,~~p'.
Ca2+1S
\
ADP + Pi
(
ADP EB Troponin C
AOP+P;~ \
/ffi
Metabolism
CONTRACTION· RELAXATION
Fi 9ure 1-2 p-Adrenergic signal systems involved in positive inotropic
and lusitropic (enhanced relaxation) effects. These can be explained in
tenns of changes in the cardiac calcium cycle When the Il·adrenergic
agonist interacts with the Il-re<.:eptor, a series of G-protein-mediated
changes lead to activation of adenylate cyclase and formation of the
adrenergic second messenger, cyclic AMP (cAMP). The laner acts via
protein kinase A to stimulate metabolism and to phosphorylate (P) the
calcium channel protein, thus increasing the opening probability of this
channel. More Ca'· ions enter through the sarcolemmal (SL) channel,
to release more Ca'· ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). Thus,
the cytoso!ic Ca'· ions also increase the rate of breakdown of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) and to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic
phosphate (P,). Enhanced myosin ATPase activity explains the increased
rate of contraction, with increased activation of troponin C explaining
increased peak force development. An increased rate of relaxation
(lusitropic effect) follows from phosphorylation of the protein phos-
pholamban (PL), situated on the membrane of the SR, that controls the
rate of calcium uptake into the SR. (Figure <0 LH Opie, 2005.)
Receptor Downregulation
In human hean failure, myocardial ~-receptorsrespond to prolonged
and excess
~-adrenergic stimulation by internalization and down-
regulation, so that the ~-adrenergicinotropic response is diminished. 5
l"is "endogenous antiadrenergic strategyN could be viewed a.s a self-
protective mechanism in view of the known adverse effects of excess
CHAPTER
I
IJ-BlodnngAgents
•
5
adrenergic stimulation.5 The first step in internalization is the
increased activity of p,-adrenergic recepTor kinase
(~,ARK) in response
to excess ~,-agonist aaivity.' as occurs in advanced heart failure. ~,ARK
then phosphorylates the
~,-receptor. which in the presence of ~
arrestin becomes uncoupled from C. and internalizes. If the ~stimu­
Iation is sustained, then the internaliz.ed receptors may undergo
lysosomal deslruaion with a true loss of receptor density or down-
regulation. Ilowevn, downregulation is a term also often loosely
applied to any step leading to loss of receptor response.
Clinical ~reapfor downregulmion occurs during prolonged
~agonist
therapy or in severe congestive heart failure (CI-IF). During continued
infusion of dobutamine. a p-agonisL there may be a progressive loss
or decrease of therapeutic efficacy. which is termed tachyphylaxis. The
time: taken and the extent of receptor downgrading depend on multi-
ple factors including the dose and rate of infusion, the age of the
patient, and the degree of preexisting downgrading of receplors as a
result ofCI-IF. For example, one third of the hemodynamic response
may be 10Sl after 72 hours (see Chapter 6). In CHF. the p,-receptors
are downregulaled by the high circulating catecholamine levels,
so that the response to p,-stimulation is diminished. 5 Cardiac Pl"
receptors,
not being downregulaled,
are therefore
increased
in
relative amounts, although there are some defects in the coupling
mechanisms. Recent recognition of the dual signal path for the effeas
of ~rreceptor stimulation leads to the proposal that in CHF con-
tinued aaivity of the Prreceptors may have beneficial effects such
as protection from programmed cell death or apoptosis (see later
in this chapter, Fig. 1-7).
Receptor Upregulation
Conversely, when ~receptors are chronically blocked. such as during
sustained
~-blocker therapy.
then
the
number of
~-receptors
inaeases.~This change in the receptor density could explain the strik-
ing effect of long-term l}-blockade in heart failure. namely. improved
systolic funaion. in contrast to the short-term negative inotropic
effea.S This effect is not shared by other agents such as the
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors that reduce mortal-
ity in heart failure.
CARDIOVASCULAR EFFECTS DF ~·BLDCKADE
P-Blockers were originally designed by the Nobel Prize winner Sir
lames Black to counteract the adverse cardiac effects of adrenergic
stimulation. 11,e latter, he reasoned, increased myocardial oxygen
demand and worsened angina. Ilis work led to the design of the pro-
totype ~.blocker propranolol. He showed that. by blocking the cardiac
p-re:ceptors, these agents could induce the now well-known inhibitory
effeas on the sinus node. atrioventricular node. and on myocardial
contraaion. These are respectively lhe ne:galive chronotropic. dro-
motropic. and inotropic effects (Fig. 1-3). Of these. it is especially
bradycardia and the negative inotropic effects that are relevant to the
therapeutic effect in angina pectoris. because these changes decrease
the myocardial oxygen demand (Fig. 1-4). The inhibitory effect on the
atrioventricular (AV) node is of special relevance in the therapy of
supraventricular tachycardias (see Chapler 8), or when P-blockade is
used to control the ventricular response rate in atrial fibrillation.
Effects on Coronary Flow and
Myocardial Perfusion
Enhanced
~-adrenergic stimulation. such as in exercise,. leads to
~­
mediated coronary va!>Odilation. lhe signaling system in vascular
smooth muscle again involves the fonnation of cyclic AMP, but
6.
Cardi(J\JAA:lllar Effects of fj.Block<ldc
Other negative
inatropes
CCSs
Anti-arrhythmics
Anesthetics
Interacting drugs
Nodal depression by
·Verapamil
·Oiltiazem
oDigoxin
oAmiodarone
--
3.Anti- ~~_
arrhythmic
2 Negative
~ ~
dromotropic
~-BLOCKING
EFFECTS
4.Negative
inotropic
5 AntHschemlc - -
Opia 2005
Fig ure 1-3 Cardiac effe<:ts of ~-adrenergicblocking drugs lit the levels
of the SA node, AV node. conduction system, and myocardium. Major
pharmacodynamic drug interactions are shown on the right. AV = atrio-
ventricular; SA = sinoatrial. (Figure <0 LH Opie. 2005.)
ISCHEMIC OXYGEN BALANCE
Opia 2004
Increased A
diastolic
I
perfusion
"Heart rate
• After load
...
'wall
°2
VS
°2
demand
suppfy
/
stressI~J--"7:"""--''''''''''-'1:'\-,
tHeart size
... Contractility
.. 02 wastage
AnU-arrttythmic
Less exercise
Vasoconstriction
More spasm?..
IDEMANDI.'"
!SUPPLy!H
02 deficit".
Anaerobic metabolism."
Figure 1-4 Effects of ~·blockade on ischemic hean,
~-Blockade has a
beneficial effect on the ischemic myocardium. unless there is vasospastic
angina in which case spasm may be promoted in some patients. Note
proposal that J3-blockade diminishes exercise-induced vasoconstriction.
(Figure 0 LH Opie. 2005.)
whereas the latter agent increases cytosolic calcium in the hean. it
paradoxically decreases calcium levels in vascular muscle cells (see Fig.
3-2). Thus. during exercise. the hean pumps faster and more force-
fully. while the coronary flow is increased-a logical combination.
Conversely, ~.blockade should have a coronary vasoconstrictive effect
with a rise in coronal)' vascular resistance. However, the longer dias-
tolic filling time, resulting from the decreased heart rate in exercise.
CHAPTER
I
f3-BlockingAgenrs
•
7
leads to better diastolic myocardial perfusion, to give an overall ther-
apeutic benefit.
Effects on Systemic Circulation
The effects described in the preceding ex:plain why
~-blockers arc
antianginal. as predicted by their developers. Antihypertensive effects
arc less well understood. In the absence of the peripheral dilatory
actions of some ~-blockers (see section on vasodilatory ~-blockers),
~-blockers initially decrease the resting cardiac output by about 20%
with a compensatory reflex: rise in the peripheral vascular resistance.
Thus. within the first 24 hours of therapy, the arterial pressure is
unchanged. The peripheral resistance then starts to fall aft.er 1 to 2
days. and the arterial pressure now stans to fall in response to
decreased heart rate and cardiac output. Additional antihypertensive
mechanisms may involve (I) inhibition of those ~-receptors on the
terminal neurons that facilitate the release of norepinephrine (pre-
junctional
~-receptors). hence lessening adrenergic mediated vaso-
constriction; (2) cemral nervous system effects with reduction of
adrenergic outflow; and (3) decreased activity ofthe renin-angiotensin
system, because
~-receptors mediate renin release (the latter mecha-
nism may ex:plain part of the benefit in heart failure).
ANGINA PECTORIS
~-Rlockade reduces the oxygen demand of the heart (Fig. 1-4) by
reducing the double product (heart rate x blood pressure) and by
limiting exercise-induced increases in contractility. Of these. the
most important and easiest to measure is the reduction in heart rate.
In addition. an aspect frequently neglected is the increased oxygen
demand resulting from left. ventricular (LV) dilation, so that any
accompanying ventricular failure needs active therapy.
All
~-blockers are potentially equally effective in angina pectoris
Crable 1-1), and the choice of drug matters little in those who do nOI
have concomitant diseases. But a minority of patients do not respond
to any ~-blocker, because of (I) underlying severe obstructive coro-
nary artery disease, responsible for angina even at low levels of exer-
tion and at heart rates of 100 beats per minute or lower; or (2) an
abnormal increase in LV end-diastolic pressure resulting from an
excess negative inotropic effect and a consequent decrease in suben-
docardial blood flow. Although it is conventional to adjust the dose
of a ~-blocker to secure a resting heart rate of 55 to 60 beats per
minute, in individual patients heart rates below 50 beats per minute
may be acceptable provided that heart block is avoided and there are
no symptoms. the reduced heart rate at rest reflects the relative
increase in vagal tone as adrenergic stimulation decreases. A major
benefit is the restricted increase in the hear! rate during exercise, which
ideally should not exceed 100 beats per minute in patients with
angina. In the case of ~-blockers with added vasodi1atory properties
(see later), it may not be possible or desirable to achieve low resting
heart rates, because reduction of the aft.erload plays an increasingly
larger role in reducing the myocardial oxygen demand. Nonetheless,
in general, vasodilatory ~-blockers have not been well tested against
angina. For example. carvedilol, which is now the most frequently
used ofthe vasodilatory [i-blockers, is licensed for treatment ofangina
in the UniTed Kingdom but not in the United States.
Combination Anti4schemic Therapy of
Angina Pectoris
~-Blockers are often combined with nitrate vasodilators and calcium
channel blockers (CCBs) in the therapy of angina. It is conventional
to stan drug therapy with two agents, nitrates plus ~-blockersor CCBs,
8
•
I
Angilw Pectoris
and then to go on to combined triple therapy while watching for
adverse side effects, such as hypotension. The mechanism of action
of the three types of agents is differelll and may be additive. Thus
Il-blockers act chiefly by decreasing the myocardial oxygen demand,
whereas nitrates dilate coronary collaterals and reduce the preload
(see Fig. 2-1), and CCBs prevent exercise-induced coronary constric-
tion and reduce the afterload. Il-Blockers may also improve myocar-
dial blood flow by increased time for diastolic coronary blood flow.
Cotherapy In Angina
[n the past, the emphasis was on triple-anti-ischemic therapy by
nitrates, Il-blockers, and CCBs. Ailhough such combinations are still
important, especially in those patients in whom intervention by
angioplasty or bypass is not feasible, the emphasis has now shifted to
the recognition that angina is basically a vascular disease that needs
specific therapy designed to give long-term vascular protection. lhe
following agents should be considered for every patient with angina:
(I) aspirin and/or c1opidogrel for antiplatelet protection; (2) statim
and a lipid-lowering diet to decrease lipid-induced vascular damage;
and (3) ACE inhibitors, choosing one that has proven protection from
myocardial infarction and with the dose tested (see Chapter 5).
Prinzmeta/'s Variant Angina
p-Blockade is commonly held to be ineffective and even harmful,
because of lack of efficacy. On the other hand, there is excellent
evidence for the benefit of CCB therapy, which is the standard
treatment. [n the case of exercise-i'ldllced anginal atracks in patients
wilh variant angina, a small prospective randomized study in 20
patients showed that nifedipine was considerably more effective than
propranolol.8
COld Intolerance and Angina
During exposure to severe cold, effort angina may occur more easily.
Conventional p-blockade by propranolol is not as good as vaso-
dilatory therapy using a CCB."
Mixed Effort and Rest Angina
In the past, much was made of the possibility that coronary spasm
contributes to the symptomatology of mixed or double-component
angina in which, in addition to ordinary effort angina, there is angina
at rest. However, two studies show that Il-blockade remains the better
therapy.
Silent Myocardia/Ischemia
Increasing emphasis is now placed on the importance of silent
myocardial ischemia in patients with angina. Attacks, monitored by
continuous ECC recordings, may be predpitated by minor elevations
of heart rate, probably explaining why P-blockers are very effective in
reducing the frequency and number of episodes of silent ischemic
attacks_ In patients with silent ischemia and mild or no angina,
atenolol given for 1 year lessened new events (angina aggravation,
revascularization) and reduced combined end-points. KI
/3-Blockade Withdrawal
Chronic Il-blockade increases p-receptor density. When P-blockers are
suddenly withdrawn, angina may be exacerbated, sometimes result-
ing in myocardial infarction. Treatment of the withdrawal syndrome
is by reimroduClion of P-blockade.
CHAPTER
1
fj-Blocking Agents
•
9
AClIIi CORONARY SYNDROME
Acute coronary syndrome is an all-purpose term that includes unsta-
ble angina and other clinical entities. so that management is based on
risk stratification (see Fig. 11-3). Plaque fissuring in me wall of the
coronary artery with partial coronary thrombosis or platelet aggrega-
tion on an area of endothelial disruption is the basic pathology.
Urgent antithrombotic therapy with heparin plus aspirin is the basic
treatment, Currently, early platelet GPJlb/lIla receptor blockade is
standard in high-risk patients (see Fig. 9-5). In such patients early
coronary angiography is increasingly performed and often leads to
angioplasty with use of a drug-eluting stent, or to coronary artery
bypass grafting.
fj-Blockade is part ofthe ideal in-hospital quadruple therapy, the other
three agents being statins, antiplatelet agents, and ACE inhibitors, a
combination that reduces 6-month mortalily by 90'% compared with
treatment using none of these." p-Blockade is usually started early,
especially in patients with elevated blood pressure and heart rate
to reduce the myocardial oxygen demand and to lessen ischemia
(Fig. 1-5). The major argumem for early p·blockade is that threatened
infarction, into which unstable angina merges, may be prevented from
becoming oven.ll Logically the lower the heart rate. the less the risk
of recurrent ischemia. The actual objective evidence favoring the use
of ll-blockers in unstable angina itself is limited to borderline results
in one placebo-controlled trial, II with now the indirect evidence from
the quadruple therapy observational study."
Increased
sympathetic
drive
/
LV failurll
Pm
fncreasing
ischemic
damage
UNSTABLE ANGINA AT REST
0,;0_
~rtension
Increased
Tachycardia
~ demand f
~ wastage
/
$.be_.,
8i'-::-:-,">"'--'-,
~ __m~t ~
~.de
INitrates I
LVend·diastolic
pressure f
Heparin
o<lMWH
Aspirin
\8
P'''''~
Diltiazem in
......ed~
Regional .,/
ischemia
FI••n
1-5 Hypothetical mechanisms for unstable angina at rest and
proposed therapy. Increasing emphasis is being placed on the role of ami-
thrombotics and amiplatdet agents, such as Gp lib/lila blockers. p.-Blockade
may be panirularly effective in the presence of sympathetic activation with
increased hean ratt' and blood pressure. Calcium channel blockers need to Ix
differentialed. Dihiazern, a hean rate-lowering calcium blocker, may be used
intravenously or orally. Dihydropyridines such as nifedipine and amlodipine
should be used with care and only in combination with ~·blockade. UlWH ..
low molecular w£ighl heparin. (Figllrt e LH Opit, 2005.)
10
•
I
AcUle M)'(Jo«(IfTliallnflJrc:tion (AMI)
ACUTE MYOCARDIAl INFARcnDN (AMI)
Early AMI
According to a meta-analysis of 35 trials. in AMI wilhom obvious
clinical contraindication$, early I3-blockade has disappointingly lillie
effect on monality.l~ Funhermore, the strategy of urgent reperfusion
(within the first hours of lhe onset of AMI) by angioplasty or by
thrombolytic agents has overshadowed the possible benefits of early
intravenous
~-blockade given to inhibit adverse effeas of
cat~­
cholamines released in AMI. There are no good trial data on the early
use of~-blockade in the reperfusion era. Logically, ~-blockade should
be of most use in the presence ofongoing pain,'~ inappropriate tachy-
cardia, hypenension, or ventricular rhythm instability_16 In others,
early ~-blockade has limited benefit- 14 especially because it is simpler
to introduce it later when the hemodynamic situation has SlabiliU'd.
Overall, intravenous I3-blockade is now used in only about 10% of
patients:' In lhe United States, metoprolol and atenolol are lhe only
~-blockers licensed for intravenous use in AMI.
Benelils of Postinfarct p-Blockade
In the postinfarct phase.l3-blockade reduced monality by 23% accord-
ing to trial data l4 and by 35% to 40% in an observational study on a
spectrum of patients including diabetic individuals.'s TimoloJ, pro-
pranolol, metoprolol, and atenolol are all effective and licensed for
this purpose. Metoprolol has excellent long-term data. 1'1 Carvedilol is
the only ~-blockerstudied in the reperfusion era and in a population
also receiving ACE inhibitors." As the LV dysfunction was an entI)'
point, the carvedilol dose was gradually uptitrated, and all-cause mor-
tality was reduced. The mechanisms concerned are multiple and
include decreased ventricular arrhythmias'» and decreased reinfarc-
tion. I '
~-Blockers wilh panial agonist activity are relatively ineffective.
perhaps because of the higher hean rates.
The only outstanding questions are: (I) Do low-risk patients really
benefit from
~-blockade' However. those with non-Q infarcts. high
ejection fractions, normal creatinine values. and normal systolic blood
pressure values all benefit from postinfarct I3-blockade." (2) When
should
~-blockade stan? This is flexible, and as data for early 13-
blockade are not strong." oral
~-blocker may be staned when the
patient's condition allows, say from 3 days onwards, l7 or even later at
about I to 3 weeks. (3) For how long should ~-blockade be COlllin-
ued? Bearing in mind the risk of ~-block~de withdrawal in patients
with angina, many clinicians continue
~.blockade administration
long term once a seemingly successful result has been obtained. The
benefit in high.risk groups such as the elderly or those with low ejec-
tion fraaions increased progressively over 24 months. IS
The high-ri.sk patients who should benefit most are those often thought
to have contraindications to I3-blockade. II AJthough congestive hean
failure was previously regarded as a contraindication to I3-blockade,
postinfaret patients with hean failure benefited more lhan olhers
from P-blockade.II Today lhis categoI)' of patient would be given a 13-
blocker cautiously, with gradually increasing doses of carvedilol,
metoprolol, or bisoprolol. The SAVE trial 3 showed that ACE inhibitors
and ~.blockadeare additive in reducing postinfarct monality, at least
in patients wilh reduced ejection fractions. The benefit of ~-blockade
when added to cotherapy wilh ACE inhibitors is a monality reduction
of 23% to
40%.17,18 Concurrent therapy with calcium channel
blockers or aspirin does not diminish the benefits of postinfarct
~-blockade.
Despite all these strong arguments, and numerous recommendations,
p-blockers are .still underused in posrillfarct potie'llS, at the expense
of many lives lost. Long-term, 42 patients have to be treated for
CHAPTER
I
{JBlocki'lgAgenf5
•
11
2 years to avoid one death. which compares favorably with other
treatments. 14
LACK OF OUTCOME STUOIES IN ANGINA
Solid evidence for a decrease in mortality in postinfarct follow-up
achieved with l3-blockade has led to the assumption that this type
of treatment must also improve the outcome in effort angina and un-
stable angina. Regrettably. there are no convincing outcome studies
to support this proposal. In unstable angina, the short-term benefits
of metoprolol were borderlineu
In effort angina, a meta-analysis of
90 studies showed that l3-blockers and CCBs had equal efficacy and
safety, but that l3-blockers were better tolerated. ll The possible benefit
of l3-blockade itself on clinical events in silent ischemia with mild or
no angina seems settled by the ASIST study, "(I in which atenolol
increased event-free survival at 1 year. In reality, major events, such as
death, AMI. or unstable angina. were not reduced, perhaps because
the study was underpowered.
~-BLOCKERS FOR HYPERnNSION
I3-Blockers are no longer recommended as first-line treatment for
hypertension by the Joint National Council of the United States but
remain among second choices after diuretics (see Chapter 7). Cur-
rently jNC 7 lists the following as 'compelling indications· for the
use of l3-blockers in hypertension: heart failure, post-MJ hypertension,
high coronary risk, and diabetes.'·' The European guidelines favor 13-
blocker use in angina. post-MI, heart failure, and tachyarrhythmias.
N
The exact mechanism of blood pressure lowering by l3-blockers
remains an open question. A sustained fall of cardiac output and a
late decrease in peripheral vascular resistance (after an initial rise) are
important. Inhibition of renin release may contribute, especially to
the late vasodilation. Of the large number of l3-blockers now avail-
able, all are antihypertensive agents but few have been the subject of
outcome studies.l~
Elderly Patients
In (enain hypertension subgroups such as the elderly, especially those
with LV hypertrophy, comparative studies show better outcome data
with the other agents such as diuretics'6 and the angiotensin receptor
blocker (ARB) 10sartan.17 One possible reason is that at equivalent
brachial artery pressures, l3-blockade reduces the central aortic pres-
sure less than do other agents. IS
Black Patients
[n elderly blacks, atenolol was only marginally more antihypertensive
than placebo." Unexpectedly, in younger blacks (age younger than 60
years), atenolol was the second most effective agent, following dil-
tiazem, and more effective than the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide. I?
Thus, although P-blockade is generally held to be relatively ineffective
as monotherapy in black patients, this reservation may be largely
restricted to those older than 60 years.
Diabetic Hypertensive Patients
In the 9-year UK study, strict blood pressure reduction to a mean
blood pressure of 144/82 mm J-lg substantially reduced macrovascular
end-points. 30 Therapy based on atenolol versus captopril showed no
major differences or even trends, although individuals in the P-blocker
group had gained weight and more often needed additional glucose-
lowering treatment to control blood sugar. J1 [n reality, to achieve the
new low blood pressure goals set in diabetic persons, such as 130/
12
•
I
fJ-BIodters fur Hypertension
BOmmHg.l.l will usually require multiple drug therapy, often ....;m iI
diuretic and a CCB besides a ~-blocker and an ACE inhibitor.
Combination Antihypertensive Therapy
To reduce blood pressure, ~-blockers may be combined with CCBs, cr-
blockers, centrally active agents, and cautiously with diuretics. Because
~-blockers reduce renin levels. combination with ACE inhibitors or
an ARB is not so logical. Increased new diabetes is a risk during
~-blocker-thiazide cotherapy. '1 For example. the combination of
atenolol with a diuretic led to more new diabetes than the combina-
tion of an ARB with the same diuretic dose. lJl'he major ·antidiabetic~
strategy is limiting the diuretic dose. Much less welliested is the use
of carvedilol. which may increase insulin sensitivity.J.1 Ziac is biro-
prolol (2.5 to tOmg) with a very low dose of hydrochlorothiazide
(6.25 mg). The FDA approved as first-line therapy for systemic hyper-
tension a drug combination starting with 2.5 mg of bisoprolol plus
6.25 mg of thiazide. an approval never before given to a combination
product. To get this approval, there had to be a demonstration that
both low-dose components (the diuretic and the f}.blocker) were
themselves only marginally effective with a response rate at 12 weeks
of below 30%, and that when added together the agents were more
efficacious with a response rale of 60% or more. and with a demon-
stration that each component contribuled to the blood pressure low-
ering effect of the combination. 'I The side effects of each type ofdrug,
~·bJocker and diuretic, are dose dependent and different in nature. It
makes sense that the combined low doses of each type gave fewer side
effects than the higher doses of each agent alone that would be
required to decrease the blood pressure by the same amount. Thus,
key points are that the metabolic side effects of higher thiazide doses
were minimized and that the side effect profile of the combinatiol'
differed little from placebo, with only a small increase in fatigue and
dizziness. In Europe.. several combinations of ~-blockerplus low-dose
diuretic are available (Tenore! 50, Sec:adrex. Lopresoretic). )'Yt none
with a diuretic dose as low as in Ziac. In the United States. Tenoretic
and Lopressor Her are combinations widely used, )yt they often
contain diuretic doses that are higher than desirable (e.g., chlonhali-
done 25 mg; set' Chapter 7). Combinations of such prodiabetic doses
ofdiuretics with ~-blockade.. in itselfa risk for new diabetes. J6 is clearly
undesirable.
~.BLOCKERS FOR ARRHYTHMIAS
Mechanisms
p-Blockers have multiple antiarrhythmic mechanisms (Fig. 1-6). being
effective against many supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias.
Basic studies show that they counter the arrhythmogenic effects of
excess catecholamine stimulation by countering the proarrhythmic
effects of increased cyclic AMP and calcium-dependent triggered
arrhythmias.J','" Logically, f}.blockers should be particularly effective
in arrhythmias caused by increased adrenergic drive (early phase AMI.
heart failure. pheochromocytoma. anxiety, anesthesia. postoperative
states. and some o:ercise-related arrhythmias, as well as mitral valve
prolapse) or by increased cardiac sensitivity to catecholamines (thy-
rOlOxicosis). p-Blockade may help in the prophylaxis of suprallfmlricu-
IlIr llldl)'cardias (svrs) by inhibiting the iniliating atrial ectopic beats
and in the treatment ofSVI' by slowing the AV node and lessening the
ventricular response rate.
Increasing Evidence
Although p-blockers have long been regarded as effective agents for
supraventricular tachycardias. it was only recently that their remark-
Inhibit phase 0
Class I
anti-arrhythmic
CHAPTER
t
~BIO(;king Agent>
•
13
ANTI-ARRHYTHMIC EFFECTS OF{i-BLOCKERS
Opie 2004
Anti-Ischemic effects
/
All
Membrane 8 ~
/
'
stabilizing ---..~
Some
effects
<Il
/
"'
IrP
_=.=L=O=C=K=E=R=S'j]
All limit
• l'\
Class II
phase 0 ~ "
anti-arrhythmic
\
CD ~--~:::~p
Specific to &
-,
potential
Class til
sotalol
~
\
duration
anti-arrhythmic
"prolonged '----'----'
Figure 1-6 Antiarrhythmic pro~rties of J3-blockers. Anti-ischemic effects
indirectly lessen arrhythmias. Note that only 50talol has added class III anti-
arrhythmic effeCls. It is questionable whether the membrane stabili:r,ing effects
of propranolol confer additional antiarrhythmic properties. (Figure <0 LH Opie,
2005.)
able efficacy and safety as ventricular antiarrhythmics have come
to be appreciated. Perhaps surprisingly, in sustained ventricular
tachyarrhythmias the empirical use of metoprolol was as effective as
electrophysiologically guided antiarrhythmic therapy.l9 Likewise, in
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. the ESVEM study showed that sotalol, a
~-blocker with added class III activity (rig. 1-6), was more effective
than a variety of class I antiarrhythmics.~o
In pos/infarct patients. ~-blockers outperformed other antiarrhythmics!O
and decreased arrhythmic cardiac deaths." In postinfarct patients with
depressed LV function and ventricular arrhythmias, a retrospective
analysis of data from the CAST study shows that ~-blockade reduced
all cause mortality and arrhythmia deaths." Although the mechanism
of benefit extends beyond antiarrhythmic protection.H
it is very
unlikely that ~-blockers can match the striking results obtained with
an implantable defibrillator (23% mortality reduction in class II and
JII heart failure):l." As. however. amiodarone is ineffective"· or only
marginally effective (see Chapter 8. p. 239) in this patient group,
~­
blockade becomes the antiarrhythmic of choice.
In acute svr, the ultfl-l-short-aeting agem esmolol given imfl-lvellOusly has
challenged the previously standard use of verapamil or diltiazem in
the perioperative period, although in the apparently healthy person
with svr, adenosine is still preferred (see Chapter 8). Intravenous
esmolol may also be used acutely in atrial fibrillation or flutter to
reduce the rapid ventricular response rate.
~·BLOCKERS IN CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
That
~-blockers with their negative inotropic effects could increase
cardiac contraction and decrease mortality in heart failure is certainly
counterintuitive, especially bearing in mind that the
~,-receptor is
downregulated (Fig. 1-7). Not only does the cardiac output increase,
but in addition abnormal patterns of gene expression revert toward
normal.·' Severa! mechanisms are proposed.
14
•
I
fj.Blocken in Congmh'f! Helm Fai/ure
EXCESS /3-ADRENERGIC SIGNALS IN CHF
o,;e-
ATP
cAMPD.
P2"medlated effects
APOPTOSIS -l
CONTRACTION.[l
fl. I rl 1·7 fl.-Adrenergic receptors in advanced hean failure. Down·
rtgUlation and uncoupling of p..adrenergic receplor signal systems
result in depressed levels of cyclic AMP and decrcas.ed contra<!i1ity,
which may be viewed as an autoprolcoive from the adverse dfects
of cyclic AMP. Note: (I) fS,"receptor downrcgulation Slarts as a rault
of inhibitory fS,ARK-mcdiatcd
phosphorylation;
fS,ARK
incrc.asc:s
in response 10 excess fS,-adrcnergic Slimulation of the I"C'CCptor; (2)
p,.re«ptor
uncoupling
from
G,
due
to
p..arrestin
activity;
(3)
fS,-reccptor downrcgub.tion as a resul! of internalization; (4) incrc.as.ed
Ci as a result of increased mRNA activity; (S) fSrreceplors are relatively
uprcgulated and may hypothetically o:tn an inhibitory effect on apop-
tosis via enhanced G;. (For details Stt LH Opie, Hean Physiology from
ull to Circulalion. Lippincott Williams
&. Wilkins. Philadelphia,
2004:508.) (Figurl! C LH Opie. 2005.)
Mechanisms
I. The hyperpllospllorylalion hypothesis. The proposal is that continued
excess adrenergic stimulation leads to overphosphorylation of the
calcium-release channels (also known as the ryanodine receptor)
on the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR; Fig. 1-8). This causes defective
functioning of these channels with excess calcium leak from the
SR, with cytosolic calcium overload. Because the calcium pump
that regulates calcium uptake into the SR is simultaneously down-
regulated, the pattern of rise and fall of calcium ions in the cytosol
is impaired, with poor contraction and delayed relaxation. These
contractile and calcium abnormalities are revened toward normal
with
fS-blockade.~"' which also specifically normalizes the func-
tion of the calcium release channel.~1
2. Improved
f3-adrrnergic
5ignaling.
In
advanced hean failure
in
humans. there is prominent downregulation of the p,-adrenergic
receptor and its signaling pathways with relative upregulation of
the P:· and Pl-receptors (Fig. 1-8). Prolonged excess stimulation of
the 11,· leads to increased activity of PARK, (Fig. 1-7) that in tum
phO$phorylatcs and inhibits the fS,-receptors to decrease contrac-
tile activity." Experimental p,-blockade decreases the expression of
pARK, and increases the activity of adenylyl cyclase.. thereby
improving contractile functiOIl. Relative upregulation of the lh-
receptor may have mixed effects (fig. 1-7), including continued
CH.\PTER
I
f}BlockingAgenlS
•
15
HYPERPHOSPHORYLATION IN HF
Opia 2004
Beta-1
Beta-2
~/
PKA
~~
8
Ca2
+ .R
cycling VI
Beta-3
?
Contraction ~
Figure 1-1 Hyperphosphorylation hypothesis for heart
failure. Heart failure is a hyperadrenergic state. Excess ~-stim­
ulation acting via protein kinase A (PKA) hyperphosphory-
lates (P, example of phosphorylation site) the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR), which causes a calcium leak and impaired
cy\osolic calcium cycling. [i-Blockade, by lessening hyper-
phosphorylation, also lessens calcium leak from the Sit so
that calcium Slores in the SR improve and calcium release
from the SR augments. Calcium uptake by the SERCA (sar-
coendoplasmic reticulum calcium-ATPase) uptake pump may
also
improve,
Note downregulated
~,-receptors,
relative
upregulation of
~,-rcreptors, and marked upregulation of
inhihitory ~,-receptors. eNOS", endothelial nitric oxide syn-
thase. (For details see lH Opie, Heart Physiology from Cell to
Circulation. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia,
2004:508.) (Figure <0 LH Opie, 2005.)
excess formation of hyperphosphorylated SR (Fig. 1-8). Upregula-
tion ofthe 133-receptor exerts a negative inotropic effect by increased
formation of inhibitory nitric oxide in the SR.' It is speculated that
a nonselective agent such as carvedilol restrains the excess activity
of the I3rreceptor to exert an indirect inotropic effect.
3. ProtectiOn from ca/echolamine myocyre IOxicity. The circulating con-
centrations ofnorepinephrine found in severe heart failure are high
enough to be directly toxic to the myocardium/ experimentally
damaging the membranes and promoting subcellular destruction,
acting at least in part through cytosolic Calcium overlOad:".!
4. Antiarrhythmic e[feclS.
In experimental heart failure, ventricular
arrhythmias are promoted via increased formation of cyclic AMP
and calcium-mediated afterpotentials.3s
S. Bradycardia.I3-Blockade may act at least in part by reduction of the
heart rate.~,Sl Metoprolol and carvedilol both reduce the heart rate
by 8 to 10 beats per minute.s3,s. Bradycardia may improve coronary
blood flow and decrease the myocardial oxygen demand, Experi-
mentally, long-tenn
heart rate
reduction
lessens extracellular
matrix collagen, in addition to improving the LV ejection fraction. s5
16
•
1
DlheT Ulrdiac IndiUlrion5
6. Antiapopto5is. Coupling of the
~l-receptor to the inhibitory G-
protein, G;, may be antiapoptotic.s6 Unexpectedly, even a com-
bined ~,- and l},-blocker can stimulate the 13l-receptor via inverse
agonism.l
7. Renin-angiotemin inhibition. When added to prior ACE inhibitor or
angiotensin receptor blocker therapy, 13-blockade by metoprolol
lessens circulating renin and angiotensin-II levels, thereby increas-
ing the blockade of the renin-angiotensin system,SJ
How 10 Apply /3.Slockers in Hearl Failure
l}-Blockers are now recognized as an integral part of therapy for heart
failure; their mechanism of aaion is based on the principles of antag-
onism of the neurohumoral response.
S7 They benefit a wide range
of patients, including females, diabetic individuals, and (in several
studies) black patients.s8 The following principles apply: (l) start
slowly and uptitrate gradually (Table 1-2), watching for adverse effects
and if necessary cutting back on the dose or titrating more slowly; (2)
add l}-blockade only to existing therapy including ACE inhibition and
diuretics, and (in some studies) digoxin, when the patient is hemo-
dynamically stable and ideally not in class IV or severe class Ill; (3)
never stop the
~-blocker abruptly (risk of ischemia and infarction);
and (4) use only l}-blockers whose doses are well understood and
clearly delineated, and with proven benefit, notably carvedilol, meto-
prolol. and bisoprolol (Table 1-2). Of these, only carvedilol and long-
acting metoprolol are approved in the United States. In large trials all
three drugs have reduced morwliry by about one third.s In the COMET
triatS< carvedilol reduced mortality more than metoprolol (for assess-
ment see Chapter 6, p. 178). The initiation of 13-blockade is a slow
process that requires careful supervision and may temporarily worsen
the heart failure, so that we strongly advise that only the proven l}-
blockers should be used in the exact dose regimens that have been
tested (Table 1-2). Propranolol, the original gold standard J3-blocker,
and atenolol, two commonly used agents, have not been well studied
in heart failure.
OTHER CARDIAC INDICAllDNS
In hypertrophic obstructive canliomyopathy, high-dose propranolol is
standard therapy, although verapamil and disopyramide are effective
alternatives.
In mitral Sle1losi5 with 5inus rhythm, l}-blockade benefits by decreasing
resting and exercise heart rates, thereby allowing longer diastolic
filling and improved exercise tolerance. In mitral stenosis with chronic
atrial fibrillation, 13-blockade may have to be added to digoxin to
Table 1-2
Heart Failure' A New Indication for P-Blockade TitratIOn and
Doses of Drugs
j!-Blocker
Carvedilol
Metoprolol SR
Bisoprolol
First Dose
3.125
25"
1.25
Week 3
6.25 x 2
SO
3.75
Week 5-6
12.5x2
100
5.0
Anal Dose
25 x 2
200
10.0
All daily doses arc in milligrams. Data from placebo-controlled large lrials. ~d~rled
from McMurray. Heart. 1999.81 (SuppllV). 14-11, r-orced titration in all .tudie..
assuming pr«eding do~ toleraled. Do~ once daily for meloprolol ~nd bisoprolol and
lwice daily for car...edilol Car...edilol doses from US package in~n doses, I3ken with
food 10 .1",,- ~bsorption: targct dOS( may be inc,-.,ascd to 50mg bid for patitTllS >85kg.
'Slow fdca~ metoprolol (CR/XL formulation): reduce initial do~ 10 11,5 mg in i\e1...,,,,,
hun failure.
C HAPTE R 1
fJ-Blocking Agents
•
17
obtain sufficient ventricular slowing during exercise. Occasionally
~-blockers. verapamil, and digoxin are all combined. Hean block is
a risk during cotherapy of f}-blockers with verapamil.
In mitral \.'aIVl! prolapse, f}-blockade is the standard procedure for
control of associated arrhythmias.
In dissecting aneurysms, in the hyperacute phase, intravenous propra-
nolol has bet:n standard, although it could be replaced by esmolo!.
Thereafter oral ~-blockade is continued.
tn Marfan's syndrome with aortic rom involvement, ~-blockade is like-
wise used against aonic dilation and possible dissection.
In neurOCtlrdiogenic syncope,
~·blockade helps to control the episodic
adrenergic reflex discharge believed to contribute to symptoms.
In failor's utralogy, 2 mg/kg of propranolol twice daily is usually effec-
tive against the cyanotic spells, probably acting by inhibition of right
ventricular contractility.
In congenital QT-prolongation, ~-blockade is standard therapy," perhaps
acting to restore an imbalance between left and right stellate ganglia.
NONCARDIAC INOICAnONS FOR Jl-BLOCKADE
Vascular and Noncardiac Surgery
~.Blockade exerts an imponant protective effect in selected patients.
rerioperative death from cardiac causes and myocardial infarction
were reduced by bisoprolol in high-risk patients undergoing vascular
surgery.60 For noncardiac surgery, ·we believe that beta-blockade
should be given to all patients (unless contraindicated) at high risk
for coronary events.·..
Thyrotoxicosis
Together with antithyroid drugs or radioiodine. or as the sole agent
before surgery, f}-blockade is commonly used in thyrotoxicosis to
control
symptoms,
although
the
hypermetabolic state
is
not
decreased. f}-Blockade controls tachycardia, palpitations, tremor, and
nervousness and reduces the vascularity of the thyroid gland, thereby
facilitating operation. In thyroid storm, intravenous propranolol can
be given at a rate of I mg/minute (to a total of 5 mg at a time); circu-
latory collapse is a risk, so that ~-blockade should be used in thyroid
storm only if LV function is normal as shown by conventional non-
invasive tests.
Anxiety States
Although propranolol is most widely used in anxiety (and is licensed
for this purpose in several countries, including the United Slates).
probably all
~-blockers are effective. acting not centrally bUI by a
reduction of peripheral manifestations of anxiety such as tremor and
tachycardia.
Glaucoma
The use of local f}-blocker E'y(' solutions is now established for open-
angle glaucoma; care needs to be exerted with occasional systemic
side effects such as sexual dysfunction, bronchospasm, and cardiac
depression. Among the agents approved for treatment of glaucoma
in the United States are the nonselective agents timolol (Timoptic),
carteolol,
levobunolol,
and
metipranolol.
The
cardioselective
betaxolol may be an advantage in avoiding side effeas in patients
with bronchospasm.
1B •
I
Pharmacologic PropertiC5 of Various ~Blockers
Migraine
Propranolol (80 to 240mg daily, licensed in the United States) acts
prophylactically to reduce the incidence of migraine attacks in 60%
of patients. ·Ine mechanism presumably involves beneficial vaso-
constriction. The antimigraine effect is prophylactic and not for
attacks once they have occurred. If there is no benefit within 4 to 6
weeks, the drug should be discontinued.
PHARMACOLOGIC PROPEII11ES OF VARIOUS
~·BLOCKERS
{3wBlocker Generations
i'irst-generation agents, such as propranolol, nonselectively block all
the
~-receptors (both
~, and ~J. Second-generation agents, such as
atenolol, metoprolol, acebutolol, bisoprolol, and others, have relative
selectivity when given in low doses for the
~I (largely cardiac) recep-
tors (Fig. 1-9). lnird-generation agents have added vasodilatory prop-
erties (Fig. t-W), acting chiefly through two mechanisms: (1) direct
vasodilation, possibly mediated by release of nitric oxide as for
nebivolol and for carvedilol61; and (2) added a-adrenergic blockade
as in labetalol and carvedilol. A third vasodilatory mechanism, as in
pindolol and acehutolol, acts via ~rintrinsic sympathomimetic activ-
ity (ISA), which stimulates arterioles to relax: however, these agents
are used less often at present and do not neatly fit into the division
ofthe three generations. Acebutolol is a cardioselective agent with less
lSA than pindolol that was very well tolerated in a 4-year antihyper-
tensive study.63
p, VS P2 SELECTIVITY
Opi1l2004
~l·SELECTIVE
~ Bradycardia
--~...
~ Negative inotropy
----.... BPt
~ ~
Less
~eJ--..-bronchospasm
Fewer peripheral
effects
Metabolic effects
Circulatory
NON-SELECTIVE
(~1
~2)
Similar cardiac and
~ antihypertensive effects
~ More marked pulmonary
and peripheral effects
Figure
1~9
~-Antagonists may be either
~,-caTdioseJeClive or non-
C3rdioseleClive (~'-~l antagonism).ln general. note several advantages of
C3rdioselective ~-blockers, CardioseJe<:livity is greatest at Jow drug doses.
(Figure e LH Opie. 2005)
CHAPTER 1
tJ.Blocking Agents
•
19
VASODfLATORY P-BLDCKERS
Op;e 2004
ADDED
0: BLOCKADE
Carvedilol
Increasing
vasodilation
-q,.,'.---,r-~---,-,-~
ao
100
Cardiac output (%)
t: 110
.1
~
iG 90
~
-----.-
Oiiioii"__.IIiii" Actin-myosin
,,'e
interaction
Other mechanisms
ENDOTHELIAL Net
Carvedilol
Nebivolol
""
\
VASODfLATORY
~.BLOCKERS
ISmooth muscle relaxes I
FlgII re 1·10 Vasodil31ory mechanisms and effe<:ts. Vasodilatory ~-blockers
tend to decrease the cardiac output less as the systemic vascular resistance falls.
Vasodilatory mechanisms include a-blockade (carvedilol). nonspecific mech-
anisms. and imrinsic sympathomimetic activiry (lSA). [SA. as in pindolol, has
a specific effect in increasing sympathetic tone when it is low, as at night, and
increasing nocturnal heart rate, which might be disadvantageous in nocturnal
angina or unstable angina. (Figure it' LH Opie, 2005.)
Other marked differences between ~-blockers lie in the pharmacoki-
netic properties, with half-lives varying from about 10 minutes
(esmolol) to more than 30 hours, and in differing lipid or water
solubility. Hence the side effects may vary from agent to agent.
Nonetheless, there is no evidence that any of these ancillary proper-
ties has any compelling therapeutic advantage, although for the
individual patient the art of minimizing l3-blocker side effects may
be of great importance. For example, a patient with chronic obstruc-
tive airways disease needs a cardioselertive agent, whereas a patient
with early morning angina may need an ultra-long-aCling Il-blocker.
Likewise, a patient with cold extremities might benefit from a
vasodilatory agent.
Nonselective Agents (Combined !J,-P2-Blockers)
The prototype ~-blockeris propranoloL which worldwide is still used
more than any other agent and is a World Health Organization
(WHO) essential drug. By blocking Il,-receptors it affects heart rate,
conduction, and contractility, yet by blocking Il,-receptors it tends to
cause smooth muscle contraction with risk of bronchospasm in pre-
disposed individuals. This same quality might. however, explain the
benefit in migraine when vasoconstriction could inhibit the attack.
Among the nonselective blockers, nadolol and sotalol are much
longer acting and are also lipid insoluble.
tardioselective Agents (p,-selectivity)
Cardioselective agents (acebutolol, atenolol, betaxolol. bisoprolol,
celiprolol. and metoprolol) are as antihypenensive as the nonselec-
20
•
1 Poonntlcokinetic Properties of frBlockm
tive ones (Fig. 1-9). Selective agents are preferable in patients with
chronic lung disease or chronic smoking. and insulin-requiring
diabetes mellitus. Cardioselectivity varies between agents, but is always
greater at lower doses. Bisoprolol is among the most selective. Cardio-
selectivity declines or is lost at high doses. No ~-blocker is completely
safe in the presence of asthma; low-dose cardioselective agents can
be used with care in patients with bronchospasm or chronic lung
disease or chronic smoking. In angina and hypenension, cardio-
selective agents are just as effective as noncardioselective agents. In
acute myocardial infarction (AMI) complicated by stress-induced
hypokalemia, nonselective ~-blockers theoretically should be better
antiarrhythmics than ~,-selective blockers.
Antiarrhythmic !J-B/ockers
All ~-blockers are potentially antiarrhythmic by vinue ofclass 11 activ-
ity (Fig. 1-6). Propranolol and some others have, in addition, a quini-
dine-like quality called membrane stabilizing activity (MSA), that is
to say class I activity. Such experimental activity is not clinically rele-
vant except in cases of overdose when MSA contributes to fatality.
Sotalol is a unique
~-blocker with prominent added class III anti-
arrhythmic activity (Fig. 1-6; see Chapter 8).
PHARMACOIllNEnC PROPERnES OF ~-BLOCKERS
Plasma Half-lives
Esmolol, given intravenously, has the shortest of all half-lives, at only
9 minutes. £Smolol may therefore be preferable in unstable angina
and threatened infarction when hemodynamic changes may call for
withdrawal of ~-blockade.The half-life of propranolol (Table 1-3) is
only 3 hours, but continued administration saturates the hepatic
process that removes propranolol from the circulation; the active
metabolite 4-hydroxypropranolol is fonned, and the effective half-life
then becomes longer. 'Ille biological half-life of propranolol and
metoprolol (and that of all other ~-blockers) exceeds the plasma half-
life considerably, so that twice daily dosage of standard propranolol
is effective even in angina pectoris. Clearly, the higher the dose of any
~-blocker, the longer the biologic effects. Longer-acting compounds
such as nadoloL sotalol. atenolol. and slow-release propranolol
(Inderal-LA) or extended-release metoprolol (Toprol-XL) should be
better for hypertension and effort angina.
Protein Binding
Propranolol
is
highly
bound,
as
are
pindolol.
labetalol,
and
biso-prolol.
Hypoproteinemia
calls
for
lower
doses
of such
compounds.
First-Pass liver Metabolism
This is found especially with the highly lipid-soluble compounds,
such as propranolol, labetalol, and oxprenolol. Acebutolol, meto-
prolol, and timolol have only modest lipid solubility, yet with hepatic
clearance; first-pass metabolism varks greatly among patients and
alters the dose required. In liver disease or low-output states the dose
should be decreased. First-pass metabolism produces active metabo-
lites with, in the case of propranolol, properties different from those
of the parent compound. Acebutolol produces large amounts of
diacetolol, also cardioselective with intrinsic sympathomimetic activ-
ity, but with a longer half-life and chiefly excreted by the kidneys
(Fig. 1-11).
CHAPTER 1
{J-Blodring Agents
•
21
ROUTE OF ELIMINATION
Opie 2004
100%
80
[BYUVER
o
20
ttt
~
40
60
20
0
BY KIDNEY]
80
100%
Pindolol
Bisoprolol
Propranolollimolol
Carvedilol
Metoprolol
also: betaxoiol, labetalol. penbutolol
Acebulolol
Atenolol
(metabolite)
Nadolol
$otalol
Carteolol
Figure 1·11 Comparative routes of elimination of ~-blockers. 'lbose
most hydrophilic and least lipid-soluble are excreted unchanged by the
kidneys. Those most lipophilic and least water·soluble are largely metab-
olized by the liver. Note that the metabolite of acebutolol. diacetolol, is
largely excreted by the kidney. in contrast to the parent compound. (For
derivation ofdata in figure. see the 3rd edition. Estimated data points for
acebutolol and newer agents added). (Figure (fJ LH Opie, 2005.)
Ideal Kinetics
Lipid-insoluble hydrophilic compounds (atenolol, sota[ol, nadolol)
are excreted only by the kidneys (Fig. l-ll) and have low brain
penetration. In patients with renal or liver disease, the simpler phar-
macokinetic patterns of lipid-insoluble agents make dosage easier. As
a group, these agents have low protein binding (Table 1-3).
Drug Interactions with fJ-Blockers
Phannacodynamic interactions can be predicted and occur in combi·
nations of ~-blockerswith other drugs depressing the SA or AV nodes.
or with other negative inotropic agents (Fig. 1.3). Phannacokinetic
interactions are chiefly at the level of the liver. Cimetidine reduces
hepatic blood flow and increases blood levels of 13-blockers highly
metabolized by the liver, especially propranolol. Verapamil inhibits the
hepatic breakdown of metoprolol and propranolol. and possibly other
l3-blockers metabolized by the liver. To avoid such hepatic interactions,
it is simpler to use those l3-blockers not metabolized by the liver (Fig.
I-II). I3-Blockers. in tum, depress hepatic blood flow so that the blood
levels of lidocaine increase with greater risk of lidocaine toxicity.
CONCOMITANT DISEASES AND CNOICE OF
Il-BLOCKER
Respiratory Disease
Cardioselective 13,·blockers in low doses are best for patients with
reversible bronchospasm. In patients with a history of asthma. no 13-
blocker can be considered safe.
Associated cardiovascular Disease
In patients with sick sinus syndrome, pure ~-blockade can be danger-
ous. Added ISA may be best. In patients with RaY7ulUd's phenomenon,
propranolol with its peripheral vasoconstrictive effects is best avoided.
In active peripheral vascular disease,
l3-blockers are generally con-
traindicated. although the evidence is not firm.
Table 1-3
Properties of Various jl-Adrenoceplor Antagonist Agents, Nonseleclive Versus Gardloselecllve and Vasodllatory Agems
".~
_......
""..
"'"m
lIsuIl 00St tor
SOle T!lefapy for
Intl"l'tenous
Geflefk: Name
....
......
U••
Rm-Pass
""'"
8111111ng
""'M
Mild/Moderate
""".
(T~Kame)
Mechanism
H.1f·l..IhIlbl
Solubility"
""'" --
""
(Other 11Ill1catlons)
_'~
Lkensed III lISA}
Noneardioselective
Propranolol"
'-0
-
#
U""r
"
80mg 2x daily
Sedn wieh 1O-40mg
1-6mg
(lnderal)
usually adequate
2x daily. Mean
(maygi"" 160mg
160-320mg/day.
'"
1_2 dooeo
(Indcral·U.)
8- It
-
#
Liver
"
80~320mg IX daily
80_320mg )X daily
Cartcolol'
ISA +
'-0
0/.
0
Kidney
20~JO
(Nol ....aluatedJ
2.5_lOmg.ingie
(Cart'ol)
d~
Nadolol'
20-24
0
0
Kidney
30
40_AOmg Ix daily;
40-80m&!dd)' IX
(Corgard)
up 10 240mg
daily; up 10 320mg
PcnbulOlol
""
20_25
-
#
U""r
"
(NOI studied)
10-20mg daily
(LcvaIOI)
Solalol'
7_18
0
0
Kidney
,
(80-240mg 2x daily
1I0-320mg/day;
(Ilctapacc;
(mcan 12)
in 'WI) dOl<':l for
mun 190mg
Ilcta""cc AP)
serio..., Vi::ntrirular
arrhythmia,; up to
160mg 2x daily for
auial fib, nutler)
Timolol'
,-,
•
"'
"
(po~t·M\1 IOmg 2x
10-20mg 2x daily
(8Iocadrcl1)
daily)
e..-_
Accbutolol·
'''#
8-13
0
#
L'
"
(400-t200mlllday
400~1200m&!day;
(S«traJ)
{Oiacnolol)
(Olacctolol)
in 2 daM' for PVC)
can be gi""n as a
.i11Jlle dose
Menolol"
,-,
,
,
Kidnty
"
SO_200mg IX daily
SO·I00m&,d~ IX
rrtnormin)
daily
Ilttnolol'
14_22 -
-
L, IMn K
SO
10_20mg Ix d.ily
(Kniont)
Bisoprolol'
'-12
•
,
L'
SO
10mg Ix daily (not
25-40"'1 Ix d>.ily
(zron.)
Jicmstd in USA)
(_alKlZlac.p.12)
(1-lF; _Tmlt 1-2)
-"
,-,
•
-
"'"
"
50--200 rng :zx daily
56-400m&fcby in 1
,-,
(HE _Tmlt 1-2)
w,.....
'hsoCliIab, ~ NolllilllctW
...........
,-'
- -
L_' ..
AI for hypmmsM.>n
lOO-600mgf.uyln
rrrancblt)
) <I<.,..; IDp .x-
,-..,
2400mgf.uy
Pindolol'
IM_
•
•
•
LK
"
2.5-75"'1 3X d>.ily
S-30m&f.uy :zx
lY-'
(In UK. not USA)
d>.ily
~ilol'
~,~, a·block
,
•
-
"'"
"
(USA. UK licmK for
12.S-2Smg 2X
(Corti)
lIt.n failure up .0
d>.ily
2S rna:ZX daily)
VIsocliIatorJ IHlot*n. 5eIIctfw
Nd)iVQJol
ND-
10 (2411. -
-
L'
OB
Undtr inwsliplion
Smg on«' daily.
(nol Iianstd
vasodilation
mmbolitu)
(Gtnttk
2.SmS in ""nal
in USA;
variation)
di_ or ddt.ly
Ntbjld in UK}
'<kt.nol-w.'tt di.uib~,i<»l<otMeI<n, (pi I 7.4. 37'CJ wtstt< 0 _ <0.5; + _0,5_2.0: H. 2_10; ...... _ >10.
'Appr<lY<d by FDA for hypttlenlion,
'App~ by FOA fot .nsin. 1'«10n..
'Appr<lY<d for lif<-th,ut<nlns ..,nulnal•• ,,,,,hY",,hythmia.
fib _ fibrillation: 1fT_ hypt"elUion; ISA _ intrinsi< syml"'thomim<1i< iOCIivi'r: K. 1OOnq: i_liver, NO. niui< 0Iid<; l'VC. prem.'ure ..,nui<u... conlriOClio....
SmS<J>T·Smin;
rq>t.1 Smin laIn
Smg Jx at 2 min
inltfVllls
Up 10 2mrJmin.
up 10 lOll mg for
~"'
24
•
1 Side Effecu of /3-Blockers
Renal Disease
Ultimately ~-blockers are usually excreted by the kidneys, so that in
renal failure the dose may have to be altered, especially in the case of
water-soluble agents excreted by the kidneys (atenoloL acebutolol,
nadolol, sotalol) or agents partially excreted such as bisoprolol. In
general, agents highly metabolized by the liver can be given in an
unchanged dose.
Diabetes Mellitus
In diabetes mellitus, the risk of ~-blockade in insulin-requiring dia-
betic individuals is that the sympwms of hypoglycemia might be
masked, There is a lesser risk with the cardioselective agents. In
persons with type 2 diabetes with hypertension, initial P-blocker
therapy by atenolol was as effective as the ACE inhibitor captopril in
reducing macrovascular end-points. J1 Whether diabetic nephropdlhy
benefits as much from treatment with P-blockade is not dear. ARBs
and ACE inhibiwrs have now been established as agen.ts offirst choice
in diabetic nephropathy (see Chapter 5).
Those at Risk of New Diabetes
'ille ~-blocker-diureticcombination poses a risk that should be less-
ened by using a truly low dose of the diuretic or by using another
combination.
SIDE EFFECTS OF ~-BLOCKERS
The three major mechanisms for
~blocker side effew are: (I) smooth
muscle spasm (bronchospasm and cold extremities); (2) exaggeration
of the cardiac therapeutic actions (bradycardia, heart block, excess
negative
inotropic effect);
and (3)
central nervous penetration
(insomnia, depression). llle mechanism of fatigue is not dear. When
compared with propranolol, however, it is reduced by use of either a
cardioselective ~-blocker or a vasodilatory agent, so that both central
and peripheral hemodynamic effects may be involved. When patients
are appropriately selected, double-blind studies show few differences
in side-effects between a cardioselective agent such as atenolol and
placebo. This may be because atenolol is not lipid soluble and should
have lesser effects on bronchial and vascular smooth muscle than
propranolol. When propranolol is given for hypertension, the rate of
serious side effects (bronchospasm, cold extremities, worsening of
claudication) leading to withdrawal of therapy is about 10%.... The
rate of withdrawal with atenolol is considerably lower (about 2%).
but when it comes to dose-limiting side effects, both agents can cause
cold extremities. fatigue. vivid dreams, worsening claudication, and
bronchospasm. Increasing heart failure remains a potential hazard
when
~-blockade therapy is abruptly started at normal doses in a
susceptible patient and not tailored in.
Contral Nervous System (eNS) Side Effects
An attractive hypothesis is that the lipid-soluble
~-blockers (epito-
mized by propranolol) with their high brain penetration are more
likely !O cause CNS side effects. An extremely detailed comparison
of propranolol and atenolol showed that the latter, which is not
lipid soluble, causes far fewer CNS side effects than does propra-
nolol. 65 On the other hand, the lipid-solubility hypothesis does not
explain why mewprolol, which is moderately lipid soluble. appears
!O interfere less with some complex psychological functions than
does atenolol and may even enhance certain aspects of psychological
performance.&6
CHAPTER 1
{J-Blocking Agents
•
25
Quality of Life and Sex Ute
In the first quality of life study reponed in patients with hypertension,
propranolol induced considerably more CNS effects than did the ACE
inhibitorcaptopril.67 Atenolol, with its far fewer CNS side effects, com-
pares favorably with the ACE inhibitor enalapril.68 It now appears that
a variety of !3-blockers, often with different fundamental properties,
all leave the quality of life largely intact in hypertensive individuals.
However, there aTe a number of negatives. First, weight gain is un-
desirable and contral)' to the lifestyle pattern required to limit
cardiovascular diseases
induding the
metabolic syndrome and
hypertension. Second, !3-blockade may precipitate diabetes, l6 a disease
that severely limics the quality of life. Third, during exercise, 13-
blockade reduces the total work possible by about 15% and increases
the sense of fatigue. VasodilalOry 13-blockers may be an exception.
Impotence is a frequent complaint of aging men receiving !3-blockade
therapy_ Problems with erection may take place in 11% of patients
given a !3-blocker, compared with 26% with a diuretic and 3% with
placebo.69 ACE inhibilOrs or ARBs give a better sex life.
7Q
CONTRAlNOICAnONS TO ~-BLOCKAOE
The absolute contraindications to !3-blockade can be deduced from
the profile of pharmacologic effects and side effects (Table 1-4).
Cardiac absolute contraindications include severe bradycardia, preex-
isting high-degree heart block, sick sinus syndrome, and overt left ven-
tricular failure unless already conventionally treated and stable (Fig.
1-12). Pulmonary contraindications are overt asthma or severe bron-
chospasm; depending on the severity of the disease and the cardio-
selectivity of the !3-blocker used, these may be absolute or relative
contraindications. The eNS contraindication is severe depression
(especially for propranolol). Active peripheral vascular disease with
rest ischemia is another contraindication.
OVERDOSE OF ~-BLOCKERS
Bradycardia may be countered by 1 to 2 mg of intravenous atropine;
if serious, temporary transvenous pacing may be required. When an
{i-BLOCKER CONTRA/NO/CAT/ONS
Opie 2004
,,
I
VENOUS
CAPACITANCE
VESSELS
Prinzmetal's angina
Untreated heart failure
, ,,
"
Severe
heart
block
~,...
Low CO
~~
~
cardiac output .r~ ~~~
~ asthma ~""""
Excess
~~
bffidy~ro~
\
~::::~;~~I ~-B CONTRA/ND/CATIONS
AR"~EAIOLAA
SA,
RESISTANCE
Relative contffiindications:
VESSELS
Verapamil, diltiazem,
~
amiodarone. Caution: digoxin ~
Fig.,. 1-12 Contrnindications to ~-brockade_ (Figure 10 LH Opie, 2005,)
26
•
Table 1-4
Contraindiwtioll5 10 ~Blockllde
I3-Bfockade: Contraindlcatlons and Cautions
(NOl'E: Cautiom may be ol'1mitldm 1", the impermil'e 10 Ireat, liS in
PQstinflirct pafienl.\)
cardiac
Absolute: Severe bradycardia, high·degree heart block, cardiagenic
shock, overt untreated left ventricular failure (versus major use in
stabilized heart failure already conventionally treated)
Relative: Prinzmetal's angina (unopposed a-spasm). high doses of other
agents depressing SA or AV nodes (verapamil, di!tiazem, digoxin, am;·
arrhythmic agents); in angina, awid 511dden withdrawal, danger in
unreliable patient.
Pulmonary
Absolute: Severe asthma or bronchospasm. No parienl may be given a
~-blocker without questions for past or present asthma. Fatalities have
resulted when this rule was ignored.
Relative: Mild asthma or bronchospasm or chronic airways disease Use
agents with cardioselectivity plus ~,-stimulants (by inhalation).
Gerrtral Nervous System
Absolute: Severe depression (avoid propranolol).
Relative: Vivid dreams: avoid highly lipid-soluble agents (Fig. 1-11) and
pindolol; avoid evening dose. Visual hallucinations: change from
propranolol. Fatigue (all agents). If low cardiac output is cause of
fatigue, try vasodilatory ~-blockers. Impotence: may occur (check for
diuretic use; consider change to ACE inhbitor/ARB). Psychotropic drugs
(with adrenergic augmentation) may adversely interact with ~-blotkers.
Peripheral Vascular, Raynaud's PhenomenOIl
Absolute: Active disease: gangrene, skin necrosis, severe or worsening
claudication, rest pain.
Relative: Cold extremities, absent pulses, Raynaud's phenomenon. Avoid
nonselective agents (propranolol, sotalol, nadolol); prefer vasodilatory
agents.
Diabetes Mellitus
Rdative: Insulin-requiring diabetes; nonr.elective agents decrease reaction
to hypoglycemia; use selective agents, Note successful use of atenolol in
type 2 diabetes in prolonged UK trial.
Metabolic Syndrome
~Blockers may increase blood sugar by 1.0-1.5 mmol/L and imp.air
insulin sensitivity especially with diuretic cotherapy; adjust control
accordingly or avoid combination.
Renal Failure
Relative: As renal blood flow falls, reduce doses of agents eliminated by
kidney (Fig. 1-11).
liver Disease
Relative: Avoid agents with high hepalic clearance (propranolol.
calVedilol, timolol, acebutolol, metoprolol). Use agents with low
clearance (atenolol, nadolol, soulol). See Figure I-II. If plasma
proteins low, reduce dose of highly bound agents (propranolol,
pindolol, bisoprolol).
PrelJflancy Hypertension
~Blockade increasingly used but may depress vital signs in neonate and
cause uterine vasoconstriction. Labetalol and atenolol best tested.
Preferred drug: methyldopa.
Surgical OperatiOlls
fj-Blodade may be maintained throughout, provided indication is not
trivial; otherwise stop 24 to 48 hOUTS beforehand. May protect against
anesthetic arrhythmias and pcrioperative ischemia. Preferred
intravenOU!i drug: esmolol. U$e atropine {or bradycardia, [:I-agonist {or
severe hypotension.
I3-Blockade: GontraindlcatlOns and CautlOns-Contmued
CHAPTER 1
~Blockil1gAgellrs
•
27
Table 1-4
Ag,
~-Blockade often helps to reduce blood pressure, but lacks positive
outcome data and may harm versus comparator ARB as in LIFE study.'
Watch phannacokinetics and side effects in all elderly patients.
Smoking
In hypenension, !l-blockade is less effective in reducing coronary events
in smoking men.
Hyperlipidemia
~-Blockers may have unfavorable effects on the blood lipid profile,
especially nonselective agents. Trigly<erides increase and BDl.-cholesterol
falls. Clinical significance unknown, but may worsen metabolic
syndrome. Vasodilatory agents, with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity
or a-blocking activity, may have mildly favorable effects.
ARB. JngiOlen5in receptor blocker; AV. atriovenlricular; SA .. sino,llriaL
• Kieldsen SF, et a!. ["Or Ihe UF!, Siudy Group. Effects of 105Jnan on cardiovascular
morbidity and monality if\ patienlS with isolated systolic hypenension and left
ventricular hyperlrophy.IAMA 2002;288:1491-1498.
infusion is required, glucagon (2.5 to 7.5 mg/hour) is the drug of
choice, because it stimulates formation ofcyclic AMP by bypassing the
occupied l3-receptor. Logically an infusion of a phosphodiesterase
(POE) inhibitor, such as amrinone or milrinone, should help cyclic
AMP to accumulate. Alternatively, dobutamine is given in doses high
enough to overcome the competitive l3-blockade (15Jlg/kglminute).
In patients without ischemic heart disease, an infusion (up to
O.lOJlglkglminute) of isoproterenol may be used.
SPECIFIC ~-BLOCKERS
Of the large number of l3·blockers, the ideal agent for hypertension
or angina might have (I) advantageous pharmacokinetics (lipid insol-
ubility); (2) a high degree of cardioselectivity; and (3) long duration
of action. Vasodilatory properties should be of benefit in the treat-
ment of hypertension in the elderly, but might be a disadvantage in
the treatment of certain types of angina when the heart rate must be
as slow as possible.
ProprmlOlo/ (lllderal) is the historical gold standard because it is
licensed for so many different indications, including angina, acute
stage myocardial
infarction, postinfarct follow-up,
hypertension,
arrhythmias,
migraine prophylaxis,
anxiety states,
and essential
tremor. 1I0wever, propranolol is not 13, selective. Being lipid-soluble,
it has a high brain penetration and undergoes extensive hepatic first-
pass metabolism. CNS side effects may explain its poor performance
in quality-of-life studies. Propranolol also has a shon half-life so that
it must be given twice daily unless long-acting preparations are used.
The chief of the other agents are dealt with alphabetically.
Aceburolo/ (Seclral) is the cardioselective agent with intrinsic sympa-
thomimetic activity that gave a good quality of life in the 4-year
TOMII study in mild hypertension. In particular, the incidence of
impotence was not increased.
71
Aten%l (Tenormin) was one of the first of the cardioselective agents
and now in generic form is aile of the most widely used drugs in
angina, in postinfarct protection, and in hypertension. Its phannaco-
kinetic advantages include lipid-insolubility and a relatively long
half-life. There are very few trials with outcome data for atenolol in
these conditions with two exceptions, the ASIST study in silent
ischemia" and when compared with verapamil in hypertensive indi-
viduals with coronary artery disease.'l In the British Medical Research
Council trial of hypertension in the elderly, atenolol did not reduce
28
•
1 Specific ~B/ockers
coronary events.n More recently, atenolol was inferior to the ARB
100artan in the therapy of hypertensive patients with LVH,7' Although
atenolol is also widely used in postinfarct protection, there are in fact
no randomized controlled trials to show that it works over a period
longer than a few weeks.
Blsoprolol (Ze~ in the United SUlIa, Cardicor or Emcor in w Un ired
Kingdom) is a highly ~,-selectiveagent. more so than atenoloI.licensed
for hypertension and angina heart failure in the United Kingdom but
only for hypertension in the United States. It was the drug used in the
large and successful CIBIS-2 study in heart failure. in which there was
a large reduction not only in total mortality but also in sudden
death.n
A combination of low·dose
bisoprolol
and
low-dose
hydrochlorothiazide (Ziac) is available in the Unites States (see Com·
bination Therapy). The proposal is thai antihypertensive efficacy can
be reached at doses that cause few or no side effects.
Carvedilol (Coreg in rhe United SraUS, Eucardic in the United Kingdom)
is a nonselective
~-blocker with antioxidant and a-mediated vaso-
dilatory properties that has been extensively studied in CHFs, and in
postinfarct LV dysfunction.'? In the United States, it is registered for
hypertension, for CHF (mild to severe), and for post-Ml LV dysfunc-
rion (ejection fraction S40%), but not for angina.
Celiprolol (et/urol in rh£ Unired Kingdom, nor in the United SUIteS) is a
highly cardioselective ~-blocker with low lipid solubility and a half-
life similar to that of atenoloL
wHlalol (Trandare, Normodyne) is a combined 0.- and
~blocking
antihypertensive agent that has now largely been supplanted by
carvedilol.
Meropr%l (Toprol-XL) is cardioselective and panirularly well studied
in acute myocardial infarction and in postinfarct protection. Toprol-
XL is approved in the United States for stable symptomatic dass II or
III heart failure.rJ It is also registered for hypertension and angina.
Lopressor,
shoner acting,
is licensed
for angina and myocardial
infarction.
Nad%l (Corgard) is very long acting and water soluble,. although non-
selective. It is particularly useful when prolonged antianginai activity
is required.
Nebiv%l (Nebilet in the United Kingdom, not licensed in tJre United
Srnli!S) is a highly cardioselective agent with peripheral vasodilating
properties mediated by nitric oxide. Hepatic metabolites probabl);
account for the vasodilation?· and the long biological half-life. ?
Nebivolol reverses endothelial dysfunction in hypertension.'8
Pmbutolol (Leva/ol). This agent has modest ISA. similar to acebutolol,
but is nonselective. It is highly lipid soluble and liver metabolized.
Sotalol (BeUlpace, Betapace AF) is a unique nonselective ~.blocker that
has class III antiarrhythmic activity. It is licensed for life-threatening
ventricular arrhythmias as Betapace. and now also as Betapace AF for
maintenance of sinus rhythm in patients with symptomatic atrial fi-
brillation or atrial flutter. Sotalol is a water-soluble drug. excreted only
by the kidneys, so that Betapace AF is contraindicated in patients with
a creatinine clearance of less than 40mlfminute.
Tim%l (Blocardm) was the first ~blocker shown to give postinfara
proteaion and it is one of the few licensed for this purpose in the
United States. Other approved uses are for hypertension and in
migraine prophylaxis.
ULTRA-SHORT-AcnNG INTRAVENOUS ~-BLOCKADE
fumolol (Brevib/oc) is an ultra·short-aaing ~,.blocker with a half-life
of 9 minutes. rapidly converting to inactive metabolites by blood
CHAPTER I
~Blocking Agenu
•
29
e$u:rases.. Full recovery from ~blockade ocrurs within 30 minutes in
patients with a normal cardiowscu.lar system. IndiaJtions are situations
in which on/off control of ~blockadeis desired. as in supraventricu·
lar tachycardia in the peri..operative period. or sinus tachycardia (non-
compensatory). or emergency hypertension in the perioperative
period (all registered uses in the United Scates). Other logical indica-
tions are for emergency hypertension in other situations where
pheochromocytoma is excluded, or in unstable angina." Doses are
as follows. For supraventricular rachycardia. a loading dose of SOOIlg/
kg,!minute is given over I minute. followed by a 4-minute infusion
of SOIlg/kg/minute (USA package insert). If this fails. repeat loading
dose and increase infusion to 1001lg/kg/minute again over 4 minutes.
If this fails. repeat loading dose and then infuse at rates up to 3001181
kgJminute. Thereafter, co maintain control. infuse at adjusted rate
for up to 24 hours. For perioperative hypertension, give 80mg (about
I mg/kg) over 30 seconds and infuse at ISO to 300~gJkgfminuteif
needed. For more gradual control of blood pressure. follow the
routine for supraventricular tachycardia. Higher doses are usually
required for blood pressure control than for arrhythmias. Once the
emergency is over, replace by conventional antiarrhythmic or anti-
hypertensive drugs. Caufions indude extravasation of the add solution
with risk of skin necrosis.
SUMMARY
1.
~BlockeTS come closesr among all cardiovascular Ilgents to providing ill/-
purpose therapy. licensed indications include angina. hypertension.
AMI. postinfarct follow-up. arrhythmias, and now CHF. Data for
postinfarct protection and for monality reduction in CHF are
partirularly impressive.
2. The major change in rhe c1iniaJi use of~blockers is the essential use
of
~-blockers in stabilized and treated patients with CHF. to
counter the excessive adrenergic drive. Only three agents have been
studied in detail, namely carvedilol, metoprolol. and biso-prolol,
of which only the first two are approved for heart failure in lIle
United Slates. It is essential to follow the recommended protocol.
with slowly incremental doses of the chosen agent.
3. Coronary heart disease.
~-Blockade is very effective treatment. alone
or combined with ocher drugs. in 70% to 80% of patients with
classic angina. f3-Blockers are pan of (he essential postinfarct pro-
tection armamentarium. For acute coronary syndromes, indirect
evidence suggests a quadruple follow-up regimen of aspirin, statin,
ACE inhibitor, and poblod::ade. However, there is no evidence thar
f3-blod::ers slow the deo.oelopment of coronary artery disease.
4. Hypertension. ~Blockers reduce blood pressure effectively in 50%
to 70% of those with mild to moderate hypertension. Elderly
hypertensives, especially those: of the black ethnic group, respond
less well to ~blocker monotherapy. The previously recommended
combination of ~blockers and diuretics may provoke diabetes.
unless the diureric dose is uuly low.
5. Arrhyrhmias. There is renewed realizarion that ~·blockers are among
the more effective ventricular antiarrhythmics.
6, Propmnolol versus otheTS. Regarding choice of P-blocker. there is no
panicular advantage for this original "gold standard" drug. with its
poor quality of life. unless hypenension or angina coexists with
some other condition in which experience with propranolol is
grearer than wllh olher
~-blockers (e.g.. hypertrophic cardiomy-
opalhy. migraine prophylaxis, anxiety or essential tremor). or
30
•
ReferenU5
unless cost is a major consideration when generic propranolol
should be compared with other generics such as atenolol.
7. Omer fJ-b/ockm are increasingly used because of specific attractive
propenies: cardia-selectivity (acebutoloJ.
atenolol, bisoprolol.
me1oprolol); positive data in hean failure (carvedilol. rnetoprolol.
bisoprolol) or postinf:uCl (metoprolol. carvedilol, timolol); lipid
insolubility and
no hepatic
metabolism
(atenolol.
nadolol,
5Otalol); long action (nadolol) or long-acting formulations; intrin-
sic sympathomimetic activity (ISA) in selected patients to help
avoid bradycardia (pindolol, acebutolol); added
a~blockade to
achieve more anerial dilation (carvedilol); and well-studied antiar-
rhythmic propenies (sotalol). The antihypenensive combination
bisoprolol.hydrochlorothiazide combines very low doses of two
types of agents while maintaining efficacy and minimizing side
effects. Esmolol is the best agent for intravenous use in the peri-
operative period because of its extremely sholt half-life.
8. EI/idence-basetl use. Here the logic would be to use those agents estab-
lished in large trials because of the known doses and dearly
expected benefits. For example, for poslinfarct protection propra-
nolol. metoprolol. carvedilol, and timolol are thi:' best studied, of
which only calVl:'dilol has bei:'ll studied in the reperfusion era. r'()r
stabilized congestive healt failure. carvedilol, metoprolol. and biso-
prolol have impressive data from large trials. CalVl:'dilol especially
merits altemion, being licensed for a wide clinical range. from LV
dysfunaion to severe heart failure. and having best trial data. For
arrhythmias, 5Otalol with its class 111 properties stands out.
REF ERE NeE S
J. Dam CW, 2nd. Itt al. Manipulating CiIIrdix contrxtiliry in hun failure diu from
mice md mm. Cifnd41ion 2004;1.,,:tSQ--158.
2. Gon& II, Itt al. Sprri6c bru.,AR blocbr 10 118.551 aniwty d~ contrxtion
ll>1'O!Ji/l a c,.couplrd fonn of ll>r bru.,AR In myocylrs from bili"& human hart.
Cimdarion 2002;105:2497-2503.
3. Moniolle S. r1
01.1. Uprqulation of bru.,·idrmorraptors and ahem! contrxtile
rnponsr
to
inotropk
amina
in
human
failing
myoardium.
0mtlDriool
2001;103:1649_1655.
4, W.Uhaus TR. r1 al. Myocardial f'tft fOlly Kid and glUOOK usr aftrr arwdilol tll:at·
mt:nt in patients with congesti~ hun failull:. Cirt:llIDrw.. 2001;103:2441-2446.
5, 8ristow MR.
~·Mll:nergk Il:«ptor blockade in chronk hun (ailull:. CirC1/IDricn
2000; 101:558-569,
6, Akhter S, et
~1. In vivo inhibition of rlevJIW my(>Clrdi~1 ~.adn:nrrgk r«eplOr kinase
activity in hybrid tlaosgrnic mi", relto",s normal
~_adrrnergic signaling and func·
tion. Cirt:lliation 1999:100:648-653.
7. Hellbrunn SM. et al. IncreaJ.ed ooa·r«eptor density and improwd hemodynamic
",sponse to cat«holamine stimulation during long-term metopfOlol thrrapy in hun
f~ilull: (fOm dil~lrd cardiomyopathy. Cin;ulmicn 1989;79:483-4!l0
8. Kugiy.tma K. n JI. EffKt!l of pfOpnnolol Jnd nlftdlpi.... on o.rrd..._inductd attack
in pJtients variant angina: assnsmntt by exercise thallium·201 rrtyoGIrdlJI scinti.
graphy will> quantit.otWr rot.otional tomography. Cil'CflwrioolI986;74;374-380.
9_
~~n I, n al. Cold intolrrarlU In patirnts will> angina prc1Oris: df«t of nifrdipine
and prop",nolol. 8. HNT!' 1989;61:521_528.
10. ASIST Study. F.R'«ts of lreJlmntt on OUlCOlTlr in mildly symptOmatic: patients will>
iKhemia during daily life- The Atmolo! Silmt IKhemu Study (ASISll. Circul.rrion
1994;90:762-768.
II. Mukheri« D, r1 aJ. lmpaa of combiruUo<t n\dm«·butd medial tha'apy on mor·
ulity in patimts with JC\Ite cororury syndlOme$. Cirnt/Arion 1004;1"':745_749.
11. Yusuf S. r1 JI. RedtKlion in infJKt siu. anhythmiu JOO chrsl p;lin by ,","tty intra·
vmous brtJ blocbdo: in suspecttd JC\Ite myocardial infarction. CimolDrion 1983;67
(Suppl 1)·J·32_I--41.
13. IIINT Study. E.1rty lreJunmt of unsublr Jngiru in the coronuy C1Il: uni.. ann·
domism. double·blind plJ«bo conuolled comparison of I«UrtnU isdlnni.J. in
patimu lreattd will> nifrdipi.... or rnetoprolol O' both_ Ilolland Inter...nivrnity
NifedipineTriJI. 8. Hean / 1986;56:400-413.
14. FlftmJntlr N. <"I 01.1. Pblocbde ahrr rrtyoGIrdiJI infunion: systemic rrnrw and m<"I.1
"'lP"e$Sion Jnalysis. 8r MtJ / 1999;318:1730-1737.
IS. Rydm I.. Itt al. A double·blind lrial of m<"loprolol in uute myocardial infaraion.
N £nt' 1Mtd 1983;308:614-618.
16. Noms RM, r1 JI. ~ntion ofwmricul.. fibrillJtion during uule myoardial infJrc_
lion by ;nt",wnous propranolol. IAn«! 1984:883-886.
CHAPTER 1
f3-Blockhlg Agents
•
31
17 CAPR[CORN Investi!l"lOrs. Effea of carvedilol on outcome after myocardial infarc_
tion in patients with left_ventricular dysfunaion: Ihe CAPIUCORN randomised trial.
lAncet 2001;357:1385_1390.
18 Gottlieb 55, et aJ. Effect of bela-blockade on mortality anlong high_risk and low_risk
patient< after myocardial infaroion N Engl I Med 1998;339:489_497.
19. OlilSon G, el a!. long_term treatment with metoptolol after myocardial i"farClion
effect on 3_yur mortality and morbidity. I Am Coli O>rd;oI1985S1428_1437.
20. Teo KK. et a!' Effern of prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug therapy in acute myocardial
infarction.
An overview of resuhs
from
randomized controlled lrial<.
lAMA
1993; 270: 1589_1595.
21. SAVE Study. Effect of captopril on monalily and morbidity in patient< willI lefl ven-
tricular dysfunaion afler myocardial infamion. Results oflhe SllIvival and Vemricu_
lar l'nlargement trial. N Engll Mtd 1992;327:669-677.
22
Heidenreich Pi\. el al. Meta_analysis of \rials comparing ~blockers, calcium antago_
nim. and nitrates for stable angina. lAMA 1999;281:1927-1936.
23. Chobanian AV, el al. The Sevemh Repon of the Joim National Commiuee on Pre-
vention,
DeteClion. Evaluation and Treaunent of High Blood Pressure. JAMA
2003;289:2560-2572,
24. European Society of I-Iypenension GuidelinfS Commin~. European Society of Car-
diolc>gy guidelin"" for the management of anerial hypenension, I Hypertenl 2003;
21:1011_1O53.
25
Psaty BM. et at Health outcomes associaled with antihypenensive therapi", us", as
first·line agent<. A systemic review and meta_analysis. lAMA 1997:277:739-745.
26. Messerli FH, et al. Are beta-blockers efficacious as fim·line therapy for hypenension
in the elderly? A systematic review. lAMA 1998;279: 1903-1907,
27. KjeJdsen SE, et al. Forthe UFE Study Group. Effeas oflosanan on cardiovasrular mor-
bidity and monality in palients with isolaled systolic hypenension and left ventricu_
lar hypenrophy, lAMA 2002;288:1491-1498,
28. Morgan T. et a1. Effect of different antihypenensive drug classes on central aonic pres-
sure, Am I Hypertell! 2004; 17:118-123,
29, Malerson II), et ai, Single-drug therapy for hypenension in men. Acomparison of six
antihypenensive agenlt with placebo, The Depanment ofVeteratlS Affairs Coopera-
tive Study Group on Antihypenensive Agents. N fngll Med [993;328:914-921.
30, UKPDS 38, UK Prospective DiabetfS SlUdy Group. Tight blood pressure control and
risk of macrovasrularand microvascular complications in type 2 diabeles; UKPDS 3S.
Sf Mod 11998;317;703-713
31
UKPDS 39. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Hficacy of alenolol and captopril
in redudng risk of macrov<lscular and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes;
UKPDS 39. Br .'.led 11998;317:713-720.
32. Dunder K. et al. Increase in blood glucose concentration during anlihypenensive
treatmenl as a predi(\or of myocardial infarction; population based cohoM smdy. Br
Med J 2003;326,681-685.
33, Lindholm LH, et al. Risk of new-onset diabetes in the [.nsanan Intervention ['or End-
point reduaion in hypenension smdy, J Hrpenen. 2002;20: [879-1886.
34, Lithdl H, et al. Metabolic effern of carvedilol in hypenensive palient<. Eur J CUn
PharmacoI1997:52:13-17.
35. Frishman WHo et aL Pirsl_line therapy option with low-dose bisoprolol fumarale and
low-dose hydrochlorothiazide in patients wilh stage I and stage II syslemic hyper-
tension.' Gin Philrmarol 1995;35: 182-188
36. Gr""s 1W. et al.l'or the ....heros<:lerosis Risk in Communities Study. Hypenension and
antihypenensives therapy as risk factors for type 2 diabetes mellims. N fngl I Med
2000;342:905-912.
37, Lubbe WI; et al. Potential arrhythmogenic role of cyclic adenosine monophosphale
(AMP) and cytosolic calcium overload: implications for prophylactic effern of beta-
blockers in myocardial infarction and proarrhythmic .,(feCls of phosphodiesterase
inhibitors. I Am Coli CardioI1992; 19; 1622-1633.
38. Pogwizd SM. el a1. Arrhythmogenesis and contractile dysfunction in hean failure. On:
Res 2oo1;88:1l59-1167
39. Steinbeck G, et aI, A comparison ofe1eclrophysiologically guided antiarrhythmic drug
therapy with beta·blocker lherapy in patients with symptomatic. sustained vemricu-
lar tachyarrhythmias. N Engl' Mod 1992;327:987-992.
40. ESVF.M Smdy. A comparison of seven anliarrhythmic drugs in patiems with ventric-
ular tachyarrhythmias. Electrophysiologic Study versus Electrocardiographic Moni-
toring [nvesti!l"tors. N Engl JMod 1993;329:452-458,
41. BoUlilie F, et aL Amiodarone interactions wilh bela-blockers, Analysis of the merged
P1I.t1AT (European Myocardill Infa'ct Trial) and CAM[AT (Canadian Amio<1arone
Myocardial [nf;,rct Trial) daubases. Ci,wIM;on 1999;99:2268-2275.
42. Kennedy H[, et aL Il-Blockertherapy in Ihe cardiac arrhythmia suppression trial. Am
I Ca,dioI1994;74:674-680.
43. Ellison KE, et al. EffecI of beta-blocking therapy On outcome in the Molticenter
UnSustained Tachycardia Trial (MUSIT}, CirruJat;on 2002; 106:2694_2699.
44. Bardy G. SCD-He[T; ICD C'lt< all_cause monality by 23% in NYHA class 2-3 hean
failure. wlW<lheheart.'":s 200~;10 March,
45. lowe. BD, el .11. Myocardial gene expression in dilated cardiomyopathy trealed with
beta_blocking agems, N Eng; J Med 2002;346:1357-1365,
46, Kubo H. et al. Palient< with end-stage congestive hean failure lreated with
~
adrenergic receptor antagonists have impro~ ventricular myocyte calcium ,egula-
tooy protein abundance. C;rrulation 1001;104:1012_1018,
47. Doi M. el a1. rropranolol pr""ent< the development of hean failllre by resloring I'KBP
12.6-mediated stabilization of oyanodine receplor. Circulaliorl 2002:105,1374-1379
32
•
References
48.
Reik~n S, (I at.
~Blockers reslore ,.10um relealle channel function and improve
cardiac muscle performance in human heart failure, Cin;uJm;01l 2003;107:2459-2466.
49. Koch W), et al. Exploring the role ofthe ~adrenergkreceplor kinase in cardiac disease
using >:ene-targeted micro '/hmds Q<rdiollillC Mm 1999;9:77_81.
SO. Engelhardl S. '" al. Altered cakium handling i. critically in"Qlwd in me cardiotoxic
"ffeCls of chronic bela-adrenergic "imulalion. C;r""lnl;CTl 2004; 109:11S4_1160.
51
Nagatm M. '" 31. Bradycardia and {he role of ~-blockade in the amelioration of left
ventricular dysfunction. Circularion 2000; 101:653-659.
51. [.«hal r, el al. I[cart rale and cardiac rhylhm relationships with bi'oprolol benefit in
chronic hean failure in ClfllS 11 Trial. Cirrularion 2001;103:1428-1433.
53. RESOLVD Inwsligalor$. Effern of metopmlol CR in patienl$ Wilh ismemic and
dilated cardiomyopathy. The Randomized Evaluation of Suategies for Left Ventricu-
lar D)."funaion Pilot Sludy. Circulation 2000;101:378-384.
54. Poole-Wilson PA. e' a1. Comparison of carvedilol and metoprolol on clinical out·
comes in patients with chronic hean failure in the CalVedilol Or Mnoprolol
European Trial (COMEl); randomis.ed controlled trial. Lan"'" 2003;362:7-13
55
Mulder P. et aI, Long-Iern, hean rate reduaion induced by Ihe .selective I, current
inhibitor ivabradine improves left ventricular funaion and intrinsic myocardial struc_
ture in congeslive hem failure. Ciradalion 2004;109:1674_1679.
56, Cvmmunal C. el al. Opposing effern of ~,. and Il,-adrmergic receplO'" on cardiac
myocyte apoplOsis, Role of a penu..is loxin-sensili'-e C prOlein. Cin:ulation 1999;
100;2210-2212.
57. Packer M. el al. Con.sensus 'ecommendations for the management of chronic hean
failure Am I Cardio11999;83 (2A):lA-38A.
58. Shekelle PC. el al. Efficacy of ang;olensin-com-ening enzyme inhibitors and beta-
blockers in the managemml ofldl ventricular systolic d)"lfunaion according 10 race,
gender. and diabetic slatus; a meta-anal)"lis of major clinical uials. J Am Coli CardJol
2003;41: 1529-1538,
59
Moss AI. et aL Effectiven"'s and limitations of ~-blocker Ihempy in congenilallong-
qr syndrome. Circulation 1000; 101:616-613.
60, poldermans D, el al. The effect of bisoprolol on perioperalive monality and myocar.
dial infaraion in high·risk patients undergoing vascular surgery. N Engl J Med
1999;34Ll789-1794
61. Fleischer 1-', et al. Lowering cardiac risk in non·Qrdiac surgery. N Engl I Med
1001;345: 1677-1681,
61. KJ.linowski L. el aL Third_generation beta-blockers stimulate nilric oxide release from
endothelial cells through ATP efflux: a novel mechanism for antihypenensive aaion.
Circulation 1003;107;2747-2752.
63. TOMB Study. Treatment of Mild !Iyrenension study [TOMH). Final results. /AMA
1993;270;713-724.
64, Simpson WI'. Nature and incidence of unwanted tffects with atenolo1. Pollrgrad Mtd
/1977;53;162_167
65 Conant I. el at. Central nervous system side effects of beta-adrenergic blocking agents
with high and low lipid solubility J CttrdiovaJc Phm7IJuo/1989:13:656-661.
66. Sueur"" S. et aL Impaer of Il-adrenergic blockers on complex cognilive funClioning.
Am lIean J 1988;116:311-315.
67. Croog S. el aJ. The effecl$ of antihypenensive Iherapy On the quality of life. N Engll
Med 1986;314:1657_1664
68. Herrick AI. et al. Comparison of enalapril and atenolol in mild to moderate hyper.
tension Am 1 Med 1989;86:421-426.
69. TA[M Study. el aL The Trial of Antihypenensive Interventions and Management
rli\[M) Study. Final results with regard to blood pressure. cardiovascular risk and
quality of life. Am I H,pertms 1992;5;37-44.
70
['ogari R, el al. Sexual aaiviry in hypertensive men treated with valsanan orcarvedilol;
A crossover study. Am /II,pet1en< 2001; 14:27_31.
71. Grimm RH, et aL Long.lerm dfeas on saual funaion of five antihypenensive drugs
and nUlTitional hygienic tRalment in
hypertensiv~ men and women. Treatment of
Mild Hypenension Sludy (TOMIIS). H)pert"rn'ion 1997;29:8-14.
72. Pepine Cl. el al. Acalcium antagonisl vs a non-calcium antageni" hypenension ueat-
ment slrategy for patients with coronary anery disease. The International Verapamil.
Trandolapril
SU.ldy (INVFsr); a
randomized controlled trial,
lAMA 2003;290;
2805-2816.
73. MRC Working Pany, Medical Research Council trial of treatment of hypenension in
older adults; principal results. Br Med /1992:304:405-412.
74. Dahlof B. For the UFF. Study Group. Cardiovascul;;r motbidity and monality in the
Losanan [nterwlllion For Endpoint reduClion in hypenension study (LIFE)' a ran-
domised trial against alenoloL Lmcet 2002;359;995_1003.
75, MERrr-HF Study Group. Effect of melOprolol CRjXL in chmnic hean failure: Melo-
prolol CRjXl Rdndomized Trial in Congestive l1,an Failure (MERrr.HF)
Lancer
1999.353;2001-2007.
76
llroeders MA, et a!' Nebi"olo!: a third-generation \>(la-blocker lhal augments vascu-
lar nitric oxide release: endothelial beta(1)_adrenerEic receptor-mediated nitric oxide
produClioll, C!rculm;an 2000;102;677-684.
77. Van de Water A et ai, Phannacological and hemadynamic profile of nebivolol, a
chemicallr n",:eL potenl, and selective beta I.ad,ellergic antagonist. I Cttrdi"''''''
Pharnlaw/1988:11:552-563.
78. Tumos N, et at. Nebivolol ,,,,,,,rses endothelial dysfunction in essential hypenension;
a r.lndomized. double-blind. crossover study CJrcul..Wn 2001;104;511-514,
79. lIohnlose' SH, et aL For the European Esmolol Stucy Croup. Usefuln"'s of ",molol
in unSlable angina peaoris, Am , CttrdiaJ 1991;67:1319-1323.
2
Nitrates
Lionel H. Opie • Harvey D. White
"When the remedy is used for a IOllg time, the dose requires w be
increased before the effect is produced."
BRUmDN, 1867'
MECHANISMS OF NITRATE AenON IN ANGINA
Nitrates provide an exogenous source of vasodilator nitric oxide, a
short-lived free radical (NO', usually written as NO), thereby induc-
ing coronary vasodilation even when endogenous production ofnitric
oxide is impaired by coronary artery disease. Thus nitrates act differ-
ently from the other classes of anti-anginals (see Fig. 11-1). Chronic
use of nitrates produces tolerance, a significant clinical problem that
is still not fully understood. The main focus of current clinical work
remains on strategies to minimize or prevent the development of tol-
erance, with the major emphasis on the adverse role of excess nitric
oxide that produces harmful peroxynitrite,2 The major focus of basic
work has shifted to the role of endogenously produced nitric oxide
as a ubiquitous physiological messenger, as described by Furchgott,
Iganarro, and Murad, the 1998 Nobel Prize winners in Medicine.J
Although such endogenously produced nitric oxide has many func-
tions, such as a role in vagal neurotransmission, that are quite differ-
ent from the functions ofnitric oxide derived from exogenous nitrates,
they have imponant shared vasodilatory effects.
Vasodilatory Effects: Coronary and Peripheral
A distinction must be made between antianginal and coronary
vasodilator properties. Nitrates dilate large coronary aneries and
arterioles greater than 100 ~m in diameter
4 to: (1) redistribute blood
flow along collateral channels and from epicardial to endocardial
regions and (2) relieve coronary spasm and dynamic stenosis, espe·
cially at epicardial sites, including the coronary arterial constriction
induced by exercise. Exercise-induced myocardial ischemia is thereby
relieved. Thus. nitrates are "effective" vasodilators for angina; dipyri-
damole and other vasodilators acting more distally in the arterial tree
are not, rather having the risk of diverting blood from the ischemic
area-a "coronary steal" effect.
The peripheral hemodynamic effects of nitrates. originally observed
by Lauder Brunton,l cannot be ignored. Nitrates do reduce the after-
load, in addition to the preload of the heart (Fig. 2-I). The arterial
wave reflection from the periphery back to the aorta is altered in such
a way that there is "true' afterload reduction, with the aortic systolic
pressure falling even though the brachial artery pressure does not
change.'
Reduced Oxygen Demand
Nitrates increase the venous capacitance. causing pooling of blood in
the peripheral veins anti thereby a reduction in venous return and in
ventricular volume. There is less mechanical stress on the myocardial
wall and the myocardial oxygen demand is reduced. Furthermore, a
fall in the aortic systolic pressure also reduces the oxygen demand.
33
34
•
2
Pharmacokinetics of Nitrares
ACTION OF NITRATES ON CIRCULATION
Opie 2004
REDUCED
VENOUS
RETURN
SYSTEMIC
CIRCULATION
--~
--~
-
,
~ ~ ~ ~',-"-:'='::'::"::.J
,,,,,
IREDUCED PRELOADI
\,
,
,
"
,
_ '
+
I
- I
I~ARTERIOLES
NITRATES
:
Q';"
~,:
Df~
,
'"
'
"
ISCHEMIC
+
VE:OUS
~~,~ZONE
CAPACITANCE
VESSELS
I
fig ure 2-1 Schematic diagram of effects of Ilitr;lte Oil the circulation.
The major effect is on the venous capacitance vessels, with additional
coronary and peripheral arteriolar \l3sodil;ltory benefits,
(Fig~re Cl LH
Opie, 2005.)
Endothelium and Vascular Mechanisms
The chief vascular effect is the formation of NO' (Fig. 2-2). An intact
vascular endothelium is required for the vasodilatory effects of some
vascular active agents (thus acetylcholine physiologically vasodilates
but constriets when the endothelium is damaged). Nitrates vasodilate
whether or not the endothelium is intact. Prolonged nitrate therapy
does, however, inhibit endothelial nitric oxide synthase. which
explains one of the mechanisms of nitrate tolerance! Thus nitrate
tolerance and endothelial dysfunetion have shared pathogenetic
mechanisms. Nitrates. after entering the ve5sel wall, are converted to
nitric oxide (NO'), which stimulates guanylate cyclase to produce cyclic
CMP (Fig. 2-2), Calcium in the vascular myocyte falls, and vasodila-
tion results. Sulfhydryl (SI-I) groups are required for such formation
of NO' and the stimulation of guanylate cyclase. Nitroglycerin pow-
erfully dilates when injected into an artery, an effect that is probably
limited in humans by reflex adrenergic mediated vasoconstriction.
Hence (1) nitrates are better venous than arteriolar dilators; and (2)
there is an associated adrenergic reflex tachycardia6 that can be
attenuated by concurrent ~-blockade.
Anl/plalelel Effect
Increased platelet aggregation occurs in palients with angina.' The
antiaggregating and cyclic GMP enhancinll effects of nitrares are
reduced in such patients. reflecting nitrate resistance at a platelet level.'
PHARMACOKINETICS OF NITRATES
BioavaiJability and Half-Lives
The various preparations differ so much that each needs to be con-
sidered separately. As a group. nitrates are abwrbed from the mucous
membranes, the skin, and the gastrointestinal tract. The prototype
CHAPTER 2
Nirmtes
•
35
NITRATE MECHANISMS
Opie 2004
Nitrate tolerance
GJP
,,,
t
Cyclic
GMP,,•
Lowers
Ca"
i<±J
SH
NO'
o
l
Nitroso-
Ihiolsj\,
NO;
SH
/\
ON02
~,
A-II
Cytoplasm
t
~
Peroxy-
8
nitrate
~
Endo
Sarcolemma
Physiologic
diiators
EXCESS NITRATES
oDeplete SH
operoxynitrate
(
Mononitrate
""-
R-ON02~
1
------," ONO,
Nitroglycerin!::::"ON02 ",,-
-
ON02
---
Figure 2-2 Effects of nitrates in gennating NO' and stimulating guany-
late cyclase to cause vasodilation, Note role of cysteine cascade in stimu-
lating guanylate cyclase. Previously SH depletion was thought to explain
nitrate tolerance, Current emphasis is on the generation of peroxynitrite,
which in !Urn inhibits the conve~ion of GTr to cyclic GMr. Note that
mononitrates bypass hepatic metabolism. GMf' '" guanosine monophos-
phate; erp = guanosine triphosphate; SH '" sulfhydryl. (Figl>re 0 LH Opie,
2005,)
agent.
nitroglycerin,
has
ph<1rm<1cokinetics
that
are
not
well
understood. It rapidly disappe<1rs from the blood with a half-life of
only a few minutes, largely by extrahepatic mechanisms that convert
the parent molecule to longer acting and active dinitrates. 8 Isosorbide,
on the other hand, must first be converted in the liver to the active
mononitrates (Fig. 2-3), which have half-lives of about 4 to 6 hours
with ultimate renal excretion. The mononitrates are completely
bioavailable without any hepatic metabolism, with half.lives of 4 to
6 hours. In re<11ity, knowledge of pharmacokinetics is of limited inter-
est, because of the highly variable relationship between the plasma
concentrations of the nitrates, the levels of their active metabolites,
and the onset and duration of pharmacologic action that matter most
to the clinician,s Of the many nitrate preparations (Table 2-1). sub-
lingual nitroglycerin remains the gold standard for acute anginal
attacks. 9 In practice, patients are often also given long-acting nitrates.
NNo matter which long-acting preparation is used, physicians should
prescribe the drug in a manner to decreaSe the likelihood of nitrate
tolerance. This involves an on/off strategy of at least a lO-hour nitrate-
free interval each day."" This policy does, however, entertain the risk
of precipitation of angina during the nitrate-free interval, which is
often at night.
NRllATE INTERAcnDNS WITH OTHER DRUGS
Pharmacodynamics
The chief drug interactions of nitrates are pharmacodyn<1mic. For
example, during triple therapy of angina pectoris (nitrates, f}-blockers,
Table 2-1
...........
Nltrale Preparallons; Doses. Preparations. and Duration of Effects
Amyl nitrite
NilrOg/)"Cerin
(trinitrin, 'INf,
oJy<.",
lfinitrate)
Inhalation
(a) Sublingual ,",bleu
(b) Spray
(c) Ointment
(d) Tr.lIudennal patcha
(e) 0r.1I; sustained release
(f) BUCl:al
(g) Intravenous infusion
2-5mg
0.3-0.6 mg up to 1.5 mg
0.4 mgJrnnerrd d~
2%; 6 x 6ilU or IS x 15an or
7.5-40mg
O.2-0.8mflh patch on for 12h.
patch ofT fO£ 12h.
2.5-l3mg 1-2 tabletS 3x daily
1-3 rng tablets 3)( daily
5-200l1gJmin (avoid PVc, absorbs
nitrate; if used. start with
20~g/mill). Must dilute vials or
ampules in dextrose Of NaQ in
g1aSll comainers. For severe
hypertension, see Thble 7-6
lOs to 10 min; for diagnosis of LV outflow obsuuction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Peak blood levels at 2 min; t'/: about 7 min; for :K\lte therapy of drOit or rest angina. Keep tightly
capped. Use stabilized preparations.
Similar to tableu at same dose
Apply 2)( daily; 6-h intervals; effCCl up to 7 h aftn fim do.e No efficacy data for chronic use
EfTCCIS start within minutes and last 3-5 h. No efficacy data for second or third doses dUring
duonk therapy.
4-8h after first dose; no efficacy data for chronic therapy.
EfTCCIS start within minutes and last 3-5 h. No efficacy data for second or third doses dUring
chronic therapy.
In unstable angina. increasing doses a«' often needed to (M'fCome tolerance. High.
concentration solutions comain propylene glycol; (r()SS-reaets with heparin.
lsosorbide dinitrate
(= sorbide nitrate)
lsordil
l$O$Orbkle
5-mononilrale
Pentanythrilol
tetntniu;It"
(a) Sublingual
(b) Oral tabl,,1S
(e) Spray
(d) a..~abl"
(,,) Oral; slow-release
(f) In~ous infusion
(S) Oimment
Oral tablns
Sublingual
2.S-ISmg
5-80mg 2-3x daily
1.25mg on lOngue
5 mg as single dosc
40 mg once or 2x daily
1.25-5.0 mflh (care with PVC)
100 mg/24h
20mg 2x day (7h apan)
120-240mg Ix <bily (slow release)
10mg as nttdul
Onset 5-IOmin. effect up to 60min or longer
Up to 8h (first dose; then tollT.)nce) with 3x or 4x <bily doses; 2x daily 7 h apart may be
drwi~ but data inadequate.
Rapid aCtion 2-3min
Ext'rcise time increased for 2min-2Y,h.
Up to 8h (fim. dose; 2x daily not superior 10 plOtCebo)
May need increasing doses (or ul1$Uble angina at ren
Noc dTwi~ during continuous thfiapy
12-14 h after chronic dosing (or 2wk
Efficacy up 10 12 hailer 6wk
No efficacy data
fol rrlf1rncn,. J« pmiout mitions and lot.
IV .. inl~ I'\'C. poIyvinykhloridt (ubin!-
38
•
2
Nimue Inremaion.s wirh Other Drugs
SERIOUS NITRATE INTERACTION
ao;e_
Ip-IIGTPI
neM>S
,,
tEE>:
'-- Excess ~ 'EB
•sildenafil
r- NO'
t
#. tadalafil
I
cyclic
t?
verdenafil
INITRATESI
G~P ~e
tEE>
GMP
exc~
18PJ" SyncopeI
VASODILAnON
calcium antagonists), the efficacy ofthe combination may be lessened,
because each drug can predispose to excess hypotension. Individual
patients val)' greatly in their susceptibility to the hypotension oftriple
therapy. Even two components oftriple therapy, such as diltiazem and
nitrates, may interact adversely to cause moderate hypotension. III
Another hypotensive interaction is between angiotensin·convening
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and nitrates in early phase acute myocardial
infarction (AMI).
Interaction with SildenafilJ TadalafilJ
and Vardenafil
Erectile dysfunction is commonly associated with endothelial dys-
function, and may be an early manifestation of systemic vascular
disease. ~
Erectile dysfunction is often treated by one of these
phosphodiesterase-S (PDE-S) inhibitors. which are also S}"!olemic
vasodilators. and can all cause seriow hypotensive reactions when
combined with nitrates (Fig. 2-3). Hence the package insen ofall three
agents forbids coadministration to patients taking nitrates in any form,
either regularly or intennittently. For example. Viagra deo-eases the
blood pressure by about 8.4jS.5mmHg.. and by much more in those
taking nitrates. The exenion of intercourse also stresses the cardiovas-
rular system further, which may explain why AMI has been found
during the combined use with nitrates. As a group, these drugs should
also not be given with a·adrenergic blockers. In case of inttdverrenr
pllOsphodiesrerase-5 (PDE-5)-nitrate combinarions, administration of an
a·adrenergic agonist or even of norepinephrine may be needed.
CHArTER 2
Nirnues
•
39
An Essential Question for Men with Acute
Coronary Syndrome
Whenever a male patient presents with an anginal attack or acute coro-
nary syndrome, whether or not precipitated by sexual intercourse,
then one essential question is: Have you recently taken Viagra or
Levitra or Cialis (the trade names for sildenafiL vardenafiL and
tadalafil)? If so, how soon can a nitrate be given? The package insert
for sildenafil, the prototype drug, indicates that plasma levels of
sildenafil are much lower at 24 hours postdose, with the reservation
that even then the safety of coadministration cannot be assured.
Nonetheless, if the clinical situation requires the use of nitrates, then
they may be cautiously started in low doses 24 hours or more after
sildenaf1L9 Likewise for vardenafil a 24-hour interval can be inferred
from data in the package insert. For the longer acting tadalafil the
corresponding interval is 48 hours. ll
High-Dose Intravenous Nitrate Interaction
with Heparin
In patients receiving both drugs, as in unstable angina, the dose of
heparin required is sometimes higher than anticipated, that is, there
is heparin resislance. The dose of nitroglycerin required to produce
heparin resistance is relatively high (>350Ilg/minute). With lower
doses (mean of 591lg/minute), or with isosorbide dinitrate infusions
(mean of 3.7mg/hour), no tolerance was found. 1J
Beneficial Interaction with Hydralazine
There is a beneficial interaction between nitrates and hydralazine
whereby the latter helps to lessen nitrate tolerance,,.. probably acting
through inhibition of free radicals. This may explain why the combi-
nation of nitrates and hydralazine is effective in heart failure.
SHORT-AGnNG NITRATES FOR ACUTE
EFFORT ANGINA
Sublingual nirroglycerin is very well established in the initial therapy of
angina of effort, yet may be ineffective, frequently because the patient
has not received proper instruction or because of severe headaches.
When angina starts, the patient should rest in the sitting position
(standing promotes syncope; lying enhances venous return and heart
work) and take sublingual nitroglycerin (0.3 to 0.6 mg) every 5
minutes until the pain stops or a maximum of four to five tablets have
been taken. Nitroglycerin spray is an alternative mode of oral adminis-
tration, which is more acceptable to some patients. It vasodilates
sooner than does the tablet, which might be of special importance in
those with dryness of the mouth. IS
Isosorbide diTlitrate may be given slibliTlgually (5 mg) to abort an anginal
attack and then exerts antianginal effects for about 1 hour. Because
the dinitrate requires hepatic conversion to the mononitrate, the onset
of antianginal action (mean time: 3.4 minutes) is slower than with
nitroglycerin (mean time: 1.9 minutes), so that the manufacturers of
the dinitrate recommend sublingual administration of this drug only
if the patient is unresponsive to or intolerant of sublingual nitroglyc-
erin. After oral ingestion, hemodynamic and antianginal effects persist
for several hours. Single doses of isosorbide dinitrate confer longer
protection against angina than can single doses of sublingual nitro-
glycerin (Table 2-1).
-40
•
2
Long.Acting Nitraw for Angina Prop1rylaIis
Interval Therapy for Effort Angina by Eccentric Nitrate
Dosage Schedules DeSigned to AVOId Tolerance
...........
....
........
lsosorbide dinitrate
30mgat 7 AM, 1 PM'
Thadani and upicky,
1994'
lsosorbide mononitrate
20 mg at 8 AM and
Parker 1993'
(Robins-Boehringer-
3PM
Wyt.'1.h-Ayerst;
Pharma-Schwartz)
lsosorbide mononilrate,
120-240mg daily
Chrysant,. 1993t
Extcnded-release
(Kqr-Astra)
Tr.tnsdermal nilIalc
7.5-lOmgpcr 12h
DcMots, 1989
1"""6
patches n.'Dl~
ahcrl2h
Phasic rdcasc
15 mg. most rclcutd
Parker. 1989"
niuosfyccrin piuch
in tim 12h'
'Efficacy of second d.- not est<lbIWlrd; nO dna (or odwr dosa.
'CrrdiowK /)nip l1In t994;8:62S~6)3.
'Am I CmJiolI993;72:871_876.
'Am J Card"" 1993;71:1249-1256.
I Am CoIl Ctlrdiolt989'13:786~793.
'No daL1 for Olher dosn.
"fu, Ht~n 11989:1O(Suppl .... ):4)~49.
LONG-ACTING NITRATES FOR ANGINA PROPNYlAXlS
Long.aaing nitrates are not continuously effective if regularly taken
over a prolonged period. unless allowance is made for a nitrale-free
or -low imerval (Table 2-2).
fsosorbide dinirrale (oral preparation) is frequently given for the
prophylaxis of angina. An imponant queslion is whether regular
Iherapy with isosorbidc dinitrate gives long-lasting protection (3 10 5
hours) againsl angina. In a crucial placebo-conlrolled study, exercise
duration improved significantly for 6 to 8 hours after single oral doses
of 15 to 120 mg isosorbide dinilrate, but for only 2 hours when the
same doses were given repelitively four times daily." Marked loler-
ance develops during sustained therapy, despile much higher plasma
isosorbide dinitrate concentrations during sustained than during
acute therapy.'6 With the extended-release formulation of isosorbide
dinitrate (Tembid). eccentric twice daily treatment with a 40-mg dose
administered in the morning and 7 hours later was not superior to
placebo in a large multicenter sludy.17 Nonetheless eccentric dosing
schedules of isosorbide dinitrate are still often used in an effon to
avoid lolerance.
ManonitraleS on the whole have dosage and effects simila.r to those of
isosorbide dinitrate. Nitrate tolerance, likewise a potential problem.
ca.n be pm'ented or minimized when rapid-release preparations
(M01loket, lJmo) are fiven twice daily in an eccentric pattern with doses
spaced by 7 hours. 1 Using the slow-release preparation (fmdur), the
dose range 30 lO 240 mg once daily was lesled for antianginal activ-
ity. Only 120 and 240mg daily improved exercise times al4 and 12
hours after adminislration, even after 42 days of daily use.l' These
high doses were reached by titration over 7 days. A daily dose of
60mg. still often used, was ineffeaive.
TranS/lermal nirroglycerin ptJlches are designed
(Q permit the timed
release of nitroglycerin over a 24-hour period. Despite initial claims
of 24-hour efficacy, major studies have failed to show prolonged
improvement. The decisive study was a multicemer US Food and Drug
Administration
(FDA).monitored
lrial evaluating chronic patch
therapy in 562 patienls, using palches thal delivered up to 105 mg of
niuoglycerin over a 24-hour period. There was no improvement in
CHArTER 2
Nilmtes
•
41
treadmill exercise duration measured at 4 and 24 hours after patch
application when compared with placebo.lO In patients with unstable
anginal syndromes, a coronary e\1!:nt can rarely be precipitated in the
nitrate-free period. Howe\-er, eccentric dosage schedules ofpatches do
work apparently without rebound at night in patients receiving con-
current jl.blockade.;I
UMlTAnDNS: SIDE EFFECTS AND NITRATE FAlWRE
Side Effects
The most common side effect is the development of headaches and
the most serious side effect is hypotension (Table 2-3). Headaches
characteristically occur with sublingual nitroglycerin, and at the start
Table 2·3
PrecautIOns and Side Effects In Use of Nitrates
Precautions
Nitroglycerin tablets should b£ kept in Ilirrighr containers. Nitrate sprays
are inflammable.
Common SldfI Effects
Htadttchts frequently limit d05e. Arterial tolerance may ll"XCeed mat on me
veins. Therefore,. headaches may cease while antianginal venous efficacy
is sustained. H~daches often respond to aspirin. Facial flushing.
Sublingual nitrates may cause halitosis.
serious Side Effects
Syncopt' and h)1ll>U7Uion from reduClion of prtload and afterload; alcohol
or cothenpy wim vasodilalOrs may augment hypOIension. Treat by
recumbency.
TlIChyt4rdia frequent. but unexplained brudycardia occasionally occurs in
AMI. Hypotension may cause ccrrllral ischemia. Prolonged high dosage
can cause mnhtmoglobinemia (nitrate iOns can oridize hemoglobin to
m~emogIobin);!«'at by inU'3V'enous methylene blue (1~2 mg/kg).
High-dose intravenous nimleJ can induct htpaTin miroutCl!.
Contraindications
In angina caused by hypenrophic obslTUai'" cardiom)1lfH1thy, nitrates may
exaggerate outflow obstruction and are contraindicated acept for
diagnosis. AclIU! inferior mJo"C<lrdiaJ in{an:rwn with right ventrirular
involvement: here a fall in me filling pressure may lead to
hemodynamic and clinical deterioration. Vii/gra (or similar agents) may
lead to excess hypotension or even MIL
Relative Contralndlcatlons
In ,or pulmonale and anerial hypoxemia, nitrates decrease anelial 0 1
tension by wnous admixture. Although glaucoma is usually held to be a
contraindication. there is no objective evidence to show any increase in
intraocular pressure (possible exception: amyl nitrite). Cardiac Ulmponade
or constrictiw pnicarditis or tight mimI stenosis; me already
compromised diastolic ftlling may be aggravated by reduced. ~ous
mum.
''''''''''
Shown aperimentally and clinically. Continuous therapy and high-dose
tnquent therapy leads to tolennce that f'Canlric dosage may 3'iOid.
Cross-toleran« occurs betwft:n me various fonnulations.
WIthdm¥aI Sympbns
Established in munition woiUn, in whom withdrawal may precipitate
symptoms and sudden deam. Some evidence for a similar clinical
syndrome. 1herefore,. 10ng-tCJln nltl'1l1te menpy should be gradually
discontinued.
Rfiummce of anginal pain in nimte-tTtt inttrvals during sustained
therapy occurs in some patients, but is less common with ~blocker
(OmenPY.
41
•
2
Nitmres for Unsrabre Angina af Rest
of therapy with long-acting nitrates.') Often the headaches pass over
while antianginal efficacy is maintained; yet often headaches lead to
loss of compliance.
Concomitant aspirin may protect from
the
headaches and from coronary events. In chronic lung disease, arterial
hypoxemia
may result from
vasodilation
and
increased
venous
admixture. Occasionally, prolonged high-dose therapy can cause methe-
moglobinemia (Table 2-3), which reduces the oxygen carrying capacity
ofthe blood and the rate ofdelivery ofoxygen to the tissues. Treatment
is. by intravenous methylene blue (1 to 2 mg/kg over 5 minutes).
Failure of Nitrate Therapy
With shon-acting preparations, the most common causes of failure
are noncompliance (headaches), loss of potency of the tablets, and
incorrect timing (nitrates are more effective if taken before the
expected onset of anginal pain). Sometimes the diagnosis may be
wrong, because nitrates also relieve the pain ofesophageal spasm and,
sometimes, renal or biliary colic. Nitrates may be less effective than
expected owing to tachycardia, so that combination with ~-blockade
gives better results.
Nitrate Tolerance During therapy with long-acting preparations, the
chief cause of failure is the development of tolerance, treated by
decreasing the frequency of drug administration until there is a
nitrate-free interval (see section on Tolerance). The other main cause
of failure is worsening of the underlying disease process.
Management of Apparent Failure of Nitrate Therapy After exclusion of
tolerance and poor compliance (headaches), therapy is stepped up
(Table 2-4) while excluding aggravating factors such as hypertension,
thyrotoxicosis, atrial fibrillation, or anemia.
NITRATES FOR UNSTABLE ANGINA AT REST
As Reichek stated, Ihe one setting in which intermittent nitrate
therapy does not have a role is the treatment ofthe hospitalized patient
with unstable ischemic symptoms. with or without myocardial infarc-
Table 2-4
Proposed Step-Care lor Angina of Eflort
1. General: History and physical examination to exclude valvular disease,
anemia. hypertension, thromboembolic disease, thyrotoxicosis, and
heart failure. Check risk factors for coronary artery disease (smoking.
hypertension, blood lipids, diabetes). Must stop smoking.
2. Prophylactic drugs. Give aspirin if not contraindicated. Consider
statins and ACE inhibitors. ~-Blocktr if prior infarct.
3. ("tennittent short acting nitrates, as needed to control pain.
Combination therapy with p-blockers (sometimes calcium blockers)
often introduced here.
4. Prophylactic long-acting nitrates in eccentric doses known to avoid
tolerance. Intennittent short-acting niuCl.tl:"s art still ildded. as nerol:"d.
5. Combination long-acting nitrate therapy. May add (l) p-blocker (if
not already used); or (2) calcium antagonist (preferably verapamil or
diltiazem; se(ond choice: long·acting dihydropyridine).
6. Triple therapy, Long-acting nitrates: plus p-blockers plus calcium
blockers. Care with combination of verapamil or diltiazem with
l3~bJockers (Fig. 1-4). Use triple combination with caution when
therapy with two agents ineffective; watch for hypotension.
7. pC! with stenting may be attempted at any stage jn selected pat.ients,
especially for highly symptomatic single vessel disease.
8. Consider bypass surgery after failure to respond to medical therapy
or for left main stem lesion or for triple vessel disease, especially if
reduced LV function. Even response to medical therapy does not
eliminate need for investigation.
9. Nitrate failure. Consider nitrate £ole:rance or worsening disease or
poor compliancc'
CHAPTER 2
Nilmtes
•
43
tion. wll [t is presumed that in the treatment ofunstable angina, upward
titration of the dose of intravenous nitrate can overcome tolerance.
Intravenous nitroglycerin is very effective in the management of pain in
patients with unstable angina, although there is surprisingly little
objective evidence of such efficacy in properly controlled trials.
Furthermore, the manufacturers warn that continuous use of nitro-
glycerin leads to almost complete loss of hemodynamic effect (blood
pressure reduction) within 48 hours. Intravenous therapy allows more
rapid titration to an effective dose and the use of nitroglycerin rather
than isosorbide dinitrate permits rapid reversal of hemodynamic
effects if an adverse reaction ocrors. The usual initial starting dose is
5 to 10j.lyminute, which can be titrated up to 200 lJ.yminute or occa-
sionally higher up to IOOOIlg!minute, depending on the clinical
course and aiming at the relief of anginal pain. In patients who are
already pain free. the aim is a fall of mean blood pressure by 10%. the
infusion being maintained for up to 36 hours. A problem in dosing
is that nitroglycerin is readily absorbed (40% to 80%) by polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) tubing. but not onto polyethylene or glass.
NitrosUit infusion sets use nonabsorbent materials. The result is that the
calculated dose will in reality be delivered to the patient, so that sub-
stantially lower doses than in many published series will be effective.
Inmmmous isosorbide dinitrale (nol licensed in the United States) is
much more effective than the oral route. Oral isosorbide dinitrate has
poor bioavailability owing to extensive presystemic metabolism.
Nilrate palches and nitrogl}'Celin ointment should not be used. As there
is no role for intermittent nitrate therapy in unstable angina, because
eccentric dosage schedules cannot be used to avoid the development
of tolerance. Intravenous therapy, which can be titrated upwards as
needed, is far better for control of pain.
Percutaneous rranslwninal coronary angioplosty (PTCA): Intracoronary
nitroglycerin is often used 10 avoid coronary spasm during PTCA. Some
nitrate solutions contain
high
potassium
that
may
precipitate
ventricular fibrillation.
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARC1lDN (AMI)
Selective Use of Nitrates
Nitrates have failed to give consistent benefit in large AMI trials, so
that it would seem prudent 10 limit the use of intravenous nitrates in
AMI to those complicated patients with ongoing anginal pain, when
left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic pressure is thought to be elevated
and suited for reduction ofthe preload. for those with LV failure when
combined with ACE inhibition/-' or severe hypertension, or when the
differential diagnosis between early transmural AMI and Prinzmetal's
angina is not clear. Initial low-dose therapy is required to avoid excess
hypotension (blood pressure <90mml-lg). Nitroglycerin 5j.lYminute
is increased by 5 to 20j.lyminute every 5 to 10 minutes to a ceiling
of 200j.lyminute (using standard intravenous PVC sets with glass
bottles) until the mean blood pressure is reduced by 10% in
normotensive and by 30% in hypertensive patients.I' The infusion
should be maintained for 12 hours or longer. When the infusion is
discontinued, the dose should be tapered over several hours. The major
danger is hypotension, in which case the infusion must be stopped
abruptly and restarted at 5f.1s!minute. When doses of 200j.lg,!minUle
fail to reduce the blood pressure, there is nirrare resistance and the
infusion should be abandoned.
AMI: Nitrate Contra/nd/catlons
When there is right ventrirolar involvement in AM[, a nitrale-induced
fall in filling pressure may cause hemodynamic and clinical deterio-
44
•
2
Nirrare Tolerallce
ration. A systolic BP of less than 90 mmHg is also a contraindication.
Recent ingestion of sildenafil or its equivalent means that nitrate
therapy must be delayed or avoided (see section on Nitrate Interac-
tions, this chapter. p. 39).
CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
Both short- and long-acting nitrates are used as unloading agents in
the relief of symptoms in acute and chronic heart failure. Their dilat-
ing effects are more pronounced on veins than on arterioles, so they
are best suited to patients with raised pulmonary wedge pressure and
clinical features of pulmonary congestion. Combination of high-dose
isosorbide dinitrate (60mg four times daily) plus hydralazine was
better than placebo in decreasing mortality, yet nonetheless inferior
to an ACE inhibitor in severe congestive heart failure (CHF).lS
Dinitrate-hydralazine may, therefore, be chosen when a patient cannot
tolerate an ACE inhibitor, while nitrates without hydralazine are
selected for relief of pulmoflary edema or to improve exercise time.
l
•
Nitrate folerance remains a problem. Intennittent dosing, designed to
counter periods of expected dyspnea (at night, anticipated exercise),
is one sensible policy.16 Escalating doses of nitrates provide only a
short-term solution. A third policy is cotherapy with ACE inhibitors
or hydralazine or both, to blunt nitrate tolerance. Nitrate parches have
given variable results in CHF. Tolerance is inevitable with sustained-
release patches, unless these are given intennittently, for example, 12
hours on and 12 hours off.26
ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA
In acute pulmonary edema from various causes, including AMI, nitro-
glycerin can be strikingly effective, with some risk of precipitous falls
in blood pressure and of tachycardia or bradycardia. Sublingual nitro-
glycerin in repeated doses of 0.8 to 2.4 mg every 5 to 10 minutes can
relieve dyspnea within 15 to 20 minutes, with a fall of LV filling pres-
sure and a rise in cardiac output.17 Intravenous nitroglycerin, however,
is usually a better method to administer nitroglycerin, as the dose can
be rapidly adjusted upward or downward depending on the clinical
and hemodynamic response. Doses required may be higher than the
maximal use for AMI (i.e., above 200llg,lminute).14
NITRATE TOLERANCE
Nitrate tolerance often limits nitrate efficacy. Thus, longer acting
nitrates, although providing higher and better sustained blood nitrate
levels, paradoxically often seem to lose their efficacy with time. This
is the phenomenon of nitrate tolerance (Fig. 2-4). The major current
hypotheses are as follows:
1. [mpaired bioconversion of nitrates to active form. The donor nitrate
compound undergoes intracellular transfonnation to the active
NO' moiety that stimulates guanylate cyclase to produce vasodila-
tory cyclic GMP (Fig. 2-2). An early step in this process is the for-
mation of 1,2-glyceryl dinitrate, under the influence of the
mitochondrial enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase.18 "This enzyme is
hypothesized to function poorly in nitrate tolerance/~ a defect that
is associated with increased production of free radicals. 30
2. Free radical hypothesis. Excess nitrate administration can lead to for-
mation ofsuperoxide by the endothelium, which in turn produces
toxic superoxide and peroxynitrite,19 the latter having multiple
adverse effects, including inhibition of guanylyl cyclase with
decreased
formation
of vasodilatory cyclic GMP
(Fig.
2-3),
impaired endothelial function," and decreased activity ofaldehyde
dehydrogenase. 30 A further twist to the free radical hypothesis lies
in the multiple sources of the free radicals, including increased
CHAPTER 2
Nitra.tes
•
45
NITRATE TOLERANCE
"""-
Peroxynitrite
,,,,,,
NITRATES
....
SYSTEMIC
~
/
CIRCULATION
..-
,,,,
----------,,,,,,
~aired
\.
ENDOTHELIAL
/" DYSFUNCTION
\r:e
Fo."o/""
:
~
aCldW"
I
CARVEDILOL
"
/
HYDRAlAZINE
J
'-,
ACE INHIBITORS
'
"
JJ.
Reflex
"
e
neurohumoral
IV8soc~nstrictionI
-
,/' activation
-----B
-,,'
~~,:,~
.---'~~/,
flgu r. 2-4 Current proposals for rherapy of nitrate tolerance. For cellu-
lar mechanisms of peroxynitrite, see Fig. 2-3. Carvedilol. vitamin C, and
hydralazine may all lessen free radical formation. ACE inhibitors oppose
the neurohumoral aaivation that is thought to occur as a result of nitrate-
induced vasodilation, possibly involving rene>: anerial constriction and
impaired renal blood now. The SH depletion hypothesis (see Fig. 2-3),
which gives a specific role for captopril, is relatively OUi of favor. (Figure C
LH Opie, 2005.)
mitochondrial production of superoxide, an added pointer to a
prominent role for mitochondrial dysfunction in nitrate toler-
ance..I(l The free radical hypothesis would explain why nitrate
tolerance can be lessened by concurrent therapy by vitamin Cll.l1
or hydralazine.JJ
3. Vascular sulfhydryl depletion. This classic hypothesis now seems out-
dated yet still merits consideration. The proposal is that the intra-
cellular formation of NO· requires SH groups, derived from
cysteine. Hypothetically, excess NO· formation depletes intra-
cellular SH groups. Sulfhydryl donors, such as aceey/cysreine or
methionine, may counteract tolerance by providing SH groups. In
unstable angina, N-acetylcysteine added to transdermal nitroglycerin
reduced the probability of adverse outcome events over 4 months,
but the severe headaches rendered the strategy impractical.J'
4. Neurohumoral
hyporhesis. Marked venous dilation induced by
nitrates could cause a reflex arterial vasoconstriction, with a reduc-
tion in renal perfusion and renin-angiotensin activation. Increased
activity ofangiotensin-II on the vascular wall may lead to increased
formation
of vasoconstrictive
free
radicals
via
the
enzyme
NAPDH. JO•JS Angiotensin-II blockade lessens tolerance and super-
oxide productionJS and in some clinical studies there is lessening
of nitrate tolerance by simultaneous use of ACE inhibitors.
Prevention of Nitrate Tolerance
In effon angina, many studies now show that tolerance can be avoided
by
interval
dosing.
Eccentric
twice
daily
doses
of isosorbide
mononitrate (Monoket, Ismo) or once daily treatment with 120 or
240 mg of the extended-release formulation of mononitrate (Imdur)
prevents tolerance. Of the possible drug therapies, hydralazine is
logical, especially in CHE because (1) there are trial data favoring the
46
•
2
Combinmion Therapy for Angina
nitrate-hydrazine combination; and (2) the hydralazine may over-
come the impact of free radical fonnation. Addition of an ACE
inhibitor is logical (see earlier sedion) but sometimes disappointing.
Folic acid supplementation seems a simple procedure. and is thought
to lead to improved function of nitric oxide synthase.3G Likewise sup-
plemental L-arginine is proposed as a unormalizeru of the activity of
nitric oxide synthase.3; Vitamin C should help,3u2 is easy to obtain
and without side effects, Rapidly increasing blood nitrate levels may
overcome toleranc€'. For example, with established nitrate tolerance,
sublingual nitrate can still have some therapeutic effect albeit dimin-
ished. Likewise, during treatment of unstable angina or CH~ dose
escalation may be a shon-term maneuver to minimize tolerance.
Overall, present data do not give assurance that cotherapy with ACE
inhibitors, carvediloL hydralazine, folic acid, L-arginine.. or vitamin C
can prevent tolerance, although each may help the individual patient.
Rather only the nitrate-free or -low interval works consistently.
Nitrate Cross-Tolerance
Short- and long-acting nitrates are frequently combined. In patients
already receiving isosorbide dinitrate, addition of sublingual nitro-
glycerin may give a further therapeutic effect, albeit diminished. Log-
ically, as discussed in previous editions of this book, tolerance to
long-acting nitrates should also cause cross-tolerance to short-acting
nitrates, as shown for the capacitance vessels of the forearm, coronary
artery diameter, and On exercise lolerance during intravenous. nitro-
glycerin therapy.
STEP-CARE FOR ANGINA OF EFFORT
A full history and physical examination is required to exclude a host
of remediable factors (Table 2-4), not forgetting aortic stenosis that
may be occult in the elderly. Risk factors must be managed and aspirin
given. Nitrates remain the basis of symptomatic control of angina.
Various combinations of short- and long-acting nitrates with
~­
blockers and/or calcium blockers are the successive choices. Percuta-
neous intervention (PCI), now often with insertion of drug-eluting
stems and bypass surgery, is increasingly taken as an escape route
when coronary anatomy is appropriate. There are no long-term studies
on th~ safety of nitrates alone in angina pectoris (see p. 47).
COMBINATION THERAPY FOR ANGINA
Exis{ingdata are inadequate to evaluate the overall efficacy ofthe com-
bination of nitrates plus ~-blockers or calcium blockers, when com-
pared with optimal therapy using any one ag~nt alone.
I3-Blochade and nitrates are, nonetheless, usually combined in the
therapy of angina (Table 2-4). Both p-blockers and nitrates decrease
the oxygen demand, and nitrates increase the oxygen supply;
~­
blockers block the tachycardia caused by nitrates. ~.Blockade tends to
increas~ heart size, and nitrates tend to decrease it.
Calcium dum-riel blockers (CeBs) and shoTl-acting nitroglycerin are com-
monly combined. In a double-blind trial of 47 patients with effort
angina, 80 mg of verapamil three times daily decreased the use of
nitroglycerin tablets by 25% and prolonged exercise time by 20%!8
CeBs and long-acting nitrates are also often given together. Yet there
are no studies evaluating the objective benefits of current eccentric
dosing schedules of long-acting nitrates plus CCBs. Long-acting
nitrates are more readily combined with verapamil or diltiazem rather
than with dihydropyridines (see Fig. 3-6), because oithe powerful and
sometimes excessive pre- and afterload reduction achieved by the
latter combination. In contrast, dihydropyridines combine better with
~-blockers.
CHAPTER 2
Nimltes
•
47
Nitrates,
f3.blocJ~ers, and caIcillm antagonists may also be combined as
triple therapy, frequently deemed to be "maximal." However, triple
therapy may be no more effective or even less effective than any two
of the components, possibly because of excess hypotension, Thus
triple therapy should not be automatic when dual therapy fails
because of individual variations among patients, as some will toler-
ate one type of combination therapy better than another. Thus various
combinations of dual therapy should first be explored.
The AGnON study is a very large outcome study of the effects of addi-
tion of long-acting nifedipine (Adalat XL) to preexisting antianginal
therapy, mostly
~-blockers and nitrates. It is due at the European
Society of Cardiology in September, 2004. It may revive interest in
triple therapy and also prove that the CCB used is cardioprotective.
NEWER ANTlANGlNAL AGENTS
Nicorandil (not licensed in the United States) is a nicotinamide
nitrate, acting chiefly by dilation of the large coronary arteries. as well
as by reduction of pre- and afterload. [t has a double cellular mecha-
nism of action, acting both as a potassium channel activator and
having a nitrate-like effect, which may explain· why experimentally it
causes less tolerance than nitrates. It is widely used as an antianginal
agent in lapan. In the IONA .tudy, 5126 patient. with .table angina
were followed for a mean of 1.6 years. Major coronary events includ-
ing acute coronal)' syndromes were reduced.J~
Ranolazi"e (!mder investigation in [he United States and elsewhere) is
a metabolically active antianginal, thought to act by inhibition of
oxygen-wasting fatty acid metabolism. thereby increasing the metab-
oli.sm of protective: glucose. 4o
Trimetazidiue, available in some European countries but not in the
United States and United Kingdom. has a similar mode of aaion. An
interesting proposal is that, because it acts independently ofany blood
pressure reduction, it could be used as an antianginal in place of
nitrates to allow free use ofViagra and similar agents.
lvabradine (under investigation), an inhibitor of the sinus node pace-
making rurrent ff' owes its antianginal propenies to heart rate reduc·
tion. The proposal is that this specific effect is antiangillal without
the defects of ~~b]ocker therapy such as depressed contractility and
bronchoconstrietion.
ARE NITRATES REALLY SAFE?
In contrast to the reasonable data for the safety of P-blockers and
cess in effort angina,41 logic would say that nitrate therapy that leads
to excess production of free radicals, endothelial dysfunction, tachy-
cardia, and renin-angiotensin activation may not be safe.)!} Analys.es
of two large databases showed that nitrate use was associated with
increased mortality with hazard ratios of 1.6 and 3.8. 42 Such warnings
do, however. have to be backed by prospective well-designed trials
which are unlikely to be undertaken. Furthermore, there appear to be
no data specifically on the mononitrates. At present the best policy
may lie in combining mononitrate therapy with use of cardioprotec-
tive drugs such as aspirin. the ACE inhibitors and statins. as in the
EUROPA .tudy (see Chapter 5).
SUMMARY
1. Mechanisms of action. Nitrates act by venodilation and rehef of
coronary vasoconstriction (including that induced by exercise) to
ameliorat.e anginal attacks. They aTe also arterial dilators, and
reduce aonic systolic pressure. Their unloading effects also benefit
patients with CHF with high LV filling pressures.
48
•
2
RefenmceJ
2. Nitrates for effort angina. Sublingual nitroglycerin remains the basic
therapy. usually combined with a ~blocker or a CCB. As the dura-
tion ofaction lasts for minutes, nitrate tOlerance is unusual because
of the relatively long nitrate~free intervals between attacks. lsosor-
bide dinitrate has a delayed onset of action owing to the need for
hepallc transformation to active metabolites, yet the duration of
action is longer than with nitroglycerin. Some newer nitrate prepa-
rations are not substantial advances over the old. especially the
nitrate patches. which dearly predispose to tolerance by sustained
blood nitrate levels. By contrast. mOllonitrates are an advance over
dinitrates because they eliminate variable hepatic metabolism all
which the action of the dinitrates depends, and because the dose
schedules required to avoid tolerance have been well studied. The
longer the duration of nitrate action, the more tolerance is likely
to develop, thus it effectively turns into a balancing act belween
duration of action and avoidance of tolerance.
3. For unsr.able angina at rest. a nitrate-free interval is not possible. and
shon-term treatment for 24 to 48 hours with intravenous nitro-
glycerin is frequently effective with. however, escalating doses often
required to overcome tolerance..
4, In early phase AMI. the use of intravenous nitrates for selected and
more ill patients must be differentiated from the failure of fixed
dose nitrates in large trials. We suggest that intravenous nitrates be
specifically reserved for more complicated patients.
5. During the lreatment ofCHF, tolel'3.llce also develops, so that nitrates
are best reserved for specific problems such as acute LV failure, noc-
turnal dyspnea, or anticipated exercise.
6. Acule pulmonary edemll. Nitrates are an imponant pan ofthe overall
therapy. acting chiefly by preload reduction.
7. Nitrate tolerance. The current understanding of the mechanism
tolerance focuses on free radical formation (superoxide and
peroxynitrite) with impaired bioconversion of nitrate to active
nitric oxide. During the treatment of effon angina by isosorbide
dinitrate or mononitr.ue. substantial evidence suggests that eccen-
IriC doses with a nitrate-free interval largely avoid tolerance. Other
less well-tested measures indude administration of folic acid,
8. $eriow inreraction wifh Viagra-like agents. Nitrates can interact very
adversely with such agents. now often used to alleviate erectile dys-
function. The latter is common in those with cardiovascular
disease, being a manifestation of endothelial dysfunction. The
coadministration of these PDE-5 inhibitors with nitrates is there-
fore contraindicated. Every male presenting with acute coronary
syndrome should be queslioned about recent use of these agents
(trade names: Viagra, Levitra. or Cialis). If $0, there has to be an
interval of 24 to 48 hours (the longer interval for Cialis) before
nitrates can be given therapeutically if essential with reasonable
safety but still with great care.
REF ERE NeE S
I
fllUmon 11. On m.. uK of muile of ~myl. in an,;na peaorU. Lznm 1367;11:97-911.
2 Parkfl 'D. Therapy wilh nHfila: inarasing mdm(f of vascubr lozidl)'. I "IN Q>ll
OmIiol200J;42;18JS-18J7.
J. Ignarro IJ. n al. Nitric oxick donors and Cilrdiovascular "ifI'ts modulating the bioac·
IMI)' of nilric oxide: an~. Gin; R... 2002;90:21_28.
4. Harrison DC. n aI, The nilrov.uodiialors, New ideas aboul old drugs, C,'molaricrl
1993:87: 1461-1467.
S, I<elly RP, el al. NilroglYCfrin has mo,"" favourable effl'(tl on Itfl ventricular afletload
than apparent from musuremenl of p,""Ullff in a peripheml anel)'. t'wr Ht"" I
1990;11:138-144.
6, Noll C, n a1. Differe"tial fff«t.l of c..plopril and nilrales on mUKlf sympalhnic ne~
aclivil)' in volunlffr1 Cimll<uion 1')')7;')5:2286-2292.
7. Chirkov "Y. n a1. N;mle lesiJl<II!Kt in plalelftl from p;lllnlts with '!IDlt angina pec.
lOris. CimdariorI 19')9;100:129-134.
CHAPTER 2
Nitrates
•
49
8. Bogaen MG. Clinical pharmacokinetics of nitrates. CarrJiOtltUt Drugs Ther 1994;
8:693-699.
9. Abrams I. How to use nitrates. Cardi01N1SC Drugs Ther 2002;16:511-514.
10. Bruce RA. et aI. Excessive reduaion in peripheral resistance during exerci~ and risk
oforthostatic symptoms with sustained-release nitroglycerin and dihiaum treatment
of angina. Am Heart J 1985;109:1020-1026.
11. Kaiser DR. eot al. Impaired brachial artery endothelium-dependent and -independent
vasodilation in men with ereaile dysfunction and no other dinical cardiovasrular
disease. / Am ColI Cardial 2004;43:179-184.
12. Kloner RA. et al. Time course of the interaction between tadalalll and nitrates. J Am
ColI CardioI2003;42:1855-1860.
13. Koh KK. et al. Interaction of intravenous heparin and organic nitrates in acute
ischemic syndromes. Am I Cardial 1995;76:706-709.
14. Cogia 1-1, et aL Prevention of tolerance to hemodynamic effects of nitrates with con-
comitant use of hydralazine in patients with chronic hean failure. J Am Cardiol
1995;26:1575-1580.
15. Ducharme A. et 301. Comparison of nitroglycerin lingual spray and sublingual tablet
on lime of onset and duration of brachial anery vasodilalion in normal subjects. Am
J CArdioI1999;84:952-954.
16. Thadani U, et 301. Oral isosorbide dinitrate in angina pectoris: comparison of dura-
tion of action an dose-response relation during acute and sustained therapy. Am /
CArdio/1982;49:411-419.
17. Thadani U, et al. Shon and long-acting oral nitrates for stable angina pectoris. Car-
diOllaSC Drugs Ther 1994;8:611-623.
18. Parker 10. Eccentric dosing with isosorbide-5-mononitrate in angina pectoris. A.m J
CArdiolI993;72:871-876.
19. Chrysant SG, et al. Efficacy and safety ofext.ended-release isosorbide mononitrate for
stable effort angina pectoris. A.m J CardiolI993;72:1249-1256.
20. Tranwermal Nitroglycerin Cooperative Study. Arute and chronic antianginal efficacy
ofcontinuous twenty-four-hour application oftransdermal nitroglycerin. Am JCardio!
1991;68:1263-1273.
21. Holdright DR. et 301. Lack of rebound during intermittent transdermal treatment with
g1yceryl trinitrate in patients with Slable angina on background beta blocker. Br Heart
/1993;69:223-227.
22. Reichek N. Intermittent nitrate therapy in angina pectoris. Eur Heart / 1989;10 (Suppl
A):7-1O.
23. GISSI·3 Study Group. GISSI-3: effects of lisinopril and transdermal glyceryl trinitrate
singly and together on 6-week monality and ventricular function after irute myocar-
dial infarction. Lance! 1994;343:1ll5-1122.
24. Jugdutt 81. Nitrates in myocardial infarction. CardiOlla5C Drugs Ther 1994;8:635-646.
25. V-HeFf II Study. A comparison of enalapril with hydralazine-isosorbide dinitrate in
the treatment of chronic congestive cardiac failure. N Eng! / Med 1991;325:303-310.
26. Elkayam U, et 301. Double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the effect of
organic nitrates in patients with chronic heart failure treated with angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibition. Circulation 1999;99:2652-2657.
27. Bussmann WD, et 301. (Effect of sublingual nitroglycerin in emergency treatment of
dassic pulmonary edemal. Minerva CArdioangio! 1978;26:623-632.
28. Chen 1.. et 301. Identification of the enzymatic mechanism of nitroglycerin bioaaiva-
tion. Proc NatJ N:ad Sci USA. 2002;99:8306-8311.
29. Horowitz JD. Amelioration ofnitrate tolerance: matching strategies with mechanisms.
/ Am CoIl CArdio12003;41:2oo1-2oo3.
30. Parker JD. Nitrate tolerance.. oxidative stress, and mitochondrial function: another
worrisome chapter on the effects of organic nitrates. I ain Invesr 2004;113:352-354.
31. Fleming rw, et al. Muscarinic cholinergic-receptor stimulation ofspecific CfP hydrol-
ysis related to adenylate cyclase activity in canine cardiac sarcolemma. Cire lW
1988;64:340-350.
32. fink B, et 301. Tolerance to nitrates with enhanced radical formation suppressed by
carvedilol. J Cardiavasc PhamltuoI1999;34:800-805.
33. Munzel T. et al. Hydralazine prevents nitroglycerin tolerance by inhibiting activation
ofa membrane-bound NADH oxidase. I Clin lnve5! 1996;98:1465-1470.
34. Ardissino D, et 301. Effect of transdennal nitroglycerin on N-acelylcysteine,. or both, in
the long-tenn treaunentofunstable angina pectoris. / Am Coli CArdioI1997;29:941-947.
35. Kurz S, et al. Evidence for a casual role of the renin-angiotensin system in nitrate tol-
erance. Circulation 1999;99:3181-3187.
36. Gori T, et 301. Folic acid prevents nitroglycerin-induced nitric oxide synthase dysfunc-
tion and nitrate tolerance. Circulacion 2001;104:1119-1123.
37. rarker 10, et al. The effect ofsupplemental L-arginine on lolerance development during
continuous transdermal nitroglycerin therapy. / Am CoIl CArdiol 2002;39:1199-1203.
38. Andreasen F. et a1. Assessment of verapamil in the treatment of angina pectoris. Eur
I Cardiol 1975;2:443-452.
39. laNA Study Croup. Effect of nicorandil on coronary events in patients with stable
angina: the Impact Of Nicorandil in Angina (laNA) Randomized Trial. Lancer
2002;359: 1269-1275.
40. Chaiunan BR. et 301. Effects of ranolazine with atenolol, amlodipine.. or diltiazem on
exercise tolerance and angina frequency in patients with severe chronic angina: a ran-
domized controlled trial. lAMA 2004;291:309-316.
41. Heidenreich PA. et 301. Meta.analysis of trials comparing ~blockers, calcium antago-
nists, and nitrates for stable angina. lAMA 1999;281:1927-1936.
42. Nakamura Y, et 301. Long-term nitrate use may be deleterious in ischemic heart disease:
a study using the databases from two large-scale postinfarction studies. Am Heart /
1999;138:577-585.
3
Calcium Channel Blockers
(Calcium Antagonists)
Lionel H. Opie
"Calcium anragQnut5 IUllie iJssumed a major role in the tfell/menl
of patients with hypertension or coronal)' heart di5ea5e.-
ABERNErnY AND SCHwAJrrl., 19991
Ikre are none of the uridely rrumpered dangm from
dihydropyridine calcium cMnnt>/ blockers. •
1<.-\f>V.N, 2003, a>MMENTt.-.lG ON THE RfSUUS Of ALLHAr
Calcium channel blocke.rs (CCBs; calcium antagonists) act chiefly by
vasodilation and reduction of the peripheral vascular resistance. They
remain among the most commonly used agents for hypertension and
angina. Their true place in these conditions is now well understood,
based on the results of a series of large trials. CCBs are a heteroge-
neous group of drugs that can chemically be classified into the dihy-
dropyridines (OI-IPs) and the non-OJ-lrs (Table 3-1) their common
pharmacologic property being selective inhibition of L-ehannel
opening in vascular smooth muscle and in the myocardium (Fig. 3-
1). Distinctions between the D1IPs and non-D1IPs are reflected in dif-
ferent binding sites on the calcium channel pores, and in the greater
vascular selectivity of the DIIP agents.J In addition, the non-DIIPs by
virtue of nodal inhibition are used in cenain supraventricular arrhyth-
mias, and tend to reduce the heart rate (heart rate-lowering agents.
I-lRL). These agents, ve.rapamil and diltiaum, more closely resemble
the l3-blockers in their therapeutic spectrum.
PHARMACOLOGIC PROPEIlTlES
calcium Channel.: L- and Hype.
The most important property of all CCBs is selectively to inhibit the
inward now ofcharge-bearing calcium ions when the calcium channel
becomes penneable or is "open.~ Previously, the teon ~slow channel"
was used, but n"w it is realized that the calcium current travels much
faster than previously believed, and that there are at least two types
of calcium channels, the L and the T. The conventional long-lasting
opening calcium channel is teoned the L-<hannet which is blocked
by CCBs and increased in activity by catecholamines. The function of
the L-type is to admit the substantial amount ofcalcium ions required
for initiation ofcontraction via calcium-induced calcium release from
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 3-1). The T-type (T for transient)
channel opens at more negative potentials than the L-type and prob-
ably plays an important role in the initial depolarization of sinus and
atrioventrirular (AV) nodal tissue. It is also relatively upregulated in
the failing myocardium. A specific blocker for T-type calcium chan-
nels, mibefradil, was withdrawn when a large number of serious
adverse hepatic interactions were discovered.
Cellular Mechanisms: {J-Slockade versus cess
Both these categories of agents are used for angina and hypertension,
yet there are important differences in their subcellular mode of action.
50
Binding Slles lor CCBs, Tissue Specificity, Clinical Uses, and Salety Concerns
Table 3·1
,Ito
DHP Binding
PmfOl)pe; ni{tdipiflt site I
Mon-OHP Binding
'HMT1 Tale /owtrinS-
Site IB, 0, diltiaurn
Site Ie. v, vuap.llmil
n.... _
Vessels> Myocardium> nodes
Vascular ~viry lOX N, Nifedipine;
A, amlodipine; lOOX Nic, Nicardipine;
100x isradipine (I); 100>< fdodipine
(F); 1000x Nis, Nisoldipine
SA and ltV nodes > II'l)"OClrdiurn =
_,,
Clinical Uses
Efron angina (N, A)
Hypenension (N·, A, Nic. l. F, Nis)
Vasospastic angina (N, A)
Raynaud's phenomenon
Angina: dfon (V, 0), unstable M,
vasos~ic(V, D); Hypenemion
(D·, V); Anbythmi;u, $Upr.a-
....m.lrieular (0', V); Venp.llmi):
postinfarct patients (no USA
license).
Conb'aindlcations
Unstable angina. early phase
AMI, systolic hean failure
(possible exception:
amlodipine)
Systolic hean failure; sinus
bradycardia or SSS; AV
rnxW block; WPW
syndrollH'.. Acute
myoamii.al infarction
(oarlyp.....)
5afetyConcems
Ni!tdipiflt Ctlpsull'J: excess IW fall especially in
elderly; adrenergic activation in aCUle
coronary syndromes (ACS)
Loriga aaifl& fomu: Safe in hypertension, no
studies on ACS
Systolic hean failure, especially diltiazem.
Safety record of vuapamil m..,. equallhat of
P-blodcade in elderly hypenmsiw patiml$'·;
.also su rd. 25.
us mA-~pplUY'tddtup for IUIn! indieJlions in ~~
•Long·.IClilll (0fmI only.
'lnl~ fonns only.
AV. ~~tri(\ll:u;OIIP. dihydropyridiM; SA. sinoatria~ SSS. sid< sinus syndrome Wl'W. Wolff"·P~rki1UOn·Whil~
52
•
3
Phamwwlogic Propm1ies
cu"
MOVEMENTS
Opia 2004
Il-agonist
I
Cs"
leaves
I
pump
C '·
'
a
,,
~
awEB~
Relaxation
Mitochondrial
.........AlP
,••~_;~~
J
metabolism
-
con~
fig ur. 3-1 Role ofcalcium channel in regulating myocardial cytoso-
lic calcium ion movements. a", a-adrenergic receptor; {J '" Il·adrenergic
receptor; cAMP", cyclic AMP; PL '" phospholamban; SR '" sarcoplasmic
reticulum. (Figure C LH Opie. 2005.)
Both have a negative inotropic effect, whereas only CCBs relax vascu-
lar and (to a much lesser extent) other smooth muscle (Fig. 3-2). CCBs
"block" the entry of calcium through the calcium channel in both
smooth muscle and myocardium, so that less calcium is available to
the contraClile apparatus. The result is vasodilation and a negative
inotropic effect, which in the case of the DHPs is usually modest due
to the unloading effect of peripheral vasodilation.
~blockade has contrasting effect5 on smooth muscle and on the
myocardium. Whereas ~-blockade tends to promote smooth muscle
contraction, it impairs myocardial contradion. A fundamental differ-
ence lies in the regulation of the contractile mechanism by calcium
ions in these two tissues. In the myocardium. calcium ions interad
with troponin C to allow adin-myosin interaction; 13-stimulation
enhances the entry of calcium ions and the rate of their uptake into
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, so that calcium ion levels rise and fall
more rapidly. Hence both contraction and relaxation are speeded up
as cyclic AMP forms under l3-stimulation (see Fig. 1-2). Furthermore,
a higher cytosolic calcium ion concentration at the time of systole
means that the peak force of contraction is enhanced. I3-Blockade
opposes all these effects. and has a consistent and major inhibitory
effect on the sinus and AV nodes (see Fig 1-4).
CC8s Inhibit Vascular Contraction In smooth muscle (Fig. 3-2). calcium
ions regulate the contractile mechanism independently of troponin
C. lnteradion ofcalcium with calmodulin fonns calcium-calmodulin.
which then stimulates myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) to phos-
phorylate the myosin light chains to allow actin-myosin interaction
and, hence, contraction. Cyclic AMP inhibits the MILK I3-Blockade.
by lessening the fonnation of cyclic AMP, removes the inhibition on
MLCK adivity and, therefore, promotes contraction in smooth
muscle, which explains why asthma may be precipitated. and why the
peripheral vascular resistance often rises at the start of l3-blocker
therapy (Fig. 3-3).
CCSs
CHAPTER 3
Calcium Channel Blockrn (Ca/dum Antagonists)
•
53
III-STIMULATION I
---
.----'--~~4=-----e
oAMP
eo>-
e\·.-(+~
Myosin
'_~cr,:;;;;-;
~
~~",=~h~"=d~';",r........AClin-mYOSin
interaction
SMOOTH MUSCLE
beta-blockade promotes contraction
I~STIMULATION
\
Opie 2004
HEART MUSCLE
beta-blockade inhibits contraction
Fig.,. 3-2 Proposed oompanlliw:dfectsof!l-blockade and calcium
channel blocker's (CCBs) on smoOlh muscle and myocardium. The
opposing effects on vascular smooth muscle a~ of critical therapeutic
imponance- SR = sarcoplumic retiGllum. (Fipre 0 LR ()pW. 2005.)
cess and Vascular Protsction Experimentally,
both
nifedipine and
amlodipine give endothelial protection and promote formation of
nitric
oxide.
Furthermore,
several
CCBs including amlodipine,
nifedipine, and lacidipine have inhibitory effects on carotid athero-
matous
disease"'~ Similar protective effects have not consistently
been found with I}-blockers. However, we don'l yet know that such
vascular protection leads to improved clinical outcomes.
cess versus P-81ockers: Hemodynamic and Neurohumoral Differences Hemo-
dynamic differences are well defined (Fig. 3-3). Whereas
~-blockers
inhibit the renin-angiotensin system by decreasing renin release and
oppose the hyperadrenergic state in heart failure, CCSs as a group
have no such inhibitory effects.i lll.is difference could explain why Ii-
blockers but not CCSs are an imponant component of the therapy of
heart failure. Of interest, new N.type CCBs that block neuronal chan-
nels with the aim of suppressing sympathetic activity are under test
in Japan.
CLASSlFICAnON OF CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Dihydropyridines
The dihydropyridines (OI-IPs) all bind to the same sites on the CLI '
subunit (the N sites), thereby establishing their common property
of calcium channel antagonism (Fig. 3-4). To a different degree. they
exert a greater inhibitOry effect on vascular smooth muscle than on
the myocardium, conferring the property ofvascular selectivity (Table
54
•
3
ClassijicatiQn Q[ CAllcium Chanllel Blockm
HEMODYNAMICS: fJ-BLOCKERS VS CCBs
--------~
Opie 2004
,r
I~-.LOCKERSI
PVR initially t
then '>I or .....
CALCIUM CHANNELS
BLOCKERS
• Negative inotropic
V::o:D>N
• Nodal inhibition
V",D»N
Coronary lone
PVR !
\
~~__~BP!
Ca"· BLOCKERS
.-8
,
AV,
SA
~-L_--'-.
I~-·LOCKERS I/-----
~
..!>co '" HR~Contra.
~~
indicated
Bronchospasm
Contraction
8 -'"
>--_
I~-BLOCKERSI
"~"~~_
~~-,//
-~---------
Figun 3-3 Comparison of hemodynamic dflXts of ~-blockers and of
CCBs, showing possibilities for combination therapy_ AV '" atrioventricular
node; BP", blood pressure; CO '" cardiac output; D '" diltiazem; HR = hean
rate; N'" nifedipine as an example ofdihydropyridines; SA '" sinoatrial node;
SV '" stroke volume; PVR '" peripheral vascular resistance; V'" verapamil.
(Figure (J LH Opie, 2005.)
CALCIUM CHANNEL MODEL
Opie 2004
P
Figure 3-4 Proposed molecular model of calcium channel a,-
subunit with binding sites for nifedipine (N). diltiazem (D), and
verapamil (Y). It is thought that all DHPs bind to the same site as
nifedipine. Amlodipine has additional subsidiary binding to the V
and D sites_ P indicates sites of phosphorylation in response to
cAMP (Fig. 3-1), which acts to increase the opening probabiliry of
the calcium ch.mne\. (Figure C LH Opie, 2005.)
CH APTER 3
CAlcium Channel Blockers (CAlcium Antagonists)
•
55
3-1, Fig. 3-5). There is nonetheless still the potential for myocardial
depression, panicularly in the case of agents with less selectivity and
in the presence of prior myocardial disease and/or I}-blockade. For
practical purposes, effects on the sinoatrial (SA) and AV nodes can be
ignored.
Nifedipine is the protmype of the DHPs. In the short-acting capsule
form, originally available, it rapidly vasodilales to relieve severe hyper-
tension and to terminate attacks of coronaI)' spasm. The peripheral
vasodilation and a rapid drop in blood pressure leads to rapid reflex
adrenergic activation with tachycardia (Fig. 3-6). Such proischemic
effects probably explain why the shan-acting DHPs in high doses have
precipitated serious adverse events in unstable angina. The inappro-
priate use of short-acting nifedipine can explain much of the adverse
publicity that has surrounded the CeBs as a group,7 so that the focus
has now changed to the long-acting DI-lPs which are free of such
dangers.!
Hence, the introduction of truly long-acting compounds, such as
amlodipine or the extended-release formulations of nifedipine (GITS,
XL, CC) and of others such as felodipine and isradipine, has led to
substantially fewer symptomatic side effects. Two residual side effects
of note are headache, as for all arteriolar dilators, and ankle edema,
caused by precapillary dilation. There is now much greater attention
to the appropriate use of the DHPs, with improved safety.!
Nondihydropyridines: Hearl RatiH-owering Agents
Verapamil and dilliazem bind to two different siles on the ai-subunit
of the calcium channel (Fig. 3-4), yet have many properties in
common with each other. The first and most obvious distinction from
the DHPs is that verapamil and diltiazem both act on nodal tissue,
being therapeutically effective in supraventricular tachycardias. Both
tend to decrease the sinus rate. Both inhibit myocardial contraction
more than the DHPs or, put differently, are less vascular selective (Fig.
3-5). These properties, added to peripheral vasodilation, lead to sub-
stantial reduction in the myocardial oxygen demand. Such ·oxygen
conservation· makes the HRL agents much closer than the DI-lPs
to the I}-blockers, with whom they share a similar spectrum of
CARDIAC VS VASCULAR SELECTIVITY
Opie 2004
Nifedipine and
amlodipine
(10:1)
I OHPs I
Highly selective DHPs
(100:1 or more)
(felodipine, isradipine
nicardipine, nisoldipine)
Arterioles
oVerapamii and
diltiazem
/"8
oVerapamil and'dilliazem
oOHPs to varying elClent
(offset by reflex adrenergic
activation)
Figure 3-5
As a group, the DHPs (dihydropyridines) are more vascular
selective, while the non-DHPs verapamil and diltiazem act equally on the
hean and on {he anerioles. (Figure C LH Opie, 2005.)
INON-OHPs I
56
•
3
Major Indications for eeBs
ISCHEMIC HEART: CCB EFFECT
Opia 2004
Itt
Collateral flow t
Vasodilation t t t
0,
JI'
supply
I
+ or .heart rate
.~"maff'"~
~
Wall
02
~
stres;demand
±pre-Ioad//
I
/
±or•• contractilityl DEMANDJ.
I5liPLY
(variable) ~
Some
02 deficit •••
eE<:-'1:'~.,DHPS@
l\.u:'~I.'-;:-:·
--- R'''e<-.....·IDEMANDtl
"
Rapid"
adrenergic
,
vasodilation
Figure 3-6 Mechanisms of anti-ischemic effeas of calcium channel
blockers. Note that the rapid aneriolarvasooilation resulting from the action
of some shan-acting dihydropyridincs (DHPs) may increase myocardial
oxygen demand by reflex adrenergic stimulation. (figure <l:l LH Opie. 2005.)
therapeutic activity. lWo imponam exceptions are (1) the almost total
lack of effect of verapamil and diltiazem on standard types of ven-
tricular tachycardia, which rather is a contraindication to their use;
and (2) the benefits of ~-blockade in heart failure, in which the HRL
agents are also clearly contraindicated. The salient features for the
clinical use of these agents are shown in Table 3-2.
For supraventricular tachycardil15, a frequency-dependent effect is im-
portant, so that there is better access to the binding sites of the AV
node when the calcium channel pore is ·open.· During nodal reentry
tachycardia, the channel of the AV node opens more frequently; the
drug binds bener and hence specifically inhibits the AV node to stop
the reentry path.
Regarding side effecrs, the non-DHPs, being less active on vascular
smooth muscle, also have less vasodilatory side effects than the DHPs,
with less flushing or headaches or pedal edema (see later, Table 3-4).
Reflex tachycardia is uncommon because of the inhibitory effects on
the SA node. Left ventricular depression remains the major potential
side effect, l'SJrecially in patients with preexisting congestive heart
failure (CHF). Why constipation occurs only with verapamil of all the
CCBs is not known.
MAJOR INDICATIONS FOR ceBs
Effort Angina
Common to the effects of all types of CCBs is the inhibition of the L·
calcium current in arterial smooth muscle, occurring at relatively low
concentrations. Hence coronary vasodilation is a major common
property (Fig. 3-3). Although the antianginal mechanisms are many
and varied, the shared effects are (l) coronary vasodilation and relief
of exercise·induced vasoconstriction, and (2) afterload reduction
due to blood pressure reduction (Fig. 3-6). In addition, in the case of
verapamil and diltiazem, slowing of the sinus node with a decrease
in exercise heart rate and a negative inotropic ettect also contribute
(Fig. 3-7).
Table 3-2
Oral Heart Rate-lowering CeBs, Salient Features for CardIovascular Use
V""""l
Tablets (for IV use
sec Table 8-2, p. 220)
Slow relc.uc (SR)
Verdan (Vn)
Covera-HS (limed)
''''''on
Thbkts (for IV use
see Table 8-2, p. 221)
Prolonged Sit CD, XR
11azac
....
180-480mg daily in 2 or
J doses (lilnued)
As ahoYt. 2 doses (SR)
Single dose (VCr)
Single bedtime dose
120-J60mg daily in 3 or
4 doses
Iu above. I (XR, CD,
Tiazac) or 2 doses
Puk plasma levels within t~3h_ Low
bioavailability (10%-20'M0), high tim-pass
meobolism to long-acting norvenpamil
uemion: 15" renal, 25% GI. rY. J-1h
Peak dl"tct 1-2h (SR); 1-9h (Vcr). rY.
5-12h; 12h (Vcr) Delayed 4~6h release
(Co)
Onset: IS-30min. Peak: 1-2h. f'l15h.
Bioovailable: 45% (hepatic). Active
metabolilel. 65% CI 1055
Slower onset longer IV" otherwise similar.
Constipation. ql sick sinus syndrome.
digoxin toxicity, aa:5Ii ~blockadc.
LV failurt:. ObstJuetMo cardiomyopathy.
I..cYelsl in liver or renal dixasc.
As for vernpamil but no rolUlipation
Iv. ab~
Kinetic and Dynamic IntenIctions
Digoxin levels increase. IJq)rcssion of
SA. AV nodes and myocardium.
SSS = care. CardiodepfOAnl drugs:
fl-blockers. disopyrnmide. Ikcainide.
~ meoboli$m, 5« ten for
inter.actions.
N """"
Iu for ~rapamil, except liltle/no effen
on digoxin levels; liver interactions nOI
so prominent. Cimetidinc and liver
disease increase blood levels.
Propranolol levels t.
N ,boY<
AV _ auiOVtntrirular; SA .. sinoatr,al; SSS" lick sinus syndrome: ''l,'' pl3..lma dimin3lion half·lift.
58
•
3
Major 11ldications for CCBs
VERAPAMIL or DILTIAZEM MULTIPLE EFFECTS
Opie 2004
SYSTEMIC
CIRCULATION
'"
" ,,,,,,,,,
ARTERIOLAR
DILATION
,,
i
AFTERLOAD!
,,,,,
,
"
VERAPAMILor
DILTIAZEM
·Anti-arrhythmic
.Arterial dilator
·Negative inotropic
'LVH!
·Post-infarct (no LVF)
e
ATRIAL FIB
(slows
AV node)
PSVT
Figure 3-7 Verapamil and dil1iazem have a broad spectrum of thera-
peutic effects. Atrial jib 0; atrial fibrillation; LVF 0; left ventricular failure; LVH
0; left ventricular hypertrophy; PSVT 0; paroxysmal supraventricular tachy-
cardia. (Figure otI LH Gpit, 2005.)
Unstable Angina at Rest
Of the major CCBs, only verapamil has a license for unstable angina.
allhough intravenous diltiazem has one good supporting
study.~
It must again be emphasized that the DHPs should not be used
without concurrent ~-blockade (risk of reflex adrenergic activation; see
Fig. 3-6).
Coronary Spasm
The role of spasm as a major cause of the anginal syndromes has
undergone revision. Once seen as a major contributor to transient
ischemic pain at rest, coronary spasm is now relatively discounted
because 13-blockade was more effective than nifedipine in several
studies.9 The role of coronary spasm in unstable preinfarction angina
has also been downplayed because nifedipine, in the absence of con-
current 13-blockade, appeared to be harmful. lO Coronary spasm
remains important as a cause of angina precipitated by cold or hyper-
ventilation, and in Prinzmetal's variant angina. All CCBs should
be effective. Among those specifically licensed are verapamil and
amlodipine.
Hypertension
CCBs are excellent antihypertensive agents, especially and among
the best for elderly and black patients (see Chapter 7). Their effect is
largely independent of sodium intake or of the concurrent use of anti-
inflammatory agents such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs). The DHPs are recommended (among others) as favored
agents by the European guidelines for the following groups of hyper-
tensive cases: elderly patients. isolated systolic hypertension. angina
pectoris, peripheral vascular disease, carotid atherosclerosis. and preg-
nancy." The non-DHPs are favored for angina pectoris, carotid athe-
rosclerosis. and supraventricular tachycardia. CHF is a contraindication
only to the non·DHPs. The current American recommendations list
only two 'compelling indications· without separating DHPs and
CHAPTER 3
Calcium Channel Blockers (Calcium AnfQgonis!S)
•
59
non-DHPs: high coronary risk patients and diabetes. llThe most recent
and largest meta-analysis finds as follows. U Compared with placebo.
they reduce stroke. coronary hean disease. major cardiovascular
events, and cardiovascular death. Compared with diuretics/fl-block-
ade. there is the same lOlal and cardiovascular-related mortality. and
unchanged coronary heart disease.. However. hean failure is increased.
and Slroke is borderline decreased. LJ
In hypertemiorlwilh nepllfopmhy, both DHPs and non-DliPs reduce the
blood pressure, the primary aim. but non-Dl·IPs reduce proteinuria
better. '8
Supraventricular Tachycardia
Verapamil and diltiazem inhibit the AV node. which explains their
effect in supraventricular tachycardias. Nifedipine and other DJ·IPs are
clinically ineffective
Poslintam Protection
Although fl-blockers remain the drugs of choice. both wrapamil and
diltiazem give some protection in the absence of prior left venlricular
failure. Verapamil is beller
documented.'~·" Data are lacking for
DliPs.
Vascular Protection
Increased nitric oxide fonnation in cultured endothelial cells '6 and
improved endothelial function in fatients'7 may explain why CCBs
slow down carotid atherosclerosis, I which in tum may be linked to
decreased stroke found in several clinical studies. Whether coronary
disease is limited. as suggested by early studies. is under investigation
in the continuing ann of the ENCORE studyl7 and in the forthcom-
ing AcnON study (see p. 73).
SAFETY AND EmCACY
The ideal cardiovascular drug is both efficacious in reducing hard end-
points, such as mortality. stroke, and myocardial infarction. and safe.
Safety. not generally well defined. may be regarded as the absence of
significam adverse effects when the drug is used with due regard for
its known comraindications. In the case of CCBs, previous controversy
regarding both efficacy and safety has been laid to rest by new studies
that support the safety of long·acting CCBs, particularly in hyperten-
sion with coronal)' heart disease as end-poinLI) (Also see Table 3-6.)
A review of 100 repons leads to the following conclusions.' A dis-
tinction can be made between observational studies. including case
conuol and cohort studies. and randomized conuolled trials (RCTs).
For example. observational data from a large British clinic suggest that
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are better able to
reduce mortality in hypertensives than are CCSs.I ' But this hypothe-
sis could not be confirmed in a large adequately powered ReT. the
AUHAT study, that found ~ual all-<ause mortality when comparing
amlodipine with lisinopril:
Here the RCr outweighs the observa-
tional study. The strongest evidence comes when experimental obser-
vations, observational studies, and RCfs all give concordant evidence.
as when short-acting nifedipine is linked to poor outcomes in unsta-
ble angina. The proposed hypothesis for this adverse effect lies in
abrupt vasodilation with renex adrenergic activationll with increased
risk of ischemia. By contrast, verapamiJ even in shon-acting formula·
tion gives much less adrenergic activation. This is important, because
short-acting verapamil is widely available throughout the world as a
relatively inexpensive generic drug that can now be classed as both
safe and efficacious.
60
•
3
VeTtlpo:.lmil
satety in Ischemic Heart Disease and Hypertension
In stable effon angina. imperfect evidence based on RCfs and a meta-
analysis suggests equivalent safety and efficacy of CCBs (other than
shon-acting nifedipine) to ~blockers.The largest trial, AGnON, due
to be reponed at the end of 2004, examines the effects of addition of
\I)ng-acting nifedipine to existing therapy in effon anliina. In unsta-
ble angina, a small trial suppons the use of diltiazem. There are no
data to back the use of DHPs in unstable angina, and shon-aaing
nifedipine remains totally contraindicated in the absence of
~­
blockade.
1O In postinfarct follow-up,
~-blockers remain the agents of
choice; with the non-DI-IP hean rate-lowering agents (especially vera-
pamil) second choice if ~-blockers are contraindicated or not tolerated.
D1·IPs lack good evidence for safety and efficacy in post-MI patients.
'n hypertlm.lion, four large outcome tria1s··n -N show a reassuring effi-
cacy and safety of longer aaing DHPs (.see later, Table 3-6). Amlodi-
pine in ALLHAT exhibited the same outcomes regarding coronary
hean disease and total monality as did the diuretic. with, however,
increased heart failure balanced by the decreased incidence of new
diabetes. lO A similar tit-for-tat balance was found in INSICI-IT.·
Verapamil·based therapy had effects on coronary disease similar to
those of therapy based on atenolol in the INVESr trial. the prima7,
end.points being all<ause deaths, nonfatal MI, or nonfatal stroke. '
By the end of the study, to achieve the required blood pressure goals,
combination therapy was required in most so that the real com-
parison was between verapamil plus the ACE inhibitor trandolapril.
and atenolol plus a thiazide. Verapamil and thiazide-based therapy
were similar in the prematurely terminated and underpowered CON·
VlNCE.l6 In diabetic hyperrlm.lives long-acting DHPs are also able to
improve oUlcome.l •.2? In ALLHAT, amlodipine gave similar results in
the diabetic and nondiabetic subgroups.20 These findings make it
difficult to agree with the view that CCBs have adverse effects in dia-
betic patients, in whom the major issue is adequate blood pressure
reduction. In fact. diabetes may rather be a positive indication for
preferential use of a CCRIl Cancer; bleeding. and increased all-an./5e
mortillity, onu proposed as serious and unexpe.cred side effecrs of the CCBs.
an now discounted.uo
VERAPAMIL
Verapamil (Isoptin, Calan, Verdan), the prototype non-DHP agent
remains the CCB that has the most licensed indications. Both vera-
pamil and diltiazem have multiple cardiovascular effects (Fig. 3.7).
Electrophysiology Verapamil inhibits the action potential of the upper
and middle regions of the AV node where depolarization is calcium
mediated. Verapamil thus inhibits one limb of the reentry circuit,
believed to underlie most paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias
(see Fig. 8-4). Inaeased AV block and the increase in effective refrac·
tory period of the AV node explain the reduaion of the Vl:ntricular
rate in atrial flutter and fibrillation. Verapamil is ineffective and
hannful in the treatment of ventricular tachycardias except in cenain
uncommon fonns. HemadyMmically, verapamil combines arteriolar
dilation with a direct negative inotropic effect (Fig. 3-7). The cardiac
output and left ventricular ejection fraaion do not increase as
expected following peripheral vasodilation, which may be an expres-
sion of the negative inotropic effect. At rest the heart only drops
modestly with a greater inhibition of exercise·induced tachycardia.
Pharmacokinetics and Interactions Oral verapamil tablets take 1-3 hours
to act. Therapeutic blood levels (80 to 400ng/ml) are seldom meas-
ured. The eliminalion half-life is usually 3 to 7 hours, but increases
significantly during chronic administration and in patients with liver
or advanced renal insufficiency. Despite nearly complete absorption
CHAPTER 3
Calcium Channel Blockm (Calcium Anwgonim)
•
61
of oral doses, bioavailability is only 10% to 20%. There is a high first~
pass liver metabolism by multiple components of the P-450 system
including aT 3A4, the latter explaining why verapamil increases
blood levels of several statins such as atorvastatin, simvastatin, and
lovastatin, as well as ketoconazole. Ultimate excretion of the parent
compound, as well as the active hepatic metabolite norverapamil,
is 75% by the kidneys and 25% by the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
Verapamil is 87% to 93% protein bound, but no interaction with
warfarin has been reported. When both verapamil and digoxin are
given together, their interaction causes digoxin levels to rise, probably
owing to a reduction in the renal clearance of digoxin (see p. 62).
Norverapamil is the long-acting hepatic metabolite ofverapamil, which
appears rapidly in the plasma after oral administration ofverapamil
and in concentrations similar to those of the parent compound; like
verapamil, norverapamil undergoes delayed clearance during chronic
dosing.
Verapamil Doses '!be usual total oral daily dose is ISO to 360 mg daily;
no more than 480mg given once or twice daily (long~acting fonnu~
lations) or three times daily for standard short-acting preparations
(Table 3-2). Large differences of pharmacokinetics among individuals
mean that dose titration is required, so that 120mg daily may be
adequate for those with hepatic impairment or for the elderly. During
chronic oral dosing. the formation of norverapamil metabolites
and altered rates of hepatic metabolism suggest that less frequent or
smaller daily doses of short-acting verapamil may be used.ls For
example, if verapamil has been given at a dose of 80 mg three times
daily, then 120 mg twice daily should be as good. Lower doses are
required in elderly patients or in those with advanced renal or hepatic
disease or when there is concurrent ~-blockade. Intravenous uerapami/
is used much less often for supraventricular arrhythmias since the
advent of adenosine and the ultra-shon-acting ~-blocker esmoloL
Slow-Release Preparations Cdlan SR or Isoptin SR releases the drug from
a mauix at a rate that responds to food while Verefan releases the drug
from a rate-controlling polymer at a rate not sensitive to food intake.
The usual doses are 240 to 480mg daily. The SR preparations are
given once or twice daily and Verelan once daily. A controlled-onset
extended-release formulation (Couerll-HS; COER-24; 180 or 240mg
tablets) is taken once daily at bedtime, with the (unproven) aim of
lessening adverse cardiovascular events early in the morning.
Side Effects Class side effects are those of vasodilation causing
headaches, facial flushing, and dizziness. These may be lessened by
the long-acting preparations, so that in practice they are often not
troublesome. Tachycardia is not a side effect. Constipation is specific
and causes the most trouble, especially in elderly patients. Rare side
effects may include pain in the gums, fadal pain, epigastric pain. hepa-
totoxicity, and transient mental confusion. In the elderly, verapamil
may predispose to GI bleeding.'s
Contraindications to Verapamil (Fig. 3-8, Table 3-3) Sick sinus syndrome;
preexisting AV nodal disease; excess therapy with ~-blockade. digitalis.
quinidine, or
di~oPYT<lmide; or myo(<lrdi<ll ripprpssino <lrp <Ill con-
traindications. especially in the intravenous therapy of supraventricu-
lar tachycardias. In the Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome
complicated by atrial fibrillation, intravenous verapamil is can·
traindicated because of the risk of anterograde conduction through
the bypass tract (see Fig. 8-2). Verapamil is also contraindicated in
ventricular tachycardia
(wide
QRS-complex)
because of excess
myocardial depression, which may be lethal. An exception to this rule
is exercise-induced ventricular tachycardia. Myocardial depression,
if secondary to the supraventricular tachycardia, is not a contra-
indication, whereas preexisting left ventricular systolic failure is.
SYSTOLIC
FAILURE
(used for LVH with
diastolic failure)
62
•
3
Vempilmil
r:::-r<
NON-DHP CONTRAINDICATIONS
r
Opie 2005
·Oigitalis toxicity
·Il-blockade (care)
·AV block
·[Rare anterograde WPW]
Fig II re 3-1 Contraindications 10 verapamil or diltiazem. For use of
verapamil and diltiazem in patients already receiving Il-blockers. see
telCt. AV = atrioventricular node; SA = sinoatrial node; WPW = Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome. (Figure C LH Opie, 2005.)
Dose reduction may be required in hepatic or renal disease (see
Pharmacokinetics).
Drug Interactions with Verapamil
jJ-Blockers Verapamil by intravenous injection is now seldom given, so
that the potentially serious interaction with preexisting j3-adrenergic
blockade is largely a matter of history. Depending on the dose and
the state of the sinus node and the myocardium, the combination of
oral verapamil with a J3-blocker may be well tolerated or not. In prac-
tice, clinicians can often safely combine verapamil with J3-blockade in
the therapy of angina pectoris or hypertension, provided that due care
is lakpn (monitoring for heart rate and heart hlock). In thp plrlprly,
prior nodal disease must be excluded. For hypertension, J3-blocker
plus verapamil works well. although heart rate, AV conduction, and
LV function may sometimes be adversely affected. To avoid any
hepatic pharmacokinetic interactions, verapamil is best combined
with a hydrophilic J3-blocker such as atenolol or nadolol. rather than
one that is metabolized in the liver, such as metoprolol, propranoloL
or carvedilol.
Digoxin Verapamil inhibits the digoxin transporter. P-glycoprotein, to
increase blood digoxin levels, of special relevance when both are used
chronically to inhibit AV nodal conduction. [n digitalis toxicity, rapid
intravE'nous verapamil is absolutE'ly contraindicated because it can
lethally exaggerate AV block. There is no reason why, in the absence
of digitalis toxicity or AV block, oral verapamil and digitalis com-
pounds should not be combined (checking the digoxin level).
Whereas digoxin can be used for heart failure with atrial fibrillation,
verapamil is nE'gatively inotropic and should not be used.
Antiarrhythmics The combined negative inotropic potential of vera-
pamil and disapyrllrtlide is considerable. Cotherapy with f1ecainide may
also give added negative inotropic and dromotropic effects.
Statins Verapamil inhibits the hepatic CYP3A isoenzyme, and there-
fore potentially increases the blood levels of atorvastatin, simvastatin,
and lovastatin, which are all metabolized by this isoenzyme. 29
CHAPTER 3
Calcium Channel Blockers (Calcium Amagollilts)
•
63
ComparatIVe Contralndlcations of Verapamll, Olltiazem,
Olllydropyndmes, and of Il-Adrenerglc Blockmg Agents
"""""""".....
......... ........ ."'"
~
Ab."'''.
Severc linus br.utyrardia
0'+
0'+
•
++
Sick $inU$ $)'Tldromc
++
++
0
++
AV condUCtion dd"cas
++
++
0
++
WP'W syndrome
++
++
0
++
Digoxin toxicity, AV
block"
++
++
0
++
Asthma
0
0
0
+++
Bronchospasm
0
0
0
0/++
Heart failure
++
++
+
Indicated
Hypotcnsion
+
+
++
+
Coronary artelY spasm
0
0
0
+
Raynaud's and actlw
peripheral vascular
disease
0
0
0
+
Severe mental
deprmion
0
0
0
+
Severe aortic ltenosis
+
+
++
+
Obstructive
cardiomyopathy
0'+
0'+
++
Indicated
""'''''
Insulin roisu.ncc
0
0
0
c.re
MYmt blood lipid
profile
0
0
0
Qore
Digoxin nodal effects
c.re
Qore
0
c.re
jl-Blockadt:
c.re
Qore
BP!
N"
(Quinidine therapy)'
(Care)
(Qore)
(Care)
[Qore)
Disopyramide therapy
Qore
c.re
0
Qore
Umtabk angina
India..'"
Indkated
++
Indicned
Postinfarct protection
Indkated
o (+ifno
++
Indicated
LVF)
Indinted mum judged suit.lble for UK by author (Ul Opie), not ne<;r:W.rily FD...·
approved,
"Conll:llndication to rapid inll:l.'~nous
~dminiSlration.
'Nol recommended for ~ny purpose; s.ee Chapter 8.
+++. absolutely contraindiated; ++ K51rongly contraindicated; + = relative
conll:lindkatlon; 0 Knot contraindiated.
BP.j,. hypotension; Dill's. dihydropyridina; LVI' _left ventricular failure; NtA. not
~pplicable,
Other Agents Phenobarbital,
phenytoin,
and
rifampin
induce
the
cytochrome systems metabolizing verapamil so that its blood levels
fall. Conversely, verapamil inhibits hepatic CYP3A to increase blood
levels ofcydosporin, carbamazepine (Tegretol), and rheophylline, as men-
tioned in the package insert. This inhibition is also expected to
increase blood levels ofketoamazole and sildenafiI. Cimetidine has vari-
able effects. A1coholle\'e1s increase. Verapamil may sensitize to neuro-
muscular blocking agen!5, and to the effects of lirhium (neurotoxicity).
Therapy of Verapamil Toxicity
There are few dinical repons on management of verapamil toxicity.
Intravenous calcium gluconate (I to 2g) or half that dose of calcium
chloride. given over 5 minutes. helps when hean failure or excess
hypotension is presenL If there is an inadequate response. posi-
tive inotropic or vasoconstridory catecholamines (see Chapter 6)
are given, or else glucagon. A novel alternative is hyperinsulinemic.
euglycemic therapy.'" Intravenous atropine (I mg) or isoproterenol is
used to shonen AV conduction. A pacemaker may be needed.
64
•
3
Verapamil
Clinical Indications of Verapamil
Angina In chronic stable effort angina, verapamil acts by a combination
of afterload reduction and a mild negative inotropic effect, plus
reduction of exercise-induced tachycardia and coronary vasoconstric-
tion. The heart rate usually stays the same or falls modestly. In
several studies, verapamil has been as effective as propranolol for
effort angina. In lIt15table angina at rest with threat of infarction, vera-
pamil has not been tested against placebo, although licensed for
this purpose in the United States. In Prinzmeral's variant anginll therapy
is based on CCBs, including verapamil, and high doses may be
needed. J1 Abrupt withdrawal of verapamil may precipitate rebound
angina.
Hypertension Verapamil is approved for mild to moderate hypertension
in the United States. There are now results from two major outcome
studies. In CONVINCE, stopped early by the sponsors, verapamil-
based therapy was similar to diuretic-13-blocker therapy with regard
to all major outcomes.26 In INVEST. verapamil-based therapy was
compared with atenolol-based therapy. the former supplemented
by an ACE inhibitor trandolapril, and the latter by a thiazide if
required to reach the blood pressure goal.l~ Major outcomes were very
similar without. however. reaching the strict criteria for noninferior-
ity. Verapamil doses of 240 to 360mg daily were the approximate
equivalent of atenolol 50 to 100mg daily. In another long-term
double-blind comparative trial. mild to moderate hypertension was
adequately controlled in 45% of patients given verapamil 240mg
daily.J1 versus 25% for hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg daily, versus 60%
for the combination. Higher doses ofverapamil might have had even
better results.
Combinations can be with diuretics, 13-blockers. ACE inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers. or centrally acting agents. During com-
bination with a-blockers, a hepatic interaction may lead to excess
hypotension.
Verapamil for Supraventricular Arrhythmias Verapamil is licensed for the
prophylaxis of repetitive supraventricular tachycardias, and for rate
control in chronic atrial fibrillation when given with digoxin (note
interaction). For acute attacks of supraventricular tachycardias, when
there is no myocardial depression, a bolus dose of5 to lOmg (0.1 to
0.15 mg/kg) given over 2 minutes restores sinus rhythm within 10
minutes in 60% ofcases (see package insert). However. this use is now
largely supplanted by intravenous adenosine (see Fig. 8-5). When
used for uncontrolled atrial fibrillarion, verapamil may safely be given
(0.005 mg/kg/minute. increasing) or as an intravenous bolus of 5mg
(0.075 mg/kg) followed by double the dose if needed. If there is
myocardial disease, and when cardioversion is not practical, verapamil
can still be used with caution, if infused at a very low dose (0.0001 mg/
kg/minute) and carefully titrated against the ventricular response. In
atrial flutter, AV block is increased. In all supraventricular tachycardias,
including atrial flutter and fibrillation, the presence of a bypass tract
(WPW syndrome) contraindicates verapamil.
Other Uses for Verapamil In hypenrophic cardiomyopathy, verapamil has
been the CCB best evaluated. It is licensed for this purpose in Canada.
When given acutely, it lessens symptoms, reduces the outflow tract gra-
dient, improves diastolic function, and enhances exercise performance
by 20% to 25%. Verapamil should not be given to patients with resting
outflow tract obstruction. when propranolol or disopyramide, which
do not vasodilate, should be safer. No long-term placebo-controlled
studies with verapamil are available. In retrospective comparisons
with propranolol. verapamil appeared to deaease sudden death
and gave better lO-year survival.)] The best results were obtained by a
combination of septal myectomy and verapamil. In current practice.
CHAPTER]
Calcium Channel Blockers (Calcium AmagQnist»
•
65
propranolol and verapamil are often combined (see Chapter 11, p.
387). A significant number of patients on long-term verapamil
develop severe side effects, including SA and AV nodal dysfunction,
and occasionally overt heart failure.
Atypical ventricular tachycardia. Some patients with exercise-induced
ventricular tachycardia due to triggered automaticity may respond well
to verapamil, as may young patients with idiopathic right ventricular
outflow tract ventricular tachycardia (right bundle branch block and
left axis deviation). However, verapamil can be lethal for standard
wide complex ventricular tachycardia, especially when given intra-
venously. Therefore, unless the diagnosis is sure, verapamil must be
avoided in vemricular tachycardia.
For posfin/arcl protection, verapamil is approved in the United Kingdom
and in Scandinavian coumries when
~-blockade is contraindicated.
Verapamil 120 mg three times daily, started 7 to 15 days after the acute
phase in patients withom a history of heart failure and no signs of
CHF (but with digoxin and diuretic therapy allowed), was protective
and decreased reinfarction and mortality by about 25% over 18
months.'"
For diabetic m:phrOpdfhy in type 2 diabetics, verapamil was as good as
an ACE inhibitor at slowing renal deterioration, but the numbers were
low.'"
In intermittent claudication, carefully titrated verapamil increased
maximum walking ability.')
In carolid atherosclerosis, verapamil is among the CCEs tested. These
agents as a group are now recommended by the European Society of
Hypertension. U
Summary
Among CCBs, verapamil has the widest range ofapproved indications,
including all varieties of angina
(effort, vasospastic,
unstable),
supraventricular tachycardias, and hypertension. Indirect evidence
suggests that is one of the safest of the CCBs with nonetheless risks
of heart block and heart failure. Compared with propranolol in the
therapy of effort angina, it is at least as effective, with, however, dif-
ferent side effects and contraindications. Verapamil is one ofa number
ofearly options in the therapy ofhypertension, as confirmed by recent
outcome studies. The combination with ~-blockadecan be more effec-
tive than either component in the therapy of angina or hypertension,
but a number ofcautions and contraindications such as increased risk
of heart block and bradycardia must be observed.
DILTlAZEM
Although molecular studies show different channel binding sites for
diltiazem and verapamil (Fig. 3-4), in clinical practice they have some-
what similar therapeutic spectra and contraindications, so that they
are often classified as the non-DHPs or "heart rate lowering
W agents
(Fig. 3-5). Clinically, dilti~m is used for the same spectrum of dis-
eases as is verapamil: angina pectoris, hypertension, supraventricular
arrhythmias, and rate control in atrial fibrillation or flutter (Fig. 3-7).
Of these, use of dilti~m for angina (effort and vasospastic) and
hypertension is approved in the United States, with only the intra-
venous form approved for supraventricular tachycardias and for acute
rate control. Diltiazem has a low side effect profile, similar to or pos-
sibly better than that of verapamil; specifically the incidence of con-
stipation is much lower (Table 3-4). On the other hand, verapamil is
registered for more indications. Is diltiazem less cardiodepressam
l.hau
v~lapalllil? TII~I~ al~ IIU stlklly l.:ulIlpal<lbk dinkal studies to
support this clinical impression.
TableH
Reported Side EHects 01 the Three PrototypIcal CCBs and long-Acting Ddwdrollyndmes
-
........
0iItiazem XR -
_lll,
..-
Felodipine ER
Coven-HS ('%)
Short-Acmg ('%1
or CD (,%J
_'l")
cc, GITS ('%)
10mg ('%)
10rog ('%)
FKiilJ f1U$hing
<I
0-3
0-1
6-25
0-4
3
5
HGdilrnn
<P1a<:tOO
4-'
<P!iICtOO
3-34
•
<Placebo
4
Palpilation
0
0
0
lDw-25
0
4
1
Ughlheadedness. dizziness
5
'-7
0
12
2-4
2
4
Constipation
12
4
1-2
0
1
0
0
Ankle edema.. ~lIing
0
6-10
2-3
•
10-30
10
14
Provocation of angina
0
0
0
lDw-14
0
0
0
Sid~ dfKts ar~ d~-rtlated; no su;a dir«t comparisons betwttn the CCRI. I'tKemago aK plactbo-corlet:ted.
•No IOllger ust'd in the United Stales.
Data sources from Opie I.J [ Clinical Use of Calcium Antagonist Drug.<.. KJuwer. lJ.oslOlI. 1990. p. 197, and from package inseru.
CHAPTER 3
Olldurn Chllnnel Blockers (Ol/dum Anwgonists)
•
67
Pharmacokinetics Following oral administration of diltiazem, more
than 90% is absorbed, but bioavailability is about 45% (first-pass
hepatic metabolism). The onset of action of shon-acting dihiazem
is within 15 to 30 minutes (oral), with a peak at I to 2 hours. The
elimination half-life is 4 to 7 hours; hence, dosage every 6 to 8 hours
of the shon-acting preparation is required for sustained therapeutic
effect. The therapeutic plasma concentration range is 50 to 300ng/mL
Protein binding is 80% to 86%. Diltiazem is acetylated in the liver
to deacyldiltiazem (40% of the aerivity of the parent compound).
which accumulates with chronic therapy. Unlike verapamil and
nifedipine, only 35% of diltiazem is excreted by the kidneys (65% by
the Gl traer).
Dilliazem Ooses The dose of diltiazem is 120 to 360 mg. given as four
daily doses ofthe shon-aering fonnulation or once or twice a day with
slow-release preparations. CArdium SR permits twice daily doses. For
once daily use, Di/tu;qr XR is licensed in the United States for hyper-
tension and Cnrdizem CD and Tiaznc for hypertension and angina_
IntTQL't!7IOW dilriaum (Cardium injeewbk) is approved for arrhythmias
but nOI for aane hypertension. For acute conversion of paroxysmal
supraventricular tachycardia. after exclusion of WPW syndrome (see
Fig. 8-2) or for slowing the ventricular response rail' in atrial fibrilla-
tion or flutter, it is given as 0.25 mg/kg over 2 minutes with ECG and
blood pressure monitoring. Then if the response is inadequate, the
dose is repeated as 0.35 mg/kgover 2 minutes. Acute therapy is usually
followed by an infusion of 5 to 15 mg/hour for up to 24 hours. Oi/-
tillurn overdose is treated as for verapamil (see p. 63).
Side Effects Normally side effects of the standard preparation are few
and limited to headaches, dizziness. and ankle edema in about 6% to
10% of patients (Table 3·4). With high-dose diltiazem (360mg daily).
constipation may also occur. When the extended-release preparation
(Dilacor XR) is used for hypertension, the side effect profile resembles
that of placebo. Nonetheless.- bradycardia and first degree AV block
may occur with all dihiaum preparations. In the case of intravenous
dihiazem, side effects resemble those of intravenous verapamil,
including hypotension and the possible risk of asystole and high-
degree AV block when there is preexisting nodal disease. In postinfarct
patients with preexisting poor LV funerion, mortality is increased by
diltiazem, not decreased. Occasionally, severe skin rashes such as
exfoliative dermatitis are found.
Contraindications Contraindications
resemble
those
of
verapamil
(Fig. 3-8. Table 3-3)-preexisting marked depression of the sinus or
AV node, hypotension. myocardial failure, and the WPW syndrome.
Use in nodal disease may require a pacemaker. PostinfarcL LV failure
with an ejection fraerion below 40% is a clear contraindication:'·
Drug Interactions and Combinations Unlike verapamil. the effect of dilti-
azem on the blood digoxin level is ohen slight or negligible. As in the
case of verapamil, there are the expected hemodynamic interactions
with l}-blockers. Nonetheless.- diltiazem plus l}-blocker may be used
with care for angina, watching for excess bradycardia or AV block or
hypotension. Diltiaum may increase the bioavailability of oral prop-
ranolol. perhaps by displacing it from its binding sites (see package
insert). Occasionally diltiazem plus a DHP is used for refraerory coro-
nary artery spasm, the rationale being that two different binding sites
on the calcium channel are involved (Fig. 3-4). Diltiazem plus long-
acting nitrates may lead to excess hypotension. As in the case of
verapamil, but probably less so. diltiazem may inhibit CYP3A
cytochrome. which is expected to increase blood levels of cyclosporin.
ketoconazole, carbamazepine (Tegretol). and sildenafil.29 Conversely,
cimrtidine inhibits the hepatic cytochrome system, breaking down
diltiazem to increase circulating levels.
68
•
3
Dilriaum
Clinical Uses of Diltiazem
Ischemic Syndromes In chronic stable effort tmgirul, the combination of
vasodilation, reduced hean rate during exercise and a modest nega-
tive inotropic effeo is desirable (Figs. 3-5 and 3-6). The efficacy ofdil-
tiazem in chronic angina is at least as good as that of propranolol.
and the dose is titrated hom 120 to 360 mg daily (Table 3-2). In unsta-
ble angina at fesl, there is a good albeit small study showing that
intravenous diltiazem (not licensed for this purpose in the United
States) gives better pain relief than does intravenous nitrate. with
improved I-year follow-up.' In Prinunetal's variant angina, diltiazem
240 to 360mg/day reduces the number ofepisodes of pain. In a pilot
study on early phase AMI, intravenous diltiazem added to tissue plas-
min~en activator (t-PA) reduced postinfarct ischemia and reinfarc-
tion. J In the INTERCEPT study on thrombolysed patients with AMI,
long-acting oral diltiazem plus aspirin, started within 36 to 96 hours
of the onset of MI, was compared with aspirin alone, and given for
6 months. IU& Although there was a 24% reduction in the combined
primary end-point of death, recurrent MI, or refractory ischemia, the
confidence intervals just overlapped unity (el, 0.59 to 1.02). Thus, a
larger trial is required.
Oi/tiazem for Hypertension In the major long-term outcome study on
more than 10,000 patients, the Nordic Diltia:zem or NORDIL trial. dil-
tiazem, followed by an ACE inhibitor if needed to reach blood pres-
sure goals. was as effective in preventing the primary combined
cardiovascular end-point as treatment based on a diuretic. a J}-blocker,
or both.16 In the smaller multicenter VA study, diltiazem was the best
among five agents (the others were atenolo\. thiazide. doxazosin, and
captopril) in reducing blood pressure. and was especially effeaive in
elderly white patients and in black patients." Nonetheless. reduction
of LV hypertrophy was poor at I-year of follow-up, possibly bttause
a short-acting diltiazem fonnulation was used...o
AntialTflythmic Properties ofOi/tiazem The eleorophysiological properties
of diltiazem closely resemble those of verapamil. The main effect is a
depressant one on the AV node; the functional and effeaive rehactory
periods are prolonged by diltiazem, so that diltiazem is licensed for
termination of an attack of supraventricular tachyarrhythmia and for
rapid decrease of the ventricular response rate in atrial flutter or fib-
rillation. Only intravenous diltiazem is approved for this purpose in
the United States (see p. 67). Oral diltiazem can be used for the elec-
tive as well as prophylactic control (90 mg three times daily) of most
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias (oral diltiazem is not approved
for this use in the United States or United Kingdom). Diltiazem is
unlikely to be effective (and is comraindicated) in ventricular arrhyth-
mias except in those complicating coronary anery spasm or in those
few in whom verapamil works (see p. 65). [n chronic atrial fibrilla-
tion, diltiazem may be added to digoxin to improve control of
ventricular rate. As for verapamil. the presence of a bypass tract
(wPW syndrome. Fig. 8-2) is a contraindication to diltiazem.
C8Jdiac Transplantation Dihiazem acts prophylactically to limit the
development of post-transplant coronary atheroma. independently of
any blood pressure reduction.&!
Summary
Diltiazem, with its low side effect profile. is often regarded as having
advantages in the therapy of angina pectoris. Like verapamiJ. it acts by
peripheral vasodilation, relief of exercise-induced coronary constric-
tion, a modest negative inotropic e.ffect. and sinus node inhibition. In
the therapy of hypenension, it is well tolerated, and has cardiovascu-
lar outcomes similar to those of conventional therapy by diuretics
CHAPTER 3
Ozburn Channel Blockers (Olburn AntD:gonisrs)
•
69
and/or ~blockers. The
intra\'t~nous form is approved in the United
States for acute supraventricular tachycardias and for acute deause of
the ventricular response rate in atrial fibrillation or flutter. The inci-
dence of side effects (usually low) will depend on the dose and the
underlying state ofthe sinus or AV nodes and the myocardium, as well
as any possible cotherapy with ~blockers.
NIFEDIPlNE: 11IE PRDTDTYPICAL DKP
The major actions of the DHPs can be simplified to one: arteriolar
dilation (Fig. 3-5). The direct negative inotropic effed is usually
outweighed by arteriolar unloading effects and by reflex adrenergic
stimulation (Fig. 3-6), except in patients with heart failure.
Shott-Acting capsular Nifedipine
Short-acting capsular nifedipine was first introduced in Europe and
Japan as Adalat. and then became the best-selling Procardia in the
United States. In angina. it was especially used for coronary spasm, at
that time thought to be the basis of unstable angina. Unfortunately
not
enough
attention
was
paid
to
three
imponant
negative
studies. 1l,4.l.U which led to warnings against use in unstable angina in
previous editions ofthis book. Nonetheless the widespread use ofcap-
sular nifedipine continued until an influential meta-analysis by
Furberg stressed the increased mortality at high doses, BOmg or more
per day.~~ Although there were substantial arithmetical errors in the
meta-analysis,' and although the excess of deaths amounted to
only 16 in over 1000 patients, the message was dear: capsular nifedip-
ine was potentially dangerous in acute ischemic situations (Fig. 3-6).
The ensuing adverse reaction led to an examination of its overuse
and off-license use in severe hypertensionu with FDA warnings in
the package inserts against any use in
hypertension. Capsular
nifedipine is now the treatment of choice only when taken intermit-
tently for conditions such as attacks of vasospastic angina or
Raynaud's phenomenon, or when in unstable angina it is desired
to test the tolerability addition of a short-aGing CCB to preexisting
~blockade..,
Long-Acting Nifedlplne Formulallons
The rest of this sedion largely focuses on long-aGing nifedipine for-
mulations (PrOOlrdia XL in United Stales, I'\tU1lat LA. elsewhere; Adalat
CC) that are now widely used in the treatment of hypertension, in
effort angina, and in vasospastic angina.
Pharmacokinetics Almost all circulating nifedipine is broken down by
hepatic metabolism by the cytochrome P-450 system to inadive
metabolites (high first-pass metabolism) that are largely excreted in
the urine. The long-aGing osmotically sensitive tablet (nifedipine
crrs, marketed as Procardia XL or Malat LA) releases nifedipine from
the inner core as water enters the tablet from the CI trad (Table 3-2).
This process results in stable blood therapeutic levels of about 20 to
30ngJml over 24 hours. With a core<oat system (Malat Ce), the
blood levels over 24 hours are more variable,. with the trough/peak
ratios of 41% to 91%.
Doses ofNifedipine In effort angi1U1, the usual daily dose 30 to 90mg of
Procardia XL or Adalat LA (Adalat CC is not licensed in the United
States for angina). Dose titration is imponant to avoid precipitation
of ischemic pain in some patients. In cold-induced angina or in coro-
nary spasm, the doses are similar and capsules (in similar total daily
doses) allow the most rapid onset of action. In hypertension, standard
doses are 30 to 90 mg once daily of Procardia XL or Adalat CC. In the
elderly or in severe liver disease, doses should be reduced.
70
•
3
Niftdipint: The PrototypiW/ DHP
CootraindicaUons and Cautions (Fig. 3-9, Table 3-5) These are tight aonic
stenosis or obstructive hypenrophic cardiomyopathy (danger of ex-
aMrated pressure gradient), clinically evident heart failure or LV
dysfunction (added negative inouopic effect). unstable angina with
threat of infarction (in the absence of conCUl1'ent ll-blockade). and
preexisting hypotension. Relative contraindications are subjective
intolerance to nifedipine and previous adverse reactions. [n preg-
nancy. nifedipine should be used only if the benefits are thought
to outweigh the risk of embryopathy (experimental; pregnancy
category C).
MinorSide Effects The bilateral ankle edema seen with nifedipine is dis-
uessing to patients but is not caused by cardiac failure; if required. it
can be treated by dose reduction or conventional diuretics or an ACE
inhibitor. Nifedipine itself has a mild diuretic effect. The incidence of
subjective vasodilatory side effects is higher with nifedipine capsules
than with verapamil or diltiazem. The manufacturers claim that with
extended-release nifedipine preparations (Procardia XL), side effects
are restricted to headache (nearly double that found in controls)
and ankle edema (dose-dependent, 10% with 30mg daily. 30% with
l80mg daily). The low incidence of acute vasodilatory side effects,
such as flushing and tachycardia. is attributable to the slow rate of rise
of blood DHP levels.
severe orRSfB Side Effects In patients with LV depression, the direct neg-
ative inotropic effect can be a serious problem. Occasionally, there are
side effects compatible with the effects of excess hypotension and
organ underperfusion, namely myocardial ischemia or even infarc-
tion, retinal and cerebral ischemia, and renal failure. Other unusual
side effects include muscle cramps, myalgia. hypokalemia (via diuretic
effect), and gingival swelling.
Drug Interactions Cimeridine and grapefruit juiu (large amounts) inhibit
the hepatic CYP3A4 P-450 enzyme system breaking dov,," nifedipine..
thereby substantially increasing its blood levels. Phenobarbital, pheny-
toin, and ri[ampin induce this system metabolizing so that nifedipine
blood levels should fall (not mentioned in the package insert). In
some repons, blood digoxin levels rise. Volatile anesthetics interfere
DHP CONTRA/ND/CAT/ONS
No $A nodal
contraindications
AORTIC STENOSIS
HYPERTROPIC
OBSTRUCTIVE
CARDIOMYOPATHY
threatened
myocardial
fnfBrr:tion;
unstable angfna
SEVERE MYOCARDIAL
FAILURE
FI,.,. 3·' Conuaindications to dihydropyridines are chiefly oo"uuc-
tive lesions such as aortic stenosis or hypenrophic obstructive cardiom}'-
opathy. and heart failure. Unstable angina (threatened infamion) is a
contraindication unless combined nifedipine plus ~-blockade therapy is
used or unless (rarely) coronary spasm is $uspeaed. ~ and AV as in Fig.
3-6. (Figure C LH Opie. 2005.)
long-Actmg Dihydropyndmes for Oral Use
Table 3-5
....
Amlodipine
(Norvasc. (slin)
Nifediplne
Prolonged release XL
lA Grrs, Adala! CC
Procardia Xl
Felodlpine ER
(PlendiJ)
Dose and Major Trial
5-10 mg once daily
(ALUIAT, VALLIE)
30-90 mg once daily
(INSIGliT)
S-lOmg once daily
(HOT)
Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
I max.. 6-12 h. Extensive but slow
hepatic metabolism, 90% inactive
metabolites. 60% renaL r~l 35-50 h.
Steady state in 7-8 days
Stable 24-h blood levels. Slow onset.
about 611.
t max.. 3-5 h. Complete hepatic
metabolism (P-450) to inactive
metabolites 75% renal loss, IY,
22-27h
Side Effects and Contraindications
£<lema, dizziness, flushing, palpitation.
C/I: severe aortic stenosis. obstructive
cardiomyopathy, LV failure. unstable
angina AMI. May use :unlodipine in
CHF class II or Ill, but best avoided
S/E headache. ankle edema. C/I:
severe aortic stenosis. obstructive
cardiomyopathy, LV failure.
Unstable angina if no f>-blockade
Edema, headache, flushing. CII as
above except no evidence for benefit
in CHF (mortality neutral).
Interactions and Precautions
Prolonged I~, up to 56 h in liver failure. Reduce dose,
also in elderly and in heart failure. Grapefruit juice:
caution, interaction not established.
Added LV depression with p.blockade. Avoid in
unstable angina without p·blockade. Cimetidinc and
liver disease increase blood levels
Reduce dose with dmetidine, age, liver disease. Anti-
convulsants enhance hepatic metabolism. Grape-
fruit juice markedly inhibits metabolism.
f max" time 10 peak blood lewl; I~,. plasma elimination half-lire.
72
•
J
Nifedipine: The Prototypical DHP
with the myocardial calcium regulation and have inhibitory effecu
additional to those of nifedipine.
ReboundAfter cessation of Nitedipine Therapy In patients with vasospastic
angina. abrupt cessation of nifedipine capsule therapy increased the
frequency and duration of attacks. The evidence for rebound with the
long-acting preparations is much less convincing, although the man·
ufacturers recommend that the dose be tailed off.
Nitedipine Poisoning [n one case there was hypotension, SA and A\'
nodal bloc.k, and hyperglycemia. Treatment was by infusions of
calcium and dopamine (see also amlodipine).
Combination with {j-Blockers and Other Drugs In patients with reasonable
LV function, nifedipine may be freely combined with ~-blockade(Fig.
3-10), provided that excess hypotension is guarded against. In LV
depression. the added negative inotropic effects may precipitate oven
hean failure. For unstable angina at rest, nifedipine can be used only
if combined with a ~-bloc.ker." In the therapy of effort or vasospastic
angina. nifedipine is often combined with nitrates. [n the therapy of
hypertension. nifedipine may be combined with diuretics, ~-blockers,
methyldopa, ACE inhibitors, or angiotensin receptor blockers. Com-
bination with prazosin or (by extrapolation) other a-blockers may
lead to adverse hypotensive interactions.
Clinical Uses of Nifedipine
Ischemic Syndromes In the United States only Procardia XL and not
Adatat CC is licensed for effort angina, when
~-blockade and/or
nitrates are ineffective or not tolerated. Whereas capsular nifedipine
modestly increases the heart rate (that may aggravate angina), the
extended-release preparations leave the hean rate unchanged.46 Their
CCBs VERSUS /i-BLOCKADE
Opie2004
VorD DHPs
=.
H
•t
t
(t)=
tt
tt
Inotropic state
Myocardial blood
flow
Peripheral
srterioles
Il-B
.VID +DHPs
H W •
• Ht •
.. H •
• ,th ,t
• ,t
t
Fig ure 3-10 Proposed hemodynamic effects of calcium channel block-
ers, singly or in combination with
~·blockade. Note that some of these
effects are based on animal data. and extrapolation to humans needs to be
made with (amion. {JB =
~,blockade; D = diltiazem; DHP = dihydropy-
ridines; V", verapamil. (Figure C LH Opie, 2005.)
CHAPTER 3
Cilicium Chllnnel Blockers (Calcium AntllgolliSf5)
•
73
antianginal activity and safety approximates that of the 13-blockers,
albeit at the cost of more subjective symptoms,'- The ACTION study,
to be announced in late 2004, will give more infonnation on the long-
term efficacy and safety of long-acting nifedipine in those with effort
angina. The majority of patients will have had the nifedipine added
to prior 13-blockade, so that the expected result should be similar in
direction to the much smaller PREVEm study with amlodipine, that
is, decreased unstable angina and revascularization:a In addition,
ACnON is powered to assess mortality and major cardiovascular
events. [n Prinzmefal's angilltJ (vasospastic angina), nifedipine gives
consistent relief. In uIISll1ble tJllgilltJ, nifedipine may be given only
when combined with 13-blockade.
JO
Systemic Hypertension Long-acting nifedipine and other OJ-IPs are
increasingly used. The major outcome study with nifedipine GITS, the
INSIGHT study, showed equivalence in mortality and other major out-
comes to the diuretic, with less new diabetes or gout or peripheral vas-
cular disease and more heart failure: Capsular forms are not licensed
for hypertension in the United States because of the intermittent
vasodilation and reflex adrenergic discharge, as well as the short dura-
tion of action. Procardia XL and Adalat CC are, however, approved
and the dose is initially 30 mg once daily up to 90 mg daily.
Vascular Protection Intriguing basic and clinical work suggests that
nifedipine and other CCBs have vascular protective qualities, espe-
cially in the carotid vessels"· Whether coronary disease is limited is
still under investigation.
Off-License Uses of Nifedipine capsules For severe hypertension (DBP >
120 mmHg), 5- to lO-mg nifedipine capsules, repeated once after 30
to 60 minutes, were widely used and abused"s Although nifedipine
is quicker and less expensive than sodium nitroprusside infusion,5O
and when carefully used is safe, 51 it is no longer recommended for this
purpose. In unstable angina, nifedipine in the absence of 13-blockade
by itself is contraindicated, as shown by the HINT study. 10
Summary
Long-acting nifedipine is widely used as a powerful arterial vasodila-
tor with few serious side effects and is now part of the accepted
therapy of hypertension and of effort or Prinzmetal's vasospastic
angina. In hypertension, it gives outcomes equivalent to those of a
diuretic. Nifedipine is especially useful in angina patients with con-
traindications to 13-blockade, such as bronchospasm, heart block, or
active peripheral vascular disease. However, in unstable angina at rest,
nifedipine in any fonnulation should not be used as monotherapy,
although effective when added to preexisting 13-blockade.
Contraindications to nifedipine are few (apart from severe aortic
stenosis, obstructive cardiomyopathy, or LV failure), and careful com-
bination with 13-blockade is usually feasible. Vasodilatory side effects
include headache and ankle edema.
AMLOOIPINE: THE RRST OF
THE SECONO-GENERAnON ONPs
The major specific advantage of amlodipine (NorvtJSc; 15tin in the
United Kingdom) compared with the original nifedipine capsules
is the slower onset of action and the much longer duration of activ-
ity (Table 3-5). It was the first of the longer acting -second-generation-
agents. It binds to the same site as do other DHPs (labeled -N- in
Fig. 3-4). The charged nature of the molecule means that its
binding is not entirdy typical. with very slow association and
dissociation, so that the channel block is slow in onset and offset. In
74
•
3
Amlodipine: The Fint of the ~cond-Generation DHPJ
addition. it also binds to the same sites as do verapamil and diltiazem,
albeit to a lesser degree. so that with justification its binding proper-
ties are regarded as unique.Sl Because it is highly lipophilic. the mem-
brane antioxidant effectsSJ are of interest although not yet of proven
clinical relevance.
PharmacokJnetks Peak blood levels are reached after 6 to 12 hours, fol-
lowed by extensive hepatic metabolism to inactive metabolites. The
plasma levels increase during chronic dosage. probably because of the
very long half-life. The elimination half-life is 35 10 48 hours, increas-
ing slightly with chronic dosage. In the elderly. the clearance is
reduced and the dose may need reduction. Regarding drug inrenu;lion5.
no effect on digoxin levels has been found. nor is there any interac-
tion with cimetidine (in contrast to verapamil and nifedipine). There
is no known effect of grapefruit juice.
Clinical Uses of Amlodipine
Hypertension As initial monotherapy. a common starting dose is 5 mg
daily going up to IOmg, In a large 4-year trial on mild hypertension
in a middle-aged group. amlodipine 5 mg daily was the best tolerated
of the agents comEared with an a-blocker, a l3-blocker. a diuretic. and
an ACE-inhibitor.• In the largest outcome study, ALLHAT. amlodip·
ine had the same primary outcome (fatal and nonfatal coronary heart
disease) as did the diuretic and ACE inhibitor groups. but with
increased heart failure and decreased new diabetes.!O Perhaps un-
expectedly, amlodipine slowed renal deterioration bener than other
agents. In VAWE, amlodipine and valsartan gave equal benefit (see
Table 3-6).
EffrxtAngina Amlodipine is well tested in tffon angina. with an antiang-
inal effect for 24 hours. In three relatively small comparative studies
with
~blockers, amlodipine was well tolerated.ss-s, In PREVENT.
amlodipine given to patients with coronary angiographic disease had
reduced outcome measures after 3 years.... Exen:i5e-induced iJchemia
was more effectively reduced by amlodipine than by the p...blocker
atenolol.
whereas ambulatory ischemia was better reduced
by
atenolol. and for both settings the combination was the best.56 Exer-
cise-induced ischemia is at the basis ofeffort angina. After the anginal
pain is relieved by nitrates, the ejection fraction takes about 30
minutes to recover. a manifestation of posrischemic slUrming. Amlodip-
ine markedly attenuates such stunning,J& hypothetically because cel-
lular calcium overload underlies stunning. In Prinzmeral's vasospastic
angina, another licensed indication, amlodipine 5 mg daily lessens
symptOms and ST changes.
Contraindications, cautions, and Side Effects Amlodipine has the same
contraindications as other DHPs (Fig. 3-9). It is untested in un5lable
angina. AMI, and folfuw-up. First principles strongly suggest that it
should not be used in the absence of concurrent p...blockade. In hean
failure patients otherwise fully treated, amlodipine could be added
without overall adverse effects." In AUHAT. am10dipine increased
hean failure compared with the diuretic.!O CCSS as a group are best
avoided in CI-IF but amlodipine may be added, for example. for better
control of angina. In established hypenension with nephrosclerosis
in black patients. amlodipine gave poorer outcomes than ramipril. Ml
By contrast. in All.t-1AT the glomerular filtration rate was better pre-
served in the amlodipine than in the diuretic or ACE inhibitor anns.
In lil1eT di54!ase the dose should be reduced. Of the Jide effMS. periph-
eral edema is most troublesome. occurring in about 10% of patients
at IOmg daily (Table 3-4). In women there is more edema (15%) than
in men (6%). Next. in significance are dizziness (3% to 4%) and flush-
ing (2% to 3%). Compared with verapamil, edema is more common
CHAPTER 3
Ol/dum Clwrlflel Blo(/um (Ol/dum AnUigoniSf5)
•
75
but headache and constipation are less common. Compared with
placebo, headache is not increased (package insert), Amlodipine gave
an excellent quality of life compared with other agents in the TOMH
study.~·
Summary
The very long half-life of amlodipine, good tolerability, excellent trial
data, and virtual absence of drug interactions makes it an effective
once-a-day antihypertensive and antianginal agent, setting it apart
from agents that are used either twice or thrice daily. Nonetheless, the
introduction of extended-release preparations of all other D1·IPs has
narrowed these differences,
FELODIPINE
Felodipine (Plendil ER) shares the standard properties of other long-
acting DJ-IPs. [n the United Slates it is licensed only for hypertension.
in a starting dose of 5 mg once daily, then increasing to iO mg or
decreasing to 2.5 mg as needed. As monotherapy. it is approximately
as effective as nifedipine. [nilial felodipine monolherapy was the
basis of a very large outcome study in Scandinavia in which the
aim was to compare blood Eressure reduction to different diastolic
levels: 90. 85, or 80mmHg. 4 Combination with other agents such
as ACE inhibitors and
~-blockers was often required to attain the
goals. The best results were found with the lowest blood pressure
group in diabetic individuals. in whom hard end-points such as
cardiovascular mortality were reduced. Felodipine. like other DHPs,
combines well with ~·b[ockers.6l Regarding dmg interactions, there are
two of note: cimetidine, which increases blood felodipine levels. and
anticonvulsants, which markedly decrease levels. both probably acting
at the level of the hepatic enzymes. Grapefruit juice markedly inhibits
the metabolism. The high vascular selectivity of felodipine led to
extensive testing in heart failure, yet achieving no sustained benefit in
the large Ve-HeFf-IIl trial in which it was added to conventional
therapy.61
OTHER DIHYDROPYRIDINES
lnese include, in alphabetical order. isradipine, lacipidine, lercani-
dipine, nicardipine. and nisoldipine. There appears to be no particu-
lar reason for choosing any of these above the much better studied
agents such as amlodipine, nifedipine, and felodipine. Laddipine (only
in Europe and the United Kingdom), however, deselVes a comment
in that it is highly lipophilic and may therefore exert more marked
vascular protection than other agents. [n the ELSA trial (European
Lacidipine Study of Atherosclerosis) the progression of carotid ather-
osclerosis was slowed when compared with atenolo!, even though the
ambulatory blood pressure reduction of -7/-5mmHg was less than
with the
~-blocker (-1O/-9mmHg).~ Lacidipine is also claimed to
cause less ankle edema than amlodipine.
LARGE OUTCOME TRIAlS AND CCB SAFm
In hypertension. there are a large number of outcome studies. which
taken together attest to the safety of CCBs in treating this condition
(Table 3-6). The only outstanding trial, ASCOT, compares "new
therapy.· amlodipine ± perindopril, versus "old" therapy by atenolol
± diuretic. In angina. the major study is ACTION with long-acting
nifedipine added to existing therapy. due for report at the European
Congress ofCardiology in August 2004. Por both studies. recruitment
has been excellent and the safety committees have seen no reason to
stop either study.
TIIM3-4i
CCBs: Major Outcome Tnals In Hypertension
_.......
AWiAT, amJodipine'"
ASCOT. amlodipine
CONVINCE venpamil~'
E.1.StI. lacidipine'
INSICl-IT. nifedipine C~
INVEST verapamie'
NORDIl... dihiazem"
SHELL lacidipine"
VALUE, amlodipille6'
Numben and Duration
33.357 patients, 9048 ill amJodipine arm
18,000 patients, 5 years. BP> 160/100 or 140/90
on drug; age 40-80. 3+ risk factors for CHD
16.602 patients, aim for 4-6 years, but stopped
aha 3 years by sponsor
2334 patients, BP 150-210/95-1I5mmHg
6321 patients; BPi plus one other risk factor
(smoking. diabetes. angina, hyperlipidemiOll);
3 )'tan
22,576 for 2~; hypertension + coronary disease
10.881 patients, up to 5 years, mild to moderate BPf.
ages 50-74
1882 patients, age 60+, isolated SYSIOJiC hyperterlsion
15,245 patients. age 50+. initial BP l55/87mmHg
A VS othen (diuretic, ACE inhibitor,
u·blocker)
Amlodipine vs atenolo!; 2nd: A +
petindopril VI atenolol + thiazide
Verapa.mil Cover3·HS vs thiazide or
atenolol
Lxidipine vs alenolol ± diuretic if
.........
Nifedipine VI thiazide; then <KId
atenolol or enalapril to mnttol BP
Verapamil ± ACE inhibitor vs
atenolol ± diuretic
Diltiazem vs !l-blocker/diuretic
Lacidipine vs diuretic ± ACE
inhibitor if needed
Amlodipine vs valsart.:m; both ± thiazide
Equal CHD. stroke. all cause morulily, at $arne
BP target. More HE less n~ diabetes
To come. Outcome measures include nonfatal
AMI and fatal CHD
Simi!;", rombinnl. end·poin!,. but no Stria
equivalence.
Carotid wall thickness ultrasound; liKidipine
b,u~
Equal 01 eY'eflts, fhean failur", J. new diabetes
and gout
Similar in all major end-point.s: CAD. all-eause
mortality.
Equal 0/ monality, ! sUoke
01 morbidity and mortality similar
Equal cardiac and mortality outcomes.
ALLHAT _ AntihYP"nensive and l-ipid·Low<!ring treaunent to p~""t Ilean Attack Tri~l; ASCOr. Anglo Scandin3vi~n C.udi3C OUlcome~ Tt;31; CONVINCE. Conlrolled Onloel Verapamil to1>"<:slig,tliol1 fur
atrdiovucular J:ndpoin...; nSA. l:urope31l [.addipine Study On Ath«o.d~rolis. Ill' .. hun failure; NORDI!. _ Nordic Dilli.tUm study_ INSICI rr. Inlcrnational Nifedipine-CITS Study [nlerwnlion
(",0.11 ill
II~rt~nsion
Tr~atmenl; INVEST _ Intern"tion31 V~...pamil Slt{frandobpril ~ludy; SIIEU '" Syslolic IIyp«tension in the IOlde.ly l.ong-lerm
L~idipine; VALliE _ Valsart311 Antihypenensive 1~)lIg-I""n II
I v"I",..i""
utaL
CHI+. PTER 3
Cllcium Challnel Blacken (Calcium .-\nwg()1lil;u)
•
77
SUMMARY
t. 5pearum Dfuse. Calcium channel blockers (CCBs; calcium antago-
nists) are widely used in the therapy of hypenension and effon
angina. The major mechanism of aaion is by caldum channel
blockade in the anerioles. with peripheral or coronary vaso-
dilation thereby explaining the major effects in hypenension and
in effon angina. The hean rate-lowering (IIRL) CCSS also have
more Il-blocking with a more prominent negative inotropic effect
and
inhibit me sinus and the atrioventrirular nodes. These
inhibitory cardiac effects are absent or muted in the dihydropy-
ridines (DHPs), of which nifedipine is the prototype.. now joined
by amlodipine and felodipine. and others. As a group, the DHPs
are more vascular selective and more often used in hypenension
than the HRL agents, which are also called the non-DHPs. Only the
non-OI'IPs, verapamil and dilliazem, have antiarrhythmic proper-
ties by inhibiting the AV node. Both DHPs and non·DHPs are used
against effon angina, albeit acting through different mechanisms.
2. Safety and efficacy. Previous serious concerns about the long-term
safety of the CCBs as a group have been annulled by a series of
large-outcome studies in hypenension, with one still (Q come in
angina pectoris. Nonetheless, cautions and contraindication need
to be honored for correct use.
3. lschl'mic mart diseasl'. All the CCBs work against effon angina. with
efficacy and safety rather similar to those ofIl-blockers. In unstable
angina the DHPs are specifically contra-indicated in the absence of
Il-blockade. because of their tendency to vasodilation-induced
reflex adrenergic activation. By contrast the use of the hean
rate-lowering agents, the non·DHPs. in unstable angina is rela-
tively well supponed. In postinfarct patients, data also favor vera-
pamil, although the number of trials is not nearly as impressive as
the many favoring ~-blockade:. Thus, when there is no heart failure
postinfarct verapamil can be used when ~-blockadeis not tolerated
or contraindicated, although not licensed for this purpose in the
United States. DHPs do not have good postinfaret data.
4. Hypenensioll.
Overall evidence from a series of large-outcome
studies, including All..I-IAT, favors the safety and efficacy on hard
end-points, including coronary hean disease. of longer acting
OI-lls. One large-outcome study on coronary hean disease shows
that the non-OHP verapamil gives results overall as good as atenolo!.
5. III dillberic hypertensive patients, ALU-IAT showed that amlodipine
was as effective as the diuretic or the ACE inhibitor in reducing
coronary hean disease. Other data suggest that initial antihyper-
tensive therapy in diabetic patients should be based on an ACE
inhibitor, especially in those with nephropathy. To achieve current
blood pressure goals in diabetic patients, it is almost always nec-
essary to use combination therapy, which would include an ACE
inhibitor and often a CCB besides a diuretic and/or Il-blocker.
6. Heart fllilure remains a class contraindication 10 the use ofall CCSs.
with two exceptions: diastolic dysfunction based on left vt"ntricu-
lar hypenrophy, and otherwise well-treated systolic heart failure.
when amlodipine may be cautiously added if essential, for
example. for control of angina.
REFERENCES
I
A~!hy DR. e! al. Calcium·amagoni.! drugs, N IinJII MtJ 1999;341: t447_1455.
2, Kaplan NM. The meaning of AUJ~AT.I Hytwr1t1tJ 2003;21:233-234.
78
•
3
R£fffi!nas
3. ()pft, UI, ft .... Calcium c~nnd anLlgOni$U in llw: ~atmmt of roronary artery
disrur:: fundommW
ph;o~1 ~ia Kkv",nt 10 dinio.l use. I'RIs
GmlioMuc ()jj
1996;)8:273~290.
4. Ilrown MI. ft ",I. Morbidil)' and n1Orutil)' in p,atimlS nndomisfti 10 doubk-blind
trutrnrtlt wilh a Ionl~inl calcium-dlannd blodon' 01 diumK in llw: In~mation'"
NifNipin~ Grn; study: im_ntion ;lS a Go.oI in
lIypnt~lt$ion Tluun~nt. Lolnc.n
2000;356J66~371.
5. 7.:anchrtti A. ft at. On ~halfof Ih~ USA Invnlipton. Calcium antAg011i~tl.Kidipinc
~Iows down progrnsion of M)'TI1ptomatic carotid ath~ro~dcrosis. I"rindpal .esults of
tilt Europun lacidipine SlUdy On Ath~rosdcrosis (USA), a IdndomizN.. double·
blind. long-term trial, Cln:~iation 2001; 106;1422~1417.
6. llinggcli C. el aL Effe'" of chronic calcium channel block.de On ~ympathetl( nerve
activity in hypertension. 1I)'PCrte",ioM 1001;39:891~896.
7. Opie 1.11. et al. Nifedipinc and monalil)'. Cravc defcru in the do.. i~r. Cin:olmion
1995;91'1068-1073.
8. CObd EJ. n .1.1. l.oog·trnn follow·up after early imervemion with imrnwnous dH~
or intnvmous nilrog/)«rin for unsttble allgina pccIOris. fur 1/ttJrtl 1998; I'}: 1108_1113.
9. Ardissino D. ft al. T",nsiftlt myocardial
i~mia during daily
lif~ in tnt and
omional angina p«torU and comp,arison of cffCCli~ness of metoprolol \'nSus
nifNipinr. Alii J CtmIiDll99I;6:946-,}51.
10. 11INT Study. E.arIy ~atmmt of ulUlabl~ angina in llw: COIOlUIY GK unit. a Ian·
domi...d. double-blind plaabo conuoliN comp,arison of J«urrntt ixhcrnia in
p,atimlS
u~...ted wi.h nifedipinc or metoprolol 01 both. Bolland
Imft~unr.'nSiI)'
Nifedipine Tri...!. 8T 1/frHf J 1984;S6:4c:M:)-413.
II. Europnn Soddy of Il~ion Guidi-lines Commil1~ Europtart ~ of Cu·
diolog,r guidelines for the m...na8"mnIt of anm..l hypmrtl$ion. , HypmfflS 2003
11:1011-1053.
11. INC VII. The ~lIh Report of the loint N...tion...l Commilltt on £'reovcntion,
[)flection. Ev...lU'lIlon and
T~atment of lligh 8100d I'ressure lAMA 2oo3;28,}
2560~1571.
13, 81' TrialislS. Effeeu of diffefCnI blood-pJfl.SUfe lowering regimens on major cardio·
vaKular """nlS: Iesulu of pfO.peaively·de~igned<)VI'rvi""" of randoml~d trials
l"",,,w 1003;361: \527-1 535.
14, FilCher Han",n l, et al. Treatment Wilh verapamil during .nd after an aane myOClr·
dial infaraion: ... review b.ued on Ihe Danish verap3mil infamion triall i and II
I Olrdi4w.s<: Pfulmuul>l 1991;18 (SuppI.6):S20-S15.
IS. !'cpine CI. et al. Ver.tpamil use in p,atients with cardiovucula. dise...se: an 0\"(",,,,,,'
of landomized trials. Oin QlIIlJoI
19,}8;11:6))~64L
16. Ilrooirovydt V, ft aI. Syn.crs:i'ti( amihypmmsi~ C«C'CU ofnifcdipine on endothelium
1/)1:tmmsion 1001;37:34_39.
17. ENCORE In\'nl.;Ptol1 F../fCCl of nifedipinc ...nd cerivasutin on COlonary cndotheli.aJ
fulKtion in ~tim" with coronary ...rttry disr<t«: the ENCORE I Study (E\'ahution
of Nifcdipinc and Ccrivasutin On RKlJI"tl)' of COroNry Endol:heIial funaion). C,...·
nololrion 2003;107:422_428
18. Il.okris CL ft al. Diffeftlni.&1 dreeu of calcium am"fOOw sulxlasses on rnalbTs ""II
nephrop;l.thy progression. Kid,...., /ru 1004;65: I9'91-2001.
19. Mcinnes cr, ft at Mortality diffem>ca betwttn ACE inhibitor and calcium channe.
bl()(kcr t",ated hypmcnsi~ p,ati(flts (Abstr:an) /I'oCC 2000;35:333A.
10. AUJIAT ColldOOratiVil' ~af(h GlOUp. Major Ot.llcomes in high_risk
h}'pentns,,~
p;ltientll r:andomized to angioten.in-<oO\~rtingenzymc inhibitor 01 calcium channe:
blockrl vs diuretic. The ....ntihypen(fl.;ve and l.ipid_l.owering Treatment to Pro!""(nt
Hem ....!tack Trial {AI.LlIAT), lAMA 1002;288:2981_2997.
11. Gro..man Ell, et al. Effect of calcium antagonists on plum. norepinephrine 1~"Cls
heart rate and blood preSluTe, Am l 0",110/ 1')97:80:1453~1458,
22. STOI'-l Study. R.tndomhsed tri.1 of old and new antihypertensive drugs in eldem'
patients: ClItdiov<ucular mortality and morbidity in the Swedish Trial in Old Pauenu
with Hypertension·2 study. lAnaI 19'}'};354:1751-17S6.
13. Syst.rourTlill. Randomised double-.blind comparison ofpl...cd>o and ...cti'"C UUlmml
for ollkl patients with isolatnl. systolic hyp(nension (Syst·Eu. Tri.&lj,
Lol...n
'"7;3SO:757~764.
14. liar Study. F../fcetl of intensive blood·pressure Iowerinll .o.nd low--d.ose ;lSp,"n ,n
p,atimtll with hypmcnsion: prindp'" rCstllu of llw: II)-pmcnsion Optim'" Trealmem
(IIOT) nndomised wi. Lmcrl 1998:351:1755_1762.
15
Pepin.. CI. ft aI. Acalcium anu«onw vs ... non-a.lcium anLlgOnist hypmmslOll treat.
ment str.ItCllY fOI p,atimts with o::H"OR<l.I)' ..rttry disrue "f1loe Intem.ltion.U \'er"p.llllt·.
T",ndol...pril Srudy (INVEST"):
... ",odomiud controlled tri.o.l. JAMA 10031'
2805_2816.
16. Black WI. ft
1. I"rincip,al lesults of the Controlled Onset fuapamil Invnugation 01
Cardi""IKUI r F.nd Poin" (CONVINCE) tri..l.IAMA l003;189:2073~1082
17. Tuomil~hto I, ft .1. F.ffeeu of uldum-<:hannel block.tde in older patienu ,,"'Ith d,a·
betes and S)"llOlic hypertension. N Engl J Mm 1",}:34Q:6n-684
18, Schwanz 11l, n aI, I'lolongation of verapamil elimination kinetics duriMIt chronic oul
adrniniwalion, Am II../ln I 1,}81; 104: I,}8~203,
2'), Opie Ul. Adverse cardiOVMCular drug reaetiOIll, etm /'rohl Om/io/l000;lS:611_676
30, Royer EW. et al. Trrltmcnt or Cdlcium.channel·blocker iMlO~kation wilh insulin infu·
sian. N Eng! I Mm 2001;344,1711-1711.
31. l'reedm..n 58. (\ al. l.ong·term rollow·up of''rrap,amiland niuatr U~almrnlfor ooro-
nary artery ~p;lSm. Am I CtmIiDll'}82;SO:711-715.
32. 110lz&r""" H. ft o.l. \'erap,amil ""BUS hydrochlorothiazide in the 1U.lllnftlt of h)1lC'.
tftllion; reults oflong term double blind r;omp<t"'ti~trial. verap.lmil YttSU$ Diuretic
(VERDI) Trial ltaurdt Croup. 8T MM J 1989;199,881-886.
CHAPTER 3
Calcium Channel Blockers (Calcium AntagQ1list5)
•
79
33. Seiler C. et aL long-tenn follow_up of medical versus surgical therapy for hypenrophic
cardiomyopathy a retrospective study.' Am QJlI QJrdW/ 1991;17:634-642.
34. Ihkris CI. el al. Calcium chann~1 block~", versus O1h~r antihype"en.ive lherapies on
progression of NIDDM associated nephropathy. Kidney In/ 1996;50:1641_1650.
35
Bagger W et al. Effect of verapamil in intermiltent claudication. A randomized,
double·blind, placebo·controlled, CrOM-over Study after individual dose·response
assessment. Cin;ularion 1997;95;411_414.
36. Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Trial Jll;,search Croup. The effect of dihiazem
on mo"ality and reinfarction after myocardial infamion. N Engl J MM 1988:319:
385_392.
37. ll1troux P. et aI. Intravenous diltiazem in acute myocardial infarction. Diltiazem as
Adjunctive Therapy to Activase (DATA) uiaL I Am CoIl u."Jic/1998;32:620-628.
38. Boden WE, et aL Incomplete Infarction Trial of European
~alCh Collaborators
Evaluating Prognosis Post-Thrombol)"'is (li'ITERCEPT Trial). Diltiazem in anUe
myocardial infamion Ueated by Ihrombolytic agent<. wnW 2000:355:1751-1756.
39. Matenon B), el aL Single-dntg therapy for hypenension in men. A comparison of
six antihypenensive agents with placebo. The Depanment of Veteran. Affai.. Co-
operative Study Group On Antihypertensive Agents. N Eng/ I Med 1993;328:914-921.
40. Gottdiener IS, et at For lhe VA Cooperative Study Group on Antihypertensi,'l' Agenu.
Effect of single.drug therapy on reduction of left ventricular siu in mild to moderate
hypenernion. Comparison ofsix antihypenernive agent<. Cin;ulation 1998:98:140_148.
41. SChroeder I. et al. Apreliminary studyo(diltiazem in the prevention of coronaryanery
disease in hea" transplant recipients. N Engl J Med 1993;328:164-170.
42 Muller" et at Nifedipine therapy for patients with threatened and acute myocardial
infaraion: a randomiud. double-blind,
pbc~bo-conuolledcomparison. Circulation
1984;69:740-747.
43. Muller J. et al. Nifedipine and conventional therapy (or unstable angina pectoris; a
randomized, double_blind comparison. Circulation 1984;69,728-733
44. Furberg CD, et al. Nifroipine dose-related increase in monality in patient< with coro-
nary hean disease. C;n;ularion 1995:92;1326-1331.
45
Grossman E, et al. Should a moratorium be placW. on sublingual nlfedipine capsules
given for hypertensive emergencies and pseudoemergenries. lAMA. 1996:276:1328_1331.
46. de Champlain J. et al. Different effeas of nifedipine and amlodipine on circulating
catecholamine
levels
in
essential
hypenensive
patient<.
I
Hyperu",.
1998;16:
1357-1369.
47
Heidenreich PA, et a!. Meta.analysis of trial. comparing ~·blod<e.., calcium antago.
nist<. and nitrates (or stable angina.IAMII 1999:281:1927_1936.
48
Pin R, et al. Effect of amlodipine on lhe progression o( atherosclerosis and the OCCUr-
rence of clinical event< Cin;ulation 2000; 102:1503- \510.
49 Simon A, et aL Differential effeas of nifedipine and co·amilozide on lhe progression
of early carotid wall changes. C;m.lation 2001;103:2949_2954.
50. Franklin C, et al. A randomized comparison of nifedipine and sodium nitroprusside
in severe hypenenslon Chest 1986;90,SOO-503.
51. Schneider E. et al. Captopri!. nifedipine and their combination for Iherapy of hyper.
tenslve urgencies. S Afr Mod 11991;80:265-270.
52
NaylerWG. et at The unique binding properties of amlodipine; a long-actingcalcium
antagonist. I Hum Hfpertm5 1991:5 {Suppl 1):55-59
53. Mason RP. Calcium channel bloch... apoptosis and cancer: Is there a biologic rela·
tionship? IACC 1999;34'1857-1866.
54 TOMH Study. Treatment of Mild Hype"ension study (TOMH). Final result<. IAMII
1993;270:713_724.
55. Singh S. l.ong-term double-blind evaluation of amlodipine and nadolol In patient<
with stable exe"ional angina pectoris.
Th~ Investigators Study IS2. Clin u.rdiol
1993:16:54_S8.
56. Davies Rt: et al. Effect of amlodipine atenolol and their combination on myocardial
ischemia during treadmill exercise and ambulatory monitoring. , Am QJII umliol
1995;25:619-62S.
57. Midlbo K, el al. Amlodipine verllUS slow rdease metoprolol in the lreatment o(stable
exenional angina pe<:toris (AMSA). $&and QJrdiwa.sc J 2000:34:475_479.
58. Rinaldi CA. et al. Randomized, double·hlind Cl'OSSO\let study to investigate the
effem of amlodipine and isosOJbide mononitrate on the time course and severiry o(
exercise·inducW. myocardial stunning. C;n;u/"tion 1998;98:749_756.
59. Udelson IF~ et al. Effeas of amlodiplne on exercise tolerance quality of life and left
ventricular function in patient< with heart failure from left ventricular systolic dV!·
function Am Htarl J 2000; 139:503~51O.
60. Agodoa lV, et al. Effect of ramipril vs amlodlpine on renal outCOmes in hypenernive
nephrosclerosis: a randomiud controlled trial. !IIMA 2001;285:2719-2728.
61. Emanudsson 1,1, \'1 al. For the TRAFFIC Study Group. Antianginal effiCACY of the com·
bination of felodipine.metoprolol 101100mg compared with each drug alone in
palients with stable effon·inducro angina p",",ori" a multicenter parallel gmup study
11m Hl!J1rt J 1999; 137:854-862
62. Cohn IN, et al. Effect of the calcium antagoniSI felodipine as supplementary vaso-
dilator therapy in patient< with chronic heart failure treated wilh enalapril (V-HeFf
111 Sludy). Cin;ularion 1997;96;856-863.
63. luo IJ, et al. dinical advisory statement: importance of systolic blood pressure in
older Americans. Hrpi'rte",;on 2000;35:1021_1024
64. Malacco E, et al. Treatment of isolated systolic hypenemion: the SHEU.•tudy results.
Blood Prm 2003;12:160_167.
65. Julius S, et a1. OutCOmes in hypenensive patient< at high cardiovascular risk treated
with regimens based on valsanan or amlodipine: the VAWE randomi",d trial. umcet
2004;363:2022-2031.
4
Diuretics
Lionel H. Opie • Norman M. Kaplan
-Litlle bellefit is /0 be derived from wing large doses of Qral
diuretics to reduce blood pressure.·
CRANSlDN IT AL, 1963'
"Low dose diuretics lire the most effecri~ fim-line treatment for
preventing (l/rdiol/1I5m/aT morbidity and mortalicy (in
hyper/ension).
PsAlY Fr At.• 2003'
Diuretics are agents that alter the physiological renal mechanisms that
form urine in such a way that there is increased flow of urine with
greater excretion ofsodium (natriuresis; Fig. 4.1). Diuretic therapy has
traditionally been the first choice in the treatment of symptomatic
congestive heart failure, now usually in conjunction with aneiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. In hypertension, diuretics con-
tinue to be used as first-line therapy, albeit in much lower doses-a
position supported by recent meta_analyses.'·J
Differing Effects of Diuretics in Heart Failure
and Hypertension
In hean failure, diuretics are given to control pulmonary and periph-
eral symptoms and signs of congestion. Diuretics should rarely be
used as monotherapy, rather being combined with ACE inhibitors and
generally a ~-blocker.· Often the loop diuretics (Fig. 4-2) are used pref-
erentially, for three reasons: (1) the superior fluid clearance for the
same degree of natriuresis (Table 4-1); (2) loop diuretics work even
in the presence of renal impairment that often accompanies severe
hean failure; and (3) there is an increasing diuretic response to
increasing doses, so that they are "high ceiling" diuretics. Yet in mild
hean failure thiazides may initially be preferred, especially when there
is a background of hypertension. In generaL diuretic doses are higher
than those used in hypertension. Besides the induction of renal
sodium and water loss, furosemide given to previously untreated
patients with severe congestive heart failure (ClIF) calls forth two
opposing stimuli. The vasoconstrictory renin-angiotensin system is
stimulated,
and
there are also increased levels of vasodilatory
prostaglandins. lienee, the addition of ACE inhibitors to offset the
renin rise should be beneficial.
In hypertension, to exert an effect, the diuretic must provide enough
natriuresis to shrink fluid volume at least to some extent. Diuretics
may also work as vasodilators and in other ways, Some persistent
volume depletion is required to lower the blood pressure. Therefore,
once daily furosemide is usually inadequate because the initial
sodium loss is quickly reconstituted throughout the remainder of the
day. Thus, a longer acting thiazide-type diuretic is usually chosen for
hypertension.~·~
Benefit/Risk Ratio
The benefit/risk ratio ofdiuretics is high in CI-IF. In hypertension, their
use has been questioned because of certain "wrong way' blood
80
CH,\PTER 4
Diuretics
•
81
NEPHRON FUNCTION
Opie 2004
cr
N"
-
C
~
C
K'
..
",,'"
..,..
{AD"
N,'
pump
",0
(!'OPoI ......~
",0
Collecting
ducts
Figure 4-1 Nephron anatomy and function. (Figure <tl LH Opie, 1005.)
Table 4-1
Urinary Electrolyte CompOSition DUring DIUresis
VoIumo
...
..
(mllmin)
pH
(mmollL)
(mmolll)
cr
HC~-
Co"
Control
,
6.0
50
15
60
,
Variable
Thiazides
3
7.4
150
25
150
25
0
Furosemide
8
6.0
140
'0
155
,
+
Triamterene
3
7.2
130
5
120
15
0
Amiloride
2
7.2
130
5
110
15
0
0 .. decreased; + .. in(rea~.
Modified from Mudge" wirh perminion
biochemical changes. Nonetheless, they retain their primacy as first-
line agents when used in low daily doses, such as 12.5 to 25mg of
hydrochlorothiazide, that reduce total and cardiovascular mortality,
stroke, coronary heart disease, and congestive heart failure.' Higher
doses, 50 to 200 mg. as used in the past, did not reduce coronary heart
disease nor total mortality. 1ne value of diuretics is particularly well
established in certain groups of hypertensive patients-the elderly, the
obese, and blacks-and those already receiving ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). Furthermore, low doses of
diuretics can be given over prolonged periods with minimal changes
in blood lipids, glucose, and potassium. Thus the American Joint
National Committee' and the WHO/ISH Committee
U recommend
that
diuretics
should
be
considered
for
first
choice
in
the
treatment of hypertension not complicated by other conditions
(see Chapter 7).
For practical purposes, the three major groups ofdiuretics are the loop
diuretics, the thiazides, and the potassium-sparing agents. Each type
of diuretic acts at a different site of the nephron (Fig. 4-2), leading to
82
•
4
Loop Diurl!tla
DIURETIC SITES OF ACTION
0,;0 """
\'\~potonic
N,·
",0
Na+pump
Dopam;f16
agonists
(DA,)
f1,.,. "-2 1lw: multiple silt'S of action of diuretic agents from which
follows the principleofsequential nephron block. Acommon maxi~1 com-
bination. using this principle is a loop diuretic plus a thiazide plus a 1("-
sparing agenl_ (FiKUrt C LH ~ 2005.)
me concept of ~qutTltiaI nephron blodlnde. All but the potassium
sparers must be transported to the luminal side; mis process is blocked
by me buildup of organic acids in renal insufficiency so mat progreso
sively larger doses are nttded, Especially miazides lose their potency
as renal function falls.
LOOP DIURmCS
Furosemide
Furosemide (frusemide in
the United Kingdom; lAsh:,
Dryptal,
Frwelic, Frwid) is one of the standard loop diuretics for severe CHF.
[t is a sulfonamide derivative. Furosemide is initial merapy in acute
pulmonary edema and in the pulmonary congestion of left-sided
failure of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). Relief of dyspnea even
before diuresis results from venodilation and preload reduction,'
Pharmacologic Effects and Pharmacoldnetics Loop diuretics including
furosemide inhibit me Nao/K"/2Cr cotransponer concerned wim the
transport of chloride across me lining cells of me ascending limb of
me loop of Henle (Fig. 4-2). This site of action is reached intralumi-
nally, after the drug has been excreted by the proximal tubule. The
effect of the cotransport inhibition is that chloride. sodium, potas-
sium, and hydrogen ions all remain intraluminally and are lost in me
urine with me possible side effects of hyponatremia. hypochloremia.
hypokalemia, and alkalosis. HOwe'W'r, in comparison wim miazides
mere is a relatively grealer urine volume and relatively less loss of
sodium (Table 4-1). For equinatriuret.ic doses. loop diuretics actually
lose less potassium man do thiazides, despite meir image of provok-
ing hypokalemia. The plasma half-life of furosemide is 1.5 hours; me
duration of action is 4 to 6 hours. Diuresis starts wimin 10 to 20
minutes ofan intravenous dose and peaks 1 to 1.5 hours after an oral
CH.\PTER
-4
DrUfl'!'la
•
83
dose. Venodilation reduces the preload in acute LV failure \\;thin 5 to
15 minutes; the mechanism is not w~11 understood. Conversely. there
may follow a reaaive vasoconstriction.
Dose
Infral.'mOU5 fUrosemide is usually staned as a slow 40-mg injection (no
more than 4mg/minute to reduce ototoxicity; give BOmg over 20
minutes IV 1 hour later if needed). When renal function is impaired,
as in elderly patients. higher doses are required, with much higher
doses for renal failure and severe CHF. Oral furosemitk also has a wide
dose range (20 to 240mg/day or even more; 20-, 40-. and BO-mg
tablets in the United States; in Europe. also scored 500-mg tablets). A
shon duration of action (4 to 5 hours) means that frequent doses are
needed when sustained diuresis is required. When two daily doses are
required, they should be given in the early morning and mid-
afternoon to obviate nocturia and to protect against volume deple-
tion. Because ofvariable responses, such as a brisk initial diuresis with
a residual resistant component. the dose regimen must be individu·
alized. For hypertension. furosemide 20mg twice daily is the approxi.
mate equivalent of hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg. In healthy sub;eas.
furosemide causes a greater earlier (0 to 6 hours) absolute loss of
sodium than does hydrochlorothiazide but, because of its shon dura-
tion of action, the total 24-hour sodium loss may be insufficient to
maintain the slight volume contraction that is needed for a sustained
antihypenensive action.' This observation suppons the practice of
giving furosemide twice daily in hypenension. In the presence of
oliguria (not induced by volume depletion), as the glomerular filtra-
tion rate (CFR) drops below 20ml/minute. from 240mg up to
2000 mg of furosemide may be required because of decreasing
luminal excretion. Similar arguments lead to increasing doses offuro-
semide in severe refracl.Ory hetJrt failure.
lncJications Furosemide is frequently the diuretic of choice for .sewre
heart failure for reasons already discussed. Similarly, it is the initial
drug of choice in acute pulmonary edema. After initial intravenous use.
oral furosemide is usually continued as standard diuretic therapy.
sometimes to be replaced by thiazides as the hean failure ameliorates.
In AMI with clinical failure. intravenous furosemide has rapid bene-
ficial hemodynamic effects and is often combined with ACE inhibi-
tion.llln hypertension. twice daily low-dose furosemide can be effective
even as monotherapy or combined with other agents and is increas-
ingly needed as renal function deteriorates.
11 In hypenensive crisis,
intravenous furosemide is used if fluid overload is present. It is widely
believed that in severe nmal failure high dose furosemide increases the
CFR yet the subject is poorly understood.
Contraifldications Anuria, although listed as a contraindication to the
use of furosemide, is sometimes treated (as is oliguria) by furosemide
in the hope of evoking a diuresis; first exclude dehydration and a
history ofhypersensitivity to furosemide or sulfonamides. Furosemide
(like other sulfonamides) may precipitate photosensitive skin erup-
tions or may cause blood dyscrasias. Furosemide should not be used
intravenously when electrolytes cannot be monitored.
Hypokalemia with Furosemide Clearly. much depends on the doses
chosen and the degree of diuresis achieved. A lesser degree of
hypokalemia than expected occurs because (1) the actual potassium
concentration lost per unit volume during the diuresis is low
(Table 4.). and (2) the shon action of furosemide allows for post·
diuresis correction of potassium and magnesium balance. The risk of
hypokalemia is greatest with high-dose furosemide. especially when
given intravenously. and at the stan of myocardial infarction when
hypokalemia with risk of arrhythmias is common even in the absence
84
•
4
Loop Diuretics
of diuretic therapy. Carefully regulated imravenous potassium sup-
plements may be required in these circumstances. In hean failure..
digitalis toxicity may be precipitated by overdiuresis and hypokalemia.
Other Side Effects The chief side effects, in addition to hypokalemia, are
hypovolemia and hyperuricemia. Hypovolemia can be lessened by a low
staning initial dose (20 to 40mg); if hypovolemia occurs, prerenal
azotemia may develop (monitor blood urea). Afew patiems on high-
dose furosemide have developed severe hyperosmolar nonketotic
hyperglycemic states. Atherogenic blood lipid changes, similar to those
found with thiazides. may also be found with loop diuretics, although
this is not so well documented. Occasionally, gout or diabetes may be
precipitated. It is not clear whether furosemide causes fewer metabolic
side effects than convemional thiazides. First principles suggest that
minimizing hypokalemia should lessen the risk of glucose intoler-
ance. Reversible dose-related ofOto.riciry (electrolyte disturbances ofthe
endolymphatic system) can be avoided by infusing furosemide at rates
not greater than 4 mg/minute and keeping the oral dose below
1000 mg daily. Urinary menrion may result from vigorous diuresis in
the: elderly. In nursing mothers, furosemide is excreted in the milk.
Loss of Diuretic Potency Braking is the phenomenon whereby after the
first dose, there is a decrease in the diuretic response caused by renin·
angiotensin activation and prevented by restoring the diuretic-induced
loss of blood volume. 'l Long-term tolerance refers to increased reab·
sorption ofsodium associated with hypenrophy of the distal nephron
segments (see section on Diuretic Resistance). 'llIe mechanism may
be increased growth of the nephron cells induced by increased
aldosterone 9
Drug Interactions with Furosemide Cotherapy with certain aminogl)'CO$ides
can precipitate ototoxicity. Probenecid may imerfere with the effects of
thiazides or loop diuretics by blocking their secretion into the urine
of the proximal tubule Indomerhadn and other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) lessen the renal response to loop
diuretics, presumably by interfering with fonnation of vasodilatory
prostaglandins. U High doses offurosemide may competitively inhibit
the excretion of saliqlaus to predispose to salicylate poisoning with
tinnitus. Sreroid or adrenoconicotropic hormone (ACIl-I) therapy may
predispose to hypokalemia. Furosemide.. unlike thiazides, does not
decrease renal excretion oflirhium, so rhat lithium toxicity is not a risk.
Loop diuretics do not alrer blood digoxin levels, nor do they interact
with warfarin.
Bumetanide
The site ofaaion ofbumetanide (Burnu, Burinu) and its effects (and
side effects) are very similar to those of furosemide (Table 4-2). The
onset ofdiuresis is within 30 minutes, with a peak at 75 to 90 minutes.
and a total duration of action of 270 minutes. In practice.. as with
furosemide. low-dose therapy need not occasion undue concern
regarding hypokalemia as a possible side effeer. while higher doses
can cause considerable electrolyte disturbances. induding hypo.
kalemia. Again, as in the case of furosemide. a combined diuretic
effect is obtained by addition of a thiazide diuretic.
lkJsageandCJinicalUses In CHF, the usual oral dose is 0.5 to 2 mg. with
1mg bumetanide being equal to 40mg of furosemide. In acute pul-
monary edema, a single dose of 1 to 3 mg can be effective; usually it
is given intravenously over 1 to 2 minutes, and the dose can be
repeated at 2- to 3·hour intervals to a maximum of lOmg daily. In
renal
edema, the effects of bumetanide are similar to those of
furosemide In the United States. bumetanide is not approved for
hypenension.
Table 4-2
CH.",PTER
-l
DtuTeria
•
85
loop Diuretics; Doses and Kinetics
Drug
Furosemide (USA)
Frusernide (UK)
'" Lasix
2. Bumetanide
'" Burnex (USA)
'" Burinex (UK)
3. Torsemide
'" Demadex (USA)
D,,,
10-40 mg oral. 2'
for BP; 20-80 rng
2-3, for CHF; Up
to 250-2000mg
oral or IV
0.5-2 rng oral 1-2x
daily for CHF; 5mg
oral or IV for
oliguria {not
licensed for BP}
5-lOmgorall'
daily for BP; 10-
20mgorall'
daily or IV for CHF
(up to 200mg daily)
Pharmacokinetics
Diuresis within 10-
20rnin
Peak diuresis at 1.5 h
Total duration of aaion
4-5h
Renal excretion
Peak diuresis at 75-
90min
Total duration ofaaion
4-5h
Renal excretion
Diuresis within 10min
of IV dose
Peak diuresis at 60min
Oral peak effeC! at
1-2h
Oral duration of
diuresis 6-8 h
BP
blood pressull' control; CIIF. conge$tive Ilean failure.
Side Effects and Cautions Side effects associated with bumetanide are
similar to those of furosemide; ototoxicity may be lower and renal
toxicity greater. The combination with other potentially nephrotoxic
drugs. such as aminoglycosides, must be avoided. In patients with
renal failure. high doses have caused myalgia. so that the dose should
not exceed 4 mg/day when the GFR is below 5 mlfminute. Patients
allergic to sulfonamides may also be hypersensitive to bumetanide. In
pregnancy. the risk is similar to that of furosemide (category C).
Summary Most clinicians will continue to use the agent they know best
(i.e.. furosemide). Because furosemide is widely available in generic
form. its COSt is likely to be less than that of bumetanide.
Torsemide
This loop diuretic (Demadex) has a longer duration of action than
furosemide (Table 4-2). Although initial studies suggested that a sub-
diuretic daily dose of 2.5 mg was antihypertensive and free ofchanges
in plasma potassium or glucose, in the United States the only doses
registered for antihypertensive efficacy are 5 to 10 mg daily. These
natriuretic doses decrease plasma potassium, increase uric acid. and
transiently increase serum cholesterol, while the lO-mg dose mildly
increases plasma glucose (package insen). lbe information avail-
able is not enough to state whether torsemide or other loop diuretics
cause less metabolic disturbances than do thiazides in equihypo-
tensive doses.
In heart failure, an intravenous dose of torsemide 10 to 20 mg initiates
a diuresis within 10 minutes that peaks within the first hour. Similar
oral doses (high availability) give an onset of diuresis within 1 hour
and a peak effect within 1 to 2 hours. and a total duration of action
of 6 to 8 hours. Torsemide 10 mg gives about the same degree of
natriuresis as does furosemide 40 mg. 13, In these doses and in a 12-
month open-label cohon study. torsemide was associated with a
better functional class, less evident potassium loss and a lower
monality than furosemide. ll' Properly designed long-tenn outcome
studies afe required to confirm this proposed superiority of torsemide.
In renal failure, as in the case of other loop diuretics, the renal excre-
tion of the drug falls, as does the renal function. Yet the plasma
86
•
4
Loop Diuretics
half-life torsemide is unaltered, probably because hepatic clearance
increases. In h4lafic cirrhosis, the dose is 5 to IOmg daily, titrated
upwards to a maximum of 200 mg daily. Torsemide is given with an
aldosterone antagonist. In pregrwncy, torsemide may be relatively safe
(category Bversus category C for furosemide).
Regarding meUlbolic side eff«u, the FDA-approved package insert for
torsemide claims that antihypertensive doses (5 to 10mg) reduce
plasma potassium only by 0.\ mEqfL after 6 weeks. yet the higher
dose increases plasma glucose by 5.5mgldl (0.3mmoI/L) after
6 weeks with a further increase of 1.8 mgldl during the subsequent
year. Other side effects. cautions, and contraindications are similar to
those of furosemide.
Class Sid. Effects of Loop Diuretics
Sulfonamide Sensitivity Ethacrynic acid (Edecrin)
is the only non·
sulfonamide diuretic and is used only in patients allergic to other
diuretics. It closely resembles furosemide in dose (25- and 50-mg
tablet), duration of diuresis, and side effects (except for more
ototoxicity). If elhacrynic acid is not available for a sulfonamide·
sensitive patient, a gradual challenge with furosemide or, even better,
torsemide may overcome sensitivity."
Metabolic Ctlanges Loop diuretics all produce a powerful and rapid
natriuresis and can be used in the therapy of acute and chronic heart
failure. They are also used for hepatic cirrhosis and hypertension. The
important question is whether or not the loop diuretics. like the thia-
zides. can induce adverse metabolic changes. such as an increased
plasma cholesterol, glucose. and uric acid. The answer is yes.
Hypokalemia This may cause vague symptoms such as fatigue and list-
lessness, besides electrocardiographic and rhythm abnonnalities. In
the doses used for mild hypertension (furosemide 20mg twice daily,
torsemide 5 to 10mg), hypokalemia is limited and possibly less than
with hydrochlorothiazide 25 to 50mg daily. Nonetheless, it does
make sense to combine a loop diuretic with a potassium-retaining
agent or with an ACE inhibitor or ARBs unless these are contra-
indicated. In hean failure, hypokalemia is more likely; similar
cautions apply.
HyperglycemIa Diuretic-induced glucose intolerance is likel~ related to
hypokalemia, and/or to total body potassium depletion. 5 An inter-
esting proposal is that the transient postprandial fall of potassium
impairs the effect of insulin at that time and hence leads to intermit-
tent hyperglycemia.'6 Although there are no large prospective studies
on the effects of loop diuretics on insulin insensitivity or glucose
toletance in hypenensive patients, it is dearly prudent to avoid
hypokalemia and to monitor both serum potassium and blood
glucose values.
BkxxJUpid ProfilB Loop diuretics may cause blood lipid changes similar
to thiazides. For torsemide, the package insen indicates that shon-
tenn treatment with doses of 5 to 20 mg daily increased plasma cho-
lesterol by only 4 to 8mgldL (0.1 to O.2mmol/L) and that the changes
subsided during chronic therapy over 1 year, Likewise. triglycerides
rose and then reverted to nonnal. These transient changes are rather
similar to the situation described with low-dose thiazides.
Metabolic Changes wffh Loop Diuretk:s--Recommendations The overall evi·
dence suggests that loop diuretics. like the thiazides. can cause dose-
related metabolic disturbances. High doses used for hean failure
might therefore pose problems. It makes sense to take special pre-
cautions against the hypokalemia of high-dose loop diuretics because
CHAPTER 4
Diuretics
•
87
of the link between imennittem falls in plasma potassium and hyper-
glycemia. A sensible stan is addition of an ACE inhibitor or ARB.
THIAZIDE DIURmCS
Thiazide diuretics (Table 4-3) remain the most widely recommended
first-line therapy for
hypertension,~·6 although challenged by other
agents such as ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers,
~~
blockers, and calcium channel blockers. Thiazides are also standard
therapy for chronic CHF, when edema is modest, either alone or in
combination with loop diuretics.
Pharmacologic Action and Pharmacokinetics Thiazide diuretics act
to
inhibit the reabsorption of sodium and chloride in the more distal
part of the nephron (Fig. 4-2). This cotransponer is insensitive to the
loop diuretics. More sodium reaches the distal tubules to stimulate
the exchange with potassium, particularly in the presence of an acti-
vated
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Thiazides
may also
increase the active excretion of potassium in the distal renal tubule.
Thiazides are rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract to
produce a diuresis within I to 2 hours, which lasts for 16 to 24 hours
in the case of the prototype thiazide. hydrochlorothiazide. 11 Some
major differences from the loop diuretics are (1) the longer duration
of action; (2) the different site of action (Fig. 4-2); (3) the fact that
thiazides are low ceiling diuretics because the maximal response is
reached at a relatively low dosage (Fig.
4~3); and (4) the much
decreased capacity of thiazides to work in the presence of renal failure
(serum creatinine >2.0mgJdL or about 180~mol/L;GFR below 15 to
20ml/min).!> The fact that thiazides, loop diuretics, and potassium-
sparing agents all act at differem tubular sites explains their additive
effects (sequenrial nephron block).
Thiazide lkJses and Indications In hypertension, diuretics are regaining
their primacy as the initial agent of choice, especially in the elderly
LOW VS HIGH CEILING OIURETICS
Opie 2004
Low-dose thiazidesI
Dose for
mildCHF
HI h-cellln
Loop diuretics
K+ -sparin
Diuretics
Low-eelllng
-----
---
t
-- Dose------"
Figure 4-3 The differences between high- and low.ceiling diuretics,
and the doses of each group used for various indications. The lowest
doses are used for hypertension. (Figure Cl LH Opie, 2005.)
00
00
Table 4-3
Thiazide Diuretics: Doses and puration of Action
').
.
. '.'.
."
Hydro hlorothiazide
Hydroflum thazide
Chlorth Jidone
M t lazo
B ndrofluazide = bendroflumetbiazide
P lythiazide
B nthiazide
Chlorothiazide
Cydothiazide
Triehlormethiazide
Cyclopenthiazide
Indapamide
Xipamide
Trade Name (UK-Europe)
Esidrex HydroSaluric
Hydrenox
Hygroton
Metenix; Diulo
Aprinox; Centyl; Urizide
Salurie
Fluitran (not in UK)
Navidrex
Natrilix
Diurexan
Trade Name (USA)
Hydr
Salur n;
Hygrot n
Zaroxolyn; Diu)
Natur tin
Renese
Aquatag; Exna
Diuril
Anhydron
Metahydrin; Naqua
Lazol
Dose
12.5-25 mg; 12.5 mg preferred (BP); 25-100 mg (CHF)
12.5-25mg; 12.5mg preferred (BP); 25-200mg (CHF)
12. -50mg; 12.5-15 preferred (BP)
2.1::-5 mg (BP) 5-20mg (CHF)
1.25-2.5mg; 1.25 prefened (BP); Wmg (CHF)
1*-2mg (BP)
50*-200mg
250*-1000 mg
1*-2mg
1*-4mg
0.12S-0.25mg (0.125mg preferred, BP)
1.25-2.5 mg; 1.25 mg preferred (BP); 2.5-5 mg (CHF)
1O-20mg (Smg preferred for BP)
Duration of Action (h)
16-24
12-24
48-72
24
12-18
24-48
12-18
6-12
18-24
24
6-12
24
6-12
Note: The dose given here for antihypertensive therapy are generally lower than those recommended by the manufacturers (exception: Lozol 1.25 mg is recommended).
*Lowest effective antihypertensive dose not known, may prefer to use other agents for BP control.
BP =:; use for blood-pr ssure-lowering; CHf =:; use for congestive heart failure.
CHAPTER 4
Diuretics
•
89
and in black patients. By contrast, in younger whites (mean age
51 years) only one third responded to escalating doses of hydrochloro-
thiazide over 1 year. 18 The thiazide doses generally used have been
too high. Lower doses with fewer biochemical alterations provide
full antihypertensive as shown in several large trials. In the SHEP
study, chlorthalidone 12.5mg was initially used, and after 5 years
30% of the subjects were still on this lower dose; in 16% the dose
was doubled. '9 OveralL documented biochemical changes were
small, induding a O.3mmol/l fall in potassium, a rise in serum
uric acid, and small increases in serum cholesterol and in glucose
(1.7% more new diabetes than in placebo). These changes found after
I year of treatment do not necessarily predict changes over a longer
period. Regarding hydrochlorothiazide, exceeding 25 mg daily clearly
creates metabolic problems,1<l·21 whereas increasing the dose from
12.5 to 25 mg may give only a borderline better reduction of blood
pressure.21 In the case of cyclopenthiazide, widely used in the United
Kingdom, only 0.125 mg (the approximate equivalent ofhydrochloro-
thiazide 8mg) gives as much antihypertensive effect as O.5mg daily
with fewer metabolic side effects. Higher doses of all these agents are
marginally more effective, with greater risks ofundesirable side effects
(Table 4-4). In the case of bendrofluazide, a lower dose (1.25mg
daily) causes less metabolic side effects and no effects on blood
glucose or insulin when compared with the conventional5~mgdose!J
The re.sponse rare in hypertension to thiazide monotherapy is variable
and may be disappointing. being only about 45% in one trial with
12.5 to 25 mg chlorthalidone daily.u The response depends in part on
the age and race of the patient and probably also on the sodium
intake. A common error in diuretic therapy is ·premature Slep lherapy·
(i.e., going on to the next step too soon). With hydrochlorothiazide,
the full antihypertensive effect of low-dose 12.5 mg daily may take
up to 6 weeks. Increasing the dose of hydrochlorothiazide up to a
maximum of 100mg daily may improve the response, but the risk of
metabolic side effects is unacceptably high, so that combination
therapy, for example, with an ACE inhibitor or ARB becomes prefer-
able rather than increasing the dose beyond 25 mg daily'? or even
beyond 12.5mg daily.21 In CHF, higher doses are justified (50 to
100mg hydrochlorothiazide daily are probably ceiling doses), while
watching the serum potassium. Considerable advantage can result
from combining a loop diuretic with a thiazide. '1 Specifically, the thia-
zides block the nephron sites at which hypertrophy occurs during
long-term loop diuretic therapy (see section on Diuretic Resistance).
In the United States, hydrochlorothiazide is the most popular thiazide
but
chlorthalidone
was
chosen
for
the
two
most
important
Table 4-4
Side Effects of DIUretic Therapy for Hypertension
causing Withdrawal of Therapy
Impaired glucose tolerance
Gout
Impotence
Nausea, dizziness, or headache
Blood Biochemical Changes
Potassium: hypokalemia
Glucose: hyperglycemia
Uric acid: hyperuricemia
Urea. creatinine: prerenal fall in GFR
Upid profile: rise in serum cholesterol, triglyceride and ratio
apolipoprotein Bto A;, fall in HDL-cholesterol
All dftCU a", minimiud by appropriately lower doses such as hydrochlorOlhiazide
t2.5 mg daily. See also referellces ill previow edi'ioll.
trials-SJ-IEP and
ALLHAT.~· Chlonhalidone lasts longer, 1- and no
more than 15mg should be used. Hydrochlorthiazide 12.5mg is a
good alternative (see Chapter 7, p. 194).
Contraindications These include severe renal insufficiency, hypokalemia,
ventricular arrhythmias, and cotherapy with proarrhythmic drugs. In
hypokalemia (including early AMI), thiazide diuretics may precipitate
arrhythmias. Relative contraindications include pregnancy hyper-
tension, because of the risk of a decreased blood volume; moreover,
thiazides can cross the placental barrier with risk of neonatal jaun-
dice. In mild renal impairment, the GFR may fall further as thiazides
decrease the blood volume.
Side Effects Besides the ·wrong way· metabolic side effects seen with
higher doses (Table 4-4) such as hypokalemia, hyponatremia, increased
insulin resistance, and increased blood triglyceride and cholesterol
levels, thiazide diuretics rarely cause sulfonamide-type immune side
effects including intrahepatic jaundice, pancreatitis, blood dyscrasias,
angiitis, pneumonitis, and interstitial nephritis. Impotence is newly
emphasized, seen more commonly than with any other class of drugs
in the TOMH study.~5
Thiazide Drug Interactions Steroids may cause salt retention to antagonize
the action of thiazide diuretics. [tldomethaein and other NSAlDs blunt
the response to thiazide diuretics. U AntiarrhythmiC5 that prolong the
QT-intervaL such as class IA or III agents including sotalol, may
precipitate lorsades de pointes in the presence of diuretic-induced
hypokalemia. The nephrotoxic effew of certain antibiOliC5, such as the
aminoglycosides, may be pOfentiated by diuretics. Probenecid (for the
therapy ofgout) and lithium (for mania) may block thiazide effects by
interfering with thiazide excretion into the urine. Thiazide diuretics
also interact with lithium by impairing renal clearance with risk of
lithium toxicity.
OTHER THIAZIDE-UKE AGENTS
Metalaxone (Zaroloxyn, Diu/a, Metenix) is a powerful diuretic with a
quinazoline structure yet falling within the overall thiazide family.
There may be an additional site of action beyond that of the standard
thia-zides. An important advantage of metolazone is efficacy even
despite reduced renal functioll. There are, however, no strict studies com-
paring metolazone with standard thiazides in renal impainnent. The
duration of action is up to 24 hours The standard dose is 5 to 20 mg
once daily for CHF or renal edema and 2.5 to 5mg for hypertension.
In combination with furosemide, metolazone may provoke a pro-
found diuresis, with the risk ofexcessive volume and potassium deple-
tion. Nonetheless, metolazone may be added to furosemide with care,
especially in patients with renal as well as cardiac failure. The side
effect profile of metolazone closely resembles that of the ordinary
thiazides. Metolazone 1.25 to 10 mg once daily was given in titrated
doses to 17 patients with severe CHr, almost all ofwhom were already
on furosemide, captopril, and digoxin; most responded by a brisk
diuresis within 48 to 72
hours.~· Consequently, metolazone is often
used in addition to a prior combination of a loop diuretic, a thiazide,
and aldosterone inhibitor in patients with chronic heart failure and
resistant peripheral edema.
Mykrox is a rapidly acting formulation of metolazone with high
bioavailability, registered for use in hypertension only in a dose of 0.5
to 1mg once daily. The maximum antihypertensive effect is reached
within 2 weeks.
Irldapamide (1.AJzol, Natrilix) is a thiazide-like diuretic albeit with a
different indoline structure. It has two properties beyond diuresis.
First, there is added vasodilation.v A second unusual propeny is a
CHAPTER 4
Diuretics.
91
high concentration class I and III antiarrhythmic effect.'" If this were
also clinically relevant, it could protect from ventricular arrhythmias,
while also carrying a theoretical risk of torsades de pointes in the pres-
ence of hypokalemia or cotherapy with cenain other antiarrhythmics
(see Fig. 8-8). [ndapamide has a terminal half-life of 14 to 16 hours,
and effectively lowers the blood pressure over 24 hours. The initial
dose is 1.25 mg once daily for 4 weeks, then if needed 2.5 mg dailr..
Indapamide appears to be more lipid neutral than other thiazides "
but seems equally likely to cause other metabolic problems such as
hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, or hyperuricemia. With a reduced but
still antihypertensive dose of only 0.625 to 1.25 mg combined with
the ACE inhibitor perindopril 2-4 mg, the serum potassium fell by
only 0.11 mmol/L over I year, while the blood glucose was unchanged
from placebo. IQ Regarding regression of LV hypertrophy, indapamide was
better than enalapril in the LIVE study (lVH with Indapamide Versus
Enalapril).31 [n cardiac edema, higher doses such as 2.5 to 5 mg give a
diuresis. However, the drug has little advantage over other well-tried
diuretics, although approved for this purpose. There are no strict com-
parisons with low-dose thiazides concerning effects on glucose toler-
ance. In general, its side effect profile resembles that of the thiazides,
including the low risk of sulfonamide sensitivity reactions. In Europe,
a new sustained-release preparation (1.5mg) gives blood pressure
reduction equal to that of 2.5 mg indapamide, yet the incidence of
hypokalemia <3.4 mmol/L is more than 50% lower.32
METABOUC AND OTHER SIDE EFFECTS OF THIAZIOES
Many side effects of thiazides are similar to those of the loop
diuretics: electrolyte disturbances,
including hypokalemia, hypo-
natremia, and hyperuricemia; the precipitation of gout and diabetes;
a decreased blood volume; and alkalosis. Atherogenic blood lipid
changes and especially impotence have recently been emphasized.
Hyponatremia may sometimes occur in the elderly, even with low
diuretic doses. Most side effects are dose dependent. Doses as low
as 6.25 mg of hydrochlorothiazide potentiate the efficacy of other
drugs such as ~_blockers)J or ACE inhibitors with no obvious adverse
effects,
Hypokalemia As in the case of loop diuretics, hypokalemia is probably
an over-feared complication, especially when low doses of thiazides
are used." Many physicians remain impressed by the risk of fall in
plasma potassium that may become covert only when dietary potas-
sium decreases or intercurrent diarrhea develops, hence the frequent
choice of combination of thiazides with the potassium-retaining
agents including the ACE inhibitors and ARBs, This choice in turn
brings about the alternative but lesser risk that some patients will
develop hyperllalemia, especially in the presence of renal impairment
and the concomitant use of ACE inhibitors.
VentricularArrhythmias Diuretic-induced hypokalemia can contribute to
torsades de pointes and hence to sudden death, especially when there
is cotherapy with agents prolonging the QT-interval (see Fig. 8-4). The
proarrhythmic risk seems much more serious in patients with pre-
existing clinical coronary disease or heart failure. Of importance, in
the SaLVO study on heart failure, the baseline use of a non-
potassium-retaining diuretic was associated with an increased risk
of arrhythmic death compared with a potassium-retaining diuretic.)~
In mild to moderate hypenension, the degree of hypokalemia evoked
by low-dose thia-zides seldom matters.
Therapeutic Strategies to Avoid Hypokalemia Common sense says that
in patients with a higher risk of arrhythmias, as in ischemic heart
disease, heart failure on digoxin, or hypertension with LV hypertro-
phy, a potassium- and magnesium-sparing diuretic should be part of
92
•
4
Mewbolic and Other Side Effects of Thiazides
the therapy unless contraindicated by renal failure or by cotherapy
with an ACE inhibitor or ARB. A potassium sparer may be better than
potassium supplementation, especially because the supplements do
not avoid hypomagnesemia; yet these issues are not completely
resolved. Of note, several antihypenensive combination diuretic
tablets contain too much thiazide (see Table 7-5).
Hypomagnesemia Conventional doses of diuretics rarely cause magne-
sium deficiency,J6 but hypomagnesemia, like hypokalemia, is blamed
for arrhythmias of QT prolongation during diuretic therapy. Animal
data suggest that hypomagnesemia can be prevented by the addition
ofa potassium-retaining component such as amiloride to the thiazide
diuretic.
Diabetogenic Effects The thiazides are more likely to provoke diabetes
if combined with a
~_blocker.37-<1 ·Chis risk presumably depends on
the thiazide dose and possibly on the type of
~-blocker, in that
vasodilators such as carvedilol may be exceptions. Patients with a
familial tendency to diabetes or those with the metabolic syndrome
are probably more prone to the diabetogenic side effects, so that thia-
zides should be avoided or be given only in low doses, such as
hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg daily or chlonhalidone 15 mg daily. In
addition, plasma potassium and glucose should be monitored. The
"transition
W dose of hydrochlorothiazide from low-dose benefit to
high-dose precipitation of hyperglycemia and diabetes is not clearly
defined, but lower than previously thought. Hydrochlorothiazide
doses exceedin§ 25 mg daily may precipitate glucose intolerance~ or
frank diabetes.
Common sense but no good trial data suggest that
the lowest effective dose of hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg) should be
used with the expectation that a significam proponion of the anti-
hypenensive effect should be maintained without impairin~ glucose
tolerance as found in the case of low-dose bendrofluazide.1 There is
no evidence that changing from a thiazide to a loop diuretic improves
glucose tolerance.
Urate Excretion and Gout Most diuretics decrease urate excretion with the
risk of increasing blood uric acid, causing gout in those predisposed;
thus a personal or family histOly of gout further requires that only
low-dose diuretics should be used. Cotherapy with losartan lessens the
rise in uric acid. 41 When allopurinol is given for gout, or when the blood
urate is high with a family history of gout, it must be remembered
that the standard dose of300 mg daily is for a nonnal creatinine clear-
ance. With a clearance of only 40ml/minute, the allopurinol dose
drops to 150 mg daily and for IOmlfminute down to 100 mg every 2
days. Dose reduction is essential to avoid serious dose-related reactions,
which can be fatal.
Atherogenic Changes in Blood Lipids Thiazides may increase the total
blood cholesterol in a dose-related fashion. B Low-density lipoprotein
(LDL)-cholesterol and triglycerides increase after 4 months with
hydrochlorothiazide (40mg daily mean dose).~ In the TOMH study,
low-dose chlorthalidone (15mg daily) increased cholesterol levels at
1 year but not at 4 years. 4' By contrast, high diuretic doses clearly have
an adverse effect. Thus a high dose of hydrochlorothiazide, above
25 mg daily, unequivocally increases hyperlipidemia compared with
a calcium channel blocker (CCR), both given for several years. 21 But
even if total cholesterol does not change, triglycerides and the ratio of
apolipoprotein Bto A may rise, while high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-
cholesterol may fall. 40 During prolonged thiazide therapy occasional
checks on blood lipid profile are ideal and a lipid-lowering diet is
advisable.
Hypercalcemia Thiazide diuretics tend to retain calcium by increasing
proximal tubular reabsorption (along with sodium). The benefit
CH."PTER
-I
DiurFlics
•
93
is a decreased risk of hip fractures in the elderly.'s Conversely.
especially
in
hyperparathyroid
patients,
hypercalcemia
can
be
precipitated.
Impotenc6 Impotence was unexpectedly found in the large British anti-
hypenension trial that used a high-dose diuretic (Table 4-4). The hope
was that decreasing diuretic doses would avoid this unexplained
problem. Yet in the lOMll study, low-dose chlorthalidone (15mg
daily given over 4 years) was tht" only ont" of several antihypertensive
agents that doubled impotence..~ Pragmatically, sildenafil or similar
drugs should help, provided the patient is not also receiving nitrates.
Ilowever, in hypertension when diuretic therapy may not be essential,
a change of agent may be preferred.
Do Diuretics Cause Renal Cancer?
Overall, regarding cancer, tht" answer is no, as suggested by the large
West of Scotland observational study that lasted up to 15 years; or at
least they caused no more cancer than did
~-blockers or calcium
antagonists.~' According to an observational study, the incidence of
renal cell carcinoma is increased.'7 Although the risk ratio was 1.55.
the absolute incidence of renal cell carcinoma was only 0.065%, not
of great absolute statistical significance. It should be considered that
observational studies such as these usually extend over years, going
back to the era when high- rather than low-dose diuretics were
the rule.
Prevention of Metabolic Side Effects
Reduction in the dose of diuretic is the basic step. In addition, restric-
tion of dietary sodium and additional dietary potassium will reduct"
the frequency of hypokalemia. Combination of a thiazide with a
potassium sparer lessens hypokalemia, as does the addition ofan ACE
inhibitor or ARB. In the treatment ofhypt>rtension, standard doses of
diuretics should not be combined, if possible. with other drugs with
unfavorable effects on blood lipids, such as the ~-blockers. but rather
with ACE inhibitors. ARBs. or CCBs which are lipid neutral (5«
Table 10-2).
POTASSIUM-SPARING AGENTS
Potassium-retaining agents lessen the incidence of serious ventricular
arrhythmias in heart failure lS and in hypertension:'
Ami/or/de and Tr/amterene
Amiloride and triamterene inhibit the $Odium-proton exchanger,
which is concerned with sodium reabsorption in the distal tubules
and collecting tubules. Potassium loss is thereby indirectly decreased
(Table 4-5). Relatively weak diuretics on their own, they are almost
always used in combination with thiazides (Table 4-6). Advantages
are that (I) the loss of sodium is achieved without a major loss of
potassium or magnesium, and (2) there is an action independent of
the activity of aldosterone.. Side effects are few: hyperkalemia (a con-
traindication) and acidosis may seldom occur, and then mostly in
those with renal disease. In particular. the thiazide-related risks ofdia-
betes mellitus and gout have not been reported with these agents.
There are suggestions that amiloride may be preferable to triamterene
(the latter is excreted by the kidneys with risks of renal casts on stan·
dard doses and occasional renal dysfunction); amiloride helps to
retain magnesium and may be of special benefit 10 the small per·
centage of blacks with a genetic defect in the ep;thelial sodium
channel." In practice. compounds with triamterene have been widely
and extensively used without detectable risks.
94
•
4
Potassium-Sparing Agent5
Table 4-5
Potasslum-Spanng Agents (Generally Also Spare Magneslum)
Trade Names
0""
Duration of ActIon
Spironolactone
Aldaaone
25-200mg
3-5 da)'$
Amiloride
Midamor
2.5-20mg
6-24h
Triamterene
Dytac. Dyrenium
25-200mg
8-12h
Eplerenone
Inspra
50-IOOmg
24h
Table 4-6
Some CombinatIOn K -Retaining Diuretics
Combination ""-
Trade Name
(mg)
Daily Oose
Hydrochlorothiazide
Dyazide
25
'/,(upt04in
+ triamterene
50
CHF)
Hydrochlorothiazide
Moduretic
50
II. (up to 2 in
+ amiloride
5
CHF)
Hydrochlorothiazide
Maxzide
50
Y.
+ triamterene
75
Hydrochlorothiazide
Maxzide-25
25
y,
+ triamterene
37.5
Spironolactone
Aldaetazide
25
1-4/day
+ hydrochlorothiazide
25
Furosemide
Frumilo
40
1-2/day
+ amiloride
5
For h~rten$ion, Sole text; low doses aN: generally prderrw and high doses all:
contraindicated.
"Not licensed in the United Slates.
CIIF" congestiVl: hean f3ilure,
Spironolactone and Eplerenone
Spironolactone and eplerenone are both aldosterone antagonislS and
potassium sparers. In patienlS with severe CHES<) spironolactone has
increasingly been chosen for its blocking effects on aldosterone·
mediated damage in the hean, kidneys, and vasculature.51 More
recently, eplerenone, a more specific blocker ofthe aldosterone recep·
tor (thereby preventing the gynecomastia and sexual dysfunctions
seen in up to 10% of those given spironolactone) has been marketed.
Eplerenone provided additional benefit in the large EPHESUS trial of
post-Ml patients by funher reducing monality.~z Eplerenone was aho
as effective as enalapril. 40mg daily, in regresSing left ventricular
hypenrophy and lowering blood pressure,$) so thal it could become
a primary drug for treatment of hypenension, as well as a monality
reducer in CHF and in postinfarct patients, except for its exceedingly
high cost. These aldosterone receptor blockers also have an obvious
place in the treatment of primary aldosteronism and perhaps in the
larger population of patients with resistant hypenension.s4
ACE Inhibitors and ARBs
Because these agents ultimately exen an antialdosterone effect, they
too act as mild potassium·retaining diuretics. Combination therapy
with other potassium retainers should be avoided in the presence of
renal impairment. but can successfully be undenaken with care and
monitoring of serum potassium, as in the RAtES study.so
Hyperkalemia-A Specific Risk Amiloride, triamterene, spironolactone.
and eplerenone may all cause hyperkalemia (serum potassium equal
to or exceeding 5.5 mEqfL), especially in the presence of preexisting
CHAPTER 4
Diuretics
•
95
renal disease, diabetes, in elderly patients during cotherapy with ACE
inhibitors or ARBs, or in patients receiving possible nephrotoxic
agents. Hyperkalemia is treated by drug withdrawal. infusions of
glucose-insulin, and cation-exchange resins such as sodium, poly-
styrene sulfonate,
and
sometimes dialysis.
Intravenous calcium
chloride may be required to avoid ventricular fibrillation.
CDMBINAnDN DIURETICS
Besides the added diuresis achieved by addition ofone class ofdiuretic
to another, the fear of hypokalemia has increased the use of
potassium-retaining agents and diuretic combinations (Table 4-6),
such as Dyazide, Maxzide, Moduretic, and Aldacwzide. For heart failure,
a standard combination daily therapy might be one to two tablets of
Moduretic (hydrochlorothiazide 50 mg. amiloride 5 mg), or two to
four tablets of Dyazide (hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg, triamterene
50 mg), or one to two tablets of Maxzide (hydrochlorothiazide 50 mg.
triamterene 75mg). When used for hypertension, special attention must
be given to the thiazide dose (25 mg hydrochlorothiazide in Dyazide;
50mg in Moduretic; while Maxzide has both 25 mgand 50 mg), where
the initial aim is only 12.5 mg hydrochlorothiazide. A potassium-
retaining furosemide combination is available and much used in
Europe (Frumil, furosemide 40mg, amiloride 5 mg). A logical combi-
nation is that of an ACE inhibitor or ARB with low-dose thiazide, for
example, low-dose perindopril with low-dose indapamide.30 Thiazide
diuretics increase renin levels and ACE inhibitors or ARBs decrease the
metabolic side effects of thiazides (see Chapter 5).
MINOR DIURETICS
Carbonic anhydrase irrhibiwrs such as acetazolamide (Diamox) are
weak diuretics. They decrease the secretion of hydrogen ions by the
proximal renal tubule, with increased loss of bicarbonate and hence
ofsodium. These agents, seldom used as primal)' diuretics, have found
a place in the therapy of glaucoma because carbonic anhydrase plays
a role in the secretion of aqueous humor in the ciliaI)' processes of
the eye. In salicylale poisoning, the alkalinizing effect ofcarbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors increases the renal excretion of lipid-soluble weak
organic acids.
Caldum channel blockers of the dihydropyridine group have a direct
diuretic effect that contributes to the long-term antihypenensive
effect. For example, nifedipine increases urine volume and sodium
excretion and may inhibit aldosterone release by angiotensin.
Dopamine has a diuretic action apan from the improvement in cardiac
function and indirect diuresis that it induces. The mechanism of the
diuresis, found only in conditions of fluid retention, appears to
involve DA,-receptors on the renal tubular cells where dopamine
stimulation opposes the effects of antidiuretic hormone.
ArAdenosine receptor antagonist5, another new approach to diuresis,
increase urine flow and natriuresis. They may act by afferent anerio-
lar dilation, thereby increasing glomerular filtration.ss
POTASSIUM SUPPLEMENTS
In the treatment of heart failure, the routine practice in many centers
ofgiving potassium supplements with loop diuretics is usually unnec-
essal)' and does not appear to protect from the adverse effects of
non-K-sparing diuretics. Supplements lead to extra cost and loss of
compliance. Rather, addition of low-dose potassium-retaining agents
is usually better (Table 4-5) and can often be accompanied by a lower
dose of the loop diuretic. Even high doses of furosemide may not
automatically require potassium replacement because such doses are
96
•
4
Spocinl Diuretic Problem5
usually gi~ in the presence of renal impairment or severe CHF when
renal potassium handling may be abnormal. Clearly potassium levels
need periodic checking during therapy with all diuretics. A high-
potassium. low-salt diet is advised and can be simply and inexpen-
sively achieved by choosing fresh rather than processed foods and by
the use ofsalt substitutes. Sometimes, despite all reasonable care, prob-
lematic hypokalemia develops, especially after prolonged diuretic
therapy or in the presence of diarrhea or alkalosis. lben a potassium
supplement may become necessary. Persistent hypokalemia in hyper-
tension merits investigation for primary aldosteronism.
Potassium chloride in liquid form is theoretically best because (I)
coadministration of chloride is required to correct fully potassium
deficiency in hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis'lli; (2) slow-release
tabletS may cause gastrointestinal (GI) ulceration, which liquid KCI
does not. 5' The dose is variable. At least 20mEq daily are required to
avoid potassium depletion and 60 to IOOmEq are required to treat
potassium depletion. Absorption is rapid and bioavailability good. To
help avoid the frequent GI irritation, liquid KCI needs dilution in
water or another liquid and titration against the patient's acceptabil-
ity. KCI may also be given in some effervescent preparations. Slow-
release potassium chlmide wax-matrix tab/elS (Slow-K. each with 8mEq
or 600mg KCl; K1ouix. K-Tab, and Ten-K each contain 10mEq KCl;
Kaon-Cl.. 6.7 or 10mEq KCl) are widely used and well tolerated.
Nonetheless, the United States package insert cautions against the use
unless liquid or effervescent potassium preparations are not tolerated.
To avoid esophageal ulceration, tablets should be taken upright or
sitting. with a meal or beverage, and anticholinergic therapy should
be avoided. Microencnpslilllled KCI (Micro-K. Extencaps, 8 mEq KCI or
lOmEq KCI) may reduce GI ulceration to only 1 per 100,000 patient
years. Nonetheless, high doses of Micro-K may cause GI ulcers, espe-
cially during anticholinergic therapy.
£ffervesum preparariulU lessen the risk of GI ulceration and those
with KCl indude K1or-Con EF (25 mEq of K per tablet).
£Xtend~
release prepararicms (e.g., K-Tab, lOmEq K per tablet) may be used if
effervescent tablets are nOI tolerated, but there is a bold package insert
warning against GI ulcerations. GI intolerance frequently limits the
use of these agents. which are best given with liquid meals and in
relatively small doses. Porassium g/ucoruJre (with citrate), Bi-K 20mEq,
or Twin-K tends to minimize the Gl irrilative effects of the efferves-
cent preparations.
Recommendations Diet is the simplest. with high-potassium
low-
sodium intake achieved by consuming fresh foods and using salt sub-
stitutes. When K'" supplements become essential. KCI is preferred. The
best preparation will be one well tolerated by the patient and that is
inexpensive. No comprehensive adequately controlled studies of the
relative efficacy of the various KCI preparations in dinical settings are
available.
SPECIAL DIUREnC PRDBUMS
OlferdiurtJsis
During therapy ofedematous states, overvigorous diuresis is common
and may reduce intravascular volume and ventrirular filling so that
the cardiac output drops and tissues become underperfused. The
renin-angiotensin axis is further activated. Probably many patients are
protected against the extremely effective potent diuretics by poor com·
pliance. Overdiuresis is most frequently seen during hospital admis-
sions when a rigid policy of regular administration of diuretics is
carried OUI. Symptoms include fatigue and listlessness. Sometimes the
addition of ACE inhibitors or ARBs to diuretics enhances the risk of
overdiuresis.
CHAPTER 4
Diumla
•
97
Fixed diureru:
regimens are largely unsatisfactory in edematous
patients. Often intelligent patients can manage their therapy ~II by
tailoring a flexible diuretic :schedule to rheir own needs. using a simple
bathroom scale. Knowing how to recognize ~al edema and the time
course of maximal effect of their diuretic often allows a patient to
adjust his or her own diuretic dose and administration :schedule 10 fit
in with daily activities. A pmaical approadl is to stabilize the patient
on a combination ofdrugs. and then to allow self·modification ofthe
furosemide dose. within specified limits, and according to body
weight.
Adverse effects due to overdiuresis include (1) those with mild chronic
heart failure overtrealed with potent diuretics; (2) patients requiring
a high filling pressure particularly those with a "restricti'le" patho-
physiology as in restrictive cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy, or constrictive pericarditis: and (3) patients in early phase
AMI, when excess diuresis by potent intravenous diuretics can cause
a pJUSOr response that attenuated by ACE inhibition. II It may ~ nec-
essary to administer cautiously a "fluid challenge" with saline solution
or a colloid preparation while checking the patient's cardiovascular
stalUS. If the resting heart rate falls, renal function improvu. and
blood pressure stabilizes. the ventricular filling pressure has been
reduced too much by ove:rdiuresis.
Oiuretic Res/stance
Diuretic tolerance includes late resistance and early "braking," the
latter occurring even af't.er one dose of a diuretic and resulting from
intravascular fluid contraction.ll Repetitive diuretic administration
leads 10 a leveling off of Ihe diuretic effect. because (in the face of a
shrunken intravascular volume) the part of the tubular system not
affected reacts by reabsorbing more sodium (Fig. 4-4). Such decreased
sodium diuresis is assoc:ialed with hypenrophy of distal nephron
cells, U thought to be the result of aldosterone-induced growth.' Of
therapeutic interesl.. the thiazides block the nephron sites at which the
hypenrophy occurs,.n thereby providing another argument for com-
bined thiazide-loop therapy.lI Additional mechanisms for diuretic
resiSlance are an abnormally low cardiac output in patients with hean
failure; prominent activation of the renin-angiotensin axis: or an elec-
trolyte-induced resistance. Apparent resistance can also develop
during incorrect use of diuretics (Table 4-7), or when there is con-
comitanl therapy with indomethacin or wilh other NSAlDs or with
probenecid. The thiazide diuretics will not work well if the CFR is
below 20 to 30ml/minute: metolazone is an exception (Table 4-7).
When potassium depletion is severe, all diuretics work poorly for
complex reasons.
Is there compliance with dietary salt restriction? Is complete bed rest
required~ Is the optimal agent being used, avoiding thiazide diuretics
(except metolazone), when Ihe CFR is low? Is the optimal dos«: being
usedr Are: there inlerfering drugs orsevere electrolyte or volume imbal-
ances that can be remedied? Has the general cardiovascular SlaluS
httn made optimal by judidous use of unloading or inotropic drugs~
To achin'e diuresis, an ACE inhibitor or ARB may have to be added cau-
tiously to thiazide and/or loop diuretics, or metolazone may have
10 be combined with loop diuretics. all following the principle of
.sequential nephron blockade. Sometimes spironolactone is also
required. Furthermore., inlravenous dopamine may through its action
on DA,.receptors help induce a diuresis acting in pan by increasing
renal blood flow. In outpatients. compliance and dietary salt restric-
tion must be carefully checked. while all unnecessary drugs are elimi-
nated. Sometimes fewer drugs work better than more (here the prime
sinners are potassium supplements, sometimes requiring many daily
tablets frequendy no~ Iaken).
98
•
4
Less Common Uses of Diuretics
DIURETIC RESISTANCE IN CHF
0,;0 """
Angio-II
AJdo
k
Na'
K'
Diuretic
excretion
Deaeased
urine Na+
Flt_r. t-t Diuretic resistance has ~I causes including reduced
renal blood flow and the stimulation of(he renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system. Hypothetically, increased aldosterone (aldo) may promote distal
tubular hypertrophy to reabsorb greater amounu of sodium. For early
"bl1'lking.... nOt shown here. set' text. Angio-II • angiotensin-II. (Figur£ C
m Opit, 2005.)
Hyponatremia
In heart failure, hyponatremia may occur in patients severely ill with
CHF and in some elderly patients who consume large amounts of
water despite an increased total body sodium in heart failure. Pre-
dominant water retention is caused by (I) the inappropriate release
of arginine vasopressin-antidiuretic hormone (see ADH in !'ig. 4-1);
and (2) increased activity ofangiotensin.II." The best treatment seems
to be the combination of furosemide and an ACE inhibitor (see
Chapter 5, p. 124); restriction of water intake is also critical. In hyper.
tenSion, hyponatremia may occur, especially in elderly women receiv-
ing a thiazide dose of 25 mg daily or more.~
l£SS COMMON USES OF DIURET1CS
Less common indications are:
I. lntr.l.ve:nous furosemide in malignant hypertension, especially ifthere
is associated CHF and fluid retention.
2. High-dose furosemide for acuu or chronic renal failure when it is
hoped that the drug may initiate diuresis.
3. In hypercalcemia, high·dose loop diuretics increase urinary excre-
tion of calcium; intravenous furosemide plus saline is used in the
emergency treatment of severe hypercalcemia.
Table 4-7
CHAPTER 4
Diuretics
•
99
Some Causes of Apparent Resistance to Diuretics In Therapy
of Cardiac FaIlure
Incorrect Use I)f Diuretic Agent
Combination of two thiazides or two loop diuretics instead of one of
each rype
Use of thiazides when GFR is low' (exception: metolawne)
Excessive diuretic dose
Poor compliance, especially caused by multiple tabletS of oral 1\
supplements
Electrolyte and/or Valume Imbalance
Hyponatremia, hypokalemia. hypovolemia
Hypomagnesemia may need corrooion to remedy hypokalemia
Poor Renal Perfusion Diuretic-Induced Hypovolemia
Cardiac output too low
Excess hypotension (ACE inhibito~)
Excess Circulating eatecholamines
Frequem in severe CHF
Correct by additional therapy for CHF
Interfering Drugs
Nonsteroidal ami-inflammatory agents inhibit diuresis
Probenedd and lithium inhibit tubular excretion of thiazides and loop
diuretics
'CFR ~ glomerular filuauon ,ale below IS to 20 ml/m;nUle.
4. lniazides for the nephrogenic form ofdiabetes insipidus-the mecha-
nism of aaion is not clear, but there is a diminution in 'free water"
clearance.
5. Thiazide diuretics decrease the urinary calcium output by promot-
ing proximal reabsorption, so that they are used in idiopathic hyper-
calciuria to decrease the formation of renal stones (in contrast, loop
diuretics increase urinary excretion of calcium).
The inhibitory effect of thiazides on urinary calcium loss may explain
why these agents may increase bone mineralization and decrease the
incidence of hip fraaures,61 The latter benefit is another argument for
first-line low-dose diuretic therapy in elderly hypenensive patients.
DIURmcs IN STEP-CARE THERAPY DF CHF
In mild to moderate CHF, diuretics are standard first-line therapy. The
choice ofdiuretic lies between standard thiazide. a K-retainer plus thia-
zide, furosemide. spironolactone and eplerenone. The latter two are
known 10 save lives in severe CHF when added to otherwise standard
therapy.5O,sl Furthermore. a retrospective analysis showed that use of
non-K-retaining diuretics in the SOLVO study was associated with
increased arrhythmic death. 35 By contrast, a K-retainer alone or in
combination with a non-K retainer, gave no such increase in risk of
arrhythmic death. ACE inhibition plus a non-K-retaining diuretic also
did not protect from arrhythmic death. These studies, although retro-
spective and observational, are bound to influence clinicians toward
the preferential use of spironolactone, eplerenone, or combination
diuretics containing K-retainers (Tables 4-5 and 4-6).
Step-care diuretic therapy in symptomatic heart failure (see Fig. 6-2)
with fluid retention is not clearly delineated by adequate trials,
but could be: (I) thiazide diuretics with ACE inhibitors; (1) low-
dose furosemide with ACE inhibitors; (3) thiazides together with
low-dose furosemide with ACE inhibitors; and (4) spironolactone
or eplerenone added to the others, that is, four agents. High-dose
100
•
4
SUm/'M1}'
furosemide is now less used, chiefly for acute heart failure. The current
practice is to add ACE inhibitors or an ARB whenever the patient is
gi~ a diuretic. unless there is a contraindication. ACE inhibition
should offset the deleterious renin-angiotensin activation induced by
diuretics. Modest sodium restriction is advisable throughout. starting
with no added salt, then cutting out obvious sources of salt as in
processed or fast foods, and then going onto salt-frtt bread. Down-
regulation of the salt-sensitive taste buds means that after about 6
weeks of modest sodium restriction, a low-salt diet becomes the
preferred norm.
For severe congesfive heart failure, when congestion and edema are
prominent symptoms, initial therapy is usually with furosemide. espe-
cially when renal perfusion may be impaired. [n severely ill patients
complete bed rest. although old-fashioned, may promote an early
diuresis. The dose of furosemide required in resistant CHF may
be very high (500 to 1500mg daily). Alternatively, the principle
of sequential nephron blockade may be used with a lower dose of
furosemide. and consideration should be given to intermittent
dopamine.
Sequenfinl nqhnm blockade is the principle whefeby addition of a
diuretic acting at a different site. such as a thiazide to a loop diuretic.
is logical. Thus, the addition ofamiloride to hydrochlorothiazide and
digoxin improvro hemodynamics in patients with CH F.
ACE inhibitors or ARBs are now standard agents for all stages of heart
failure. [n CHF. the action ofdiuretics may be inhibited by poor renal
perfusion and vasoconstrictive fonnation of renin, with a low eFR
lessening sodium excretion. I-Ience ACE inhibitors are logical addi-
tions to diuretics. They have an indirect diuretic effect ultimately by
inhibiting aldosterone release. They also help to maintain normal cell
potassium and magnesium concentrations.
Acknowledgment
We thank Professor Ariel Reyes, Institute of Cardiovascular Theory,
Montevideo, Uruguay, for advice on diuretic doses.
SUMMARY
1. In hyperrension, diuretics remain the best tested of the potential
first-line antihypertensive agents, achieving better results when
used in low doses (below 15mg hydrochlorothiazide or chlor-
thalidone). Nonetheless, being powerful therapeutic agents, they
have the potential for major and serious side effects at higher doses.
The benefit/risk ratio of diuretics in the therapy of mild hyperten-
sion has been particularly well documented in thrtt groups of
patients: the elderly, black patients. and the obese. Patients with
renal impairment also require a diuretic (loop or metolazone). For
moSt hypertensive patientS, a low·dose thiazide diuretic. probably
with a potassium-retaining component (amiloride. triamterene.
spironolactone. or eplere.none) is appropriate.. Most combination
diuretic tablets contain too much hydrochlorothiazide. so that the
tablet must be divided with only 11.5 mg hydrochlorothiazide as
the initial and ideal dose. Thiazide diuretics combine well wilh
ACE inhibilOrs, in which case a potassium-sparing component is
nOt advisable.
1. In Ilearl [ailure, the benefit/risk ratio of diuretics is high and their
use for fluid retention remains standard. Yet not all patients require
vigorous diuresis; rather, each patient needs careful clinical evalu-
ation with a spedfic cardiological diagnosis so that surgically cor-
rectable defects are appropriately handled. First choice of therapy
CHAPTER 4
Diuretics.
101
is a thiazide (for mild heart failure) or a loop diuretic (for severe
heart failure). A logical practice in mild heart failure is to start low
doses of diuretic and ACE inhibitor therapy together. With inter-
mediate severities of failure, increasing doses of thiazide may be
used before switching to or combining with a loop diuretic such
as furosemide.
3. Sequential nephron block is an important principle. Basically, this
calls for the addition of thiazide to loop diuretics, and then
aldosterone antagonists, as the severity of heart failure increases.
When spironolactone is added to ACE inhibition, there is a pos-
sible danger of hyperkalemia, which was limited in the RALES
study by the low dose of spironolactone used. Nonetheless, mor-
tality was reduced by aldosterone antagonism.
4. Hypokalemia remains one of the frequent complications of diuretic
therapy. In hypertension this is avoided by the use of a low-dose
potassium-retaining agent, amiloride, triamterene, spironolactone,
or eplerenone. We stress that in heart failure, automatic addition of
oral potassium supplements is far from ideal practice. Rather, the
combination with ACE inhibitors or ARBs counters hypokalemia by
an antialdosterone effect. Today, some combination of diuretics
plus ACE inhibitors, often with ~-blockade. is standard therapy in
mild to moderate heart failure. In more severe hean failure or in
postinfara patients, the addition of the aldosterone antagonists
spironolactone or eplerenone, respectively, improves prognosis.
REF ERE H C E S
I. Crans,on W, et a!.
Effects of oral diuretics on raised arttrial pre",urt, Lmcorr
1963;2:966-96!l,
2. p..,ty 8M, et al. Htalth outCOmeS assoda,ed will' various an,ihypenensive therapits
used as first-line agen's. JAMA 1003;2!:19:2S34_1544.
3. fiP Trialis", Effects of different blood-pressurt lowerin!,: regimens on maior cardio·
v"S(ular events: results of prospeniwly-desill."ed """rviews of randomised trials
wnW 2003;362:1527-1535,
4. Hunt SA e, a1. ACC/AHA Guidelines for ,he Evalua,ion and Management of Chronic
Heart Failure in the Adult: Execurive Summary: A Report of ,he American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Assodalion Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Commi,-
,ee (Q Revise ,he 1995 Guidelines for the Evaluation and Managemem of lIean
failure); developed in Collaboration with the Intema,ional Society for Hean and
Lung Trarnplanution; endorsed by ,he Hean l'ailure S-ociety of America. Circulation
2001; 104:1996-3007.
5. INC VII. n,e Seventh Repon of the Joim Nalional Commine<' on Prevemion, De,ec-
lion, Evaluation and Treatmem of High Blood Pressure. JAM'" 2003;289:2560_2572
6. WHO/ISH Writing Group, 2003 World Health Organisation (WHOl/lntemational
Sociely of Hypertension (lSI I} sta'emem on managemen, of hypertension, J HrP<""
lenl2003;21:19&3_1992
7. JNC VI. loim National Commin"" on Prevention, Detenion, Evaluation and Treat-
mem of lligh Blood Pressure. '[he Sixth Report of the foim National CommiUt(' on
Prevemion, Deteaion, !'valuation and Treatmem of High Blood Pre"ure. ...",h Intem
Med 1997;157;1413-1446,
8, Gammage M. Tr"'lment of aOlte pulmonary oedema: diuresis orvasodilalion1 (Com.
mentary). Lmur 1998;351:381-383.
9, Reyes AJ. et al. Diuretics in cardiovaS(ular ,herapy: the new dinicopharmacological
bases ,hal malter. OJrdieva.«: Drug< 17Ier 1999;13:371-398.
10. Goldsmith SR, er al. Attenuat;on of the pressor response to imravenous furO-\emide
by angiotensin convening enzyme inhibi,ion in conge!ti~heart failure. Am I OJrdiol
1989;64:1382-1385,
II
Vlase 111. et ,l. Effectiveness of furosemide in uncontrolled hypenension in the
elderly: role of renin profiling, Am J HrP<"'lens 2003; 16:187-193.
12, Bra,er DC. Diurelic therapy. N Eng! J Med 1!l98:339:3&7-395
lJ Johnson AC. NSAID, and blood pressure. Clinical importance for older patients.
Drug. Aging 1998;12:17-27
13a, COlin l. et al. Tora.semide in chronic heart failure: results of the TORIC srudy. Eur 1
Hearl Fail 2002;4:507_513. Erratum in: Eur 1 Hean fui12002;4:667.
14
Wall Gc. er a!. Ethacrynic acid and the ,ulfa.sensilive patient. Arch Intem Med
1003; 163; 116-117.
15
Helderman fR. er at. Prevention of the glucose inlolerance of thiazide diuretics by
mainttnance of body potassium. Diabetes 1983;J2:106-llt
102
•
4
Refererras
16. :Nntoro D. et :t.l. Effras of chronit. ngiOlvuin<on~ning nlZf"'e inhibition on
glUCOlSe loknonce and insulin xnsitiviry In essent;"'1 hypmmsion. IIl'P""tlUioII
1992;20:181-191.
17. Cmn B~ et ..I. Hydrochlorothi.uick YI!nIIlI chlorthillidonr. ev>derw:c suppoftilll their
Interdl.....blliry. J-fnIrmmrim 2004;43:4-9.
18. M..lft1On 81. et ill. Singie-clrug thenpy for hypmmsion in mm. A comPMison ofW:
ill\ti~ ..,u with placd>o. The Oq:lanrnent of Vetcr:orl$ Alfain Coopna.
tM Study Croup on Antiltypm~ivcAamlS. N £ntI J Mnll991;328:914_92L
19. SIIEP Coopnativot Raem:h Croup. f'momtion of woke by ill\tihypm~n-~d",&
ucnmmt in older penorts with '-ol..lnl S)'JIolic hypmens>on Final rQUlu of the S)...
lolk Hypenvuion in !he Elderly f'roKram (SIIEP). JAMA
1!19';26';;1255~1264
20. PollaK T. et al. A comparison of the df«ts of hydrochlorothi~and captopril on
glucose and lipid mn.abolism in p;ltimu: with hypmuuion_ N
En&' I .\j,J
1989;321:86tl-87l.
21. Brown MI. et .11. Morbidiry and mo.uliry in patimu: randomiKd 10 double·blind
ucnment with .. long.xtingc:oldum-dt.1.nnel blodcror diuretic in the Inlem"tion,,1
Nifcdipine CfTS srudy.
Inter~mion as I C~I in
I~ypmmsion TKaUDfllL Lanttl
2000;156'166-172.
22. Llorourciere Y. II .11. Anlihypenmsi~ dfeclS of two fixed-close combinalions of lour·
tIn Ind hydrochlorothiuidc versus hydrochlorothiuidc monotherapy in subj«ts
with Imbullto'Y sy$tolic hypertension. Am J HypmtrU 2001: 16;1036-1042.
n, Harper It ct II. Effects of low doS<' ~rsus
con~ntional dose thiazide diuretic On
insulin action in esslntial hyplrtension. Br Med /1994:309:226-210
24. AI.U-IAT Collaboralj~ Research Group. MajOt OUlcomes in high-risk hypertensive
patients I'lIndomiud to angiotensin·con~ningenzyme inhibitor Or calcium channel
blo<.ker '" diuletic. The Amihypertensi~ Ind lipid·Lowering Treatmenl to PrC\~m
I-Iurt Anack Trial (AIl.HATJ, tAMA 2002;288:2')81_2997.
2'>. Crimm RH. et al. lof18-tcnn rlfn:u on saual function of 6~ anlihypc:nensi\~dross
and
nutrition~l hYKienic ucltment in hypntensi~ men and women. Treatment of
Mild lIypenemion Sludy (TOMHS). HypmtlUioft 1997;29'8-14.
26. Skao DA. n al. Diuretic combin~lions in .dn>etO'Y ~etIU sUt~ p....rm..<okinwc·
phamucodyn~micrd..tiorWiips. din ~'nn 1996;30:229-249.
27. Krftft lH. et ill. Comp;lT1llM triol of indapamide Ind hydrochlorolhiazide in nwn·
tiill hypmetl$ion with forunn pkthystnocrlphy. J ~ ~ 1984;6
622-626
28. Lu Y. et:t.l. Effras of !he diuretic..,l Indlpamide on N~. tnnsinn ounard ~nd
de~ rmifier C\11lftlU in anine ~triollll)'OC)'lft.Orr Rn '998;83;1'>8-166.
29. Amu RP. Acomparison ofblood lipid and blood prasu'" ~ duries the tlU.t-
ment of rysmnk hypertension with ind.aPilmide and with thiazKk:s. Anr I 0ud1Ol
1996;77'128-168-
10. Otalmen J. et al. Inng-tcrm dDcxy of a new. tiud. ~.\ow--dc:>R anp;iotmsin·
conYntil!8 nlZf"'e inhibitor/diurni<: combination ;IS 6m·line tIlenpy in e1dmy
hypmmsive patiems.1 HyptrVns 2000;18,127-117.
11. Co&K P. et ill. On behalfof the INE invariplOr$. Rtgrmion ofldt vmtriwlar hyper.
trophy in hypmensivc palienu lK~let1 with indapamide SA: 1.5mg YI!nIIlI "",lapril
20mI' the UVE Study. JHypmnu 2000;18:1465-1475.
12. Ambrosioni F~ et al.low-clO5l: ~nlihypnten.i"", then.py with 1.5 mg StlSuinet1·reluS<'
indapamide: rnulu of randomised double.blind conuollni snulies. 1 H}opmtIU
1998:16:1677_1684.
31. f1ishman Wil. e\ aL A multifactori~ltri~1 design to assess combination tllerapy in
hypertension, Arch Inum Med 1994;154:1461_1468.
34. franS<' IN. et al. I-Iypokalemia a"""iat«l wilh diure1ic uSC and cardiovascular C\-~nts
In lheSYSlOlic Hyperten~ion in thl Eld~tlyProgram, IfypmtrUWn 2000;35:102'>_1030
35, Domamki M. e1 ai, Diuretic usc. progressive hurt
faiiur~. and death in palienlS
in the Sludies Of 1m V"ntrirular Dysfunction (SOl.VO). I Am Coli OmlioJ 2003:42
705-708,
36. Wilcox CS. Metabolic Ind
Id~l'S<' eff«ts of diuretics, Senlin Nrphrol
1999;19
557-568.
31. Ct_iW. et ..1. l'or the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study. Hypertension l1Id
antihypertensives therapy n risk factors for type 2 diabo:tes mellilus. N En&! J Med
2000;342:905-912.
38. Swi.slodd AlM. n al. hUlllin ""isW>«. glucose imolerana and hypninsulinnnia 10
patienu with hypenension. Alii I Hypmnu 1989:2:419-423.
19. DlhlOf B. et .... For !he UFE srudy gnuI'. Cardioor.ucular morbidiry and mOM,!,' III
the loAlUrt InlnYmtion For Endpoim miuaion in hypmmsion study (liFE): a rlll-
domiJed tri... apirt51 Ilmolol. Loonm 2002;359:995-1003.
40. Lindholm UI. n al. Mn.aboIic OUICOme durinl I yeor in newly det«t.nl h)'Pft".m.
sivn; mulu ofthe Antihypencnsmr TKatment and Lipid l"rofile in .. North ofS..~
EfticiIcy Evaluation (AlJ'INE 5tudy). J lijpmms 2oo1;21:1S61-1574.
41. Ho!z&reve H. et ill. Anlihypntensivot ~"py with "",,pamil SR pIm trandolapnl
WfSIJ$ almolo! pillS dllonhalidone on glyttmic conuol. Alii I fln>tmm 2003 It-
181-186
42. Owms P. er II. Comparison of ..nlihypmmsi"'" and rneu.boli< dfras oflO$3ltWI a:ld
lOAlUrt in combiO.llion with hydrochlorothiazide-a randomiud conuollnl mill
I Hypauru 2000;18:339-145.
43. K.isiske Il~ et ..1. Effn:u of ~ntihypenmsn..:therapy on "",,m lipids. Ann Inrtm .\ltJ
1995;122:IH-141.
44. 1'0"411 Study. Trealmenl of Mild Hypenension study (TOMII). !'inll resulu:. lA.\tA
1991:270:713-724
CHAPTER 4
Diuretics
•
103
45. LaCroix AZ, el at Thiazide diuretic a.gem. and the incidenc~of hip fraaure. N Engl}
Med 1990;321:186-190.
46. Lever ....F. el at. Do inhibitors of angioternin_l_converting ntzyme prote<:l againJt ri~k
of cancer' Lmce! 1998;352;179-184.
47, GroJllman E. '" a!. Does diuretic Iherapy inaeas~ th~ risk of renal cdl carcinoma in
women? ....m J Olrdiol 1999;88:1090_1093.
48, Siscovick DS. et .11. Diuretic therapy for hypertension and the risk of primary cardiac
arr""l. N Engl / Med 1994;330'1852-1857.
49, f1ak"r EH.
~t ai, ....milorid'" a .pecific drug for
hyp~rtension in black people with
T594M vari.nt? Hrl'erml$ien 2002;40;13-17.
50. RALES Study, For Ih~ Randomized ....Id.aon~ Ev.luation Study Inv""tigato"'. The
eff~a of .pironolaaon~ on morbidity .nd mortality in paliem. with .ev.,,-e heart
failure N Engl J Med 1999;341:709-717,
51. Pin B. Aldoslerone blockade in palients with systolic left ventricular dysfunction,
Cilrulation 2003;108:1790-1794,
51 Pin R. et .11. Eplerenone•• i\('ledivt' aldoslerone blocker in patients with left ventricu-
lar dysfunaion .fter myocardi.1 infarction, N £ngl f Med 2003;348, 1309_1321.
53. Pin B. ~t at Effects of eplerenont, enalapril. and eplerenonefenalapril in patients with
eJsemial hypertension and lefl vemrirular hypenrophy; the 4E-left ventrirular hyper_
trophy study. Cilrulalion 1003;108:1831-1838.
54. Ouzan I, et at The role of spironolactone in the treatmem of patients with [('fractory
hypertension Am' H)'penertS 2002;15:333-339,
55. GOltlieb $S. et .11. Effects of BG9719 (cvr_124). an A,-adenosine m:eplor amagonist..
and furOi\('mide on glomerular filtralion rale and natriure.is in patients with rong""·
tive heart fAilure. J Am Coli Cardiol 2000;35:56-59,
56. Sianaszek WE ~t at. Current approaches to management ofpotaJllium ddici~ncy,Drug
Inrell Clin PIulrm 1985; 19:176-184,
57. Patterson DJ, '" al. Endoscopk comparison of solid and liquid potassium chloride
mpplements. wne<r 1983;2:1077_1078.
58. Donnans 11'1, tt a1. Combinalion of high_dose furosemide and hydrochlorothiazide
in the I~atmentofrdractorycongestive hean failure. lOur Heart J 1996;17:1867_1874.
59. Ray W..... el .11. Long-term use of thiazid~ diurttics and ri.k of hip fractures, Lmcer
1989; I:687_690.
60. Sharabi Y.
~t at Diurelic induced hyponatraemia in elderly hypenensive
wom~n,
I Hum Hypertrns 2001;16:631-635.
61
LaCroix AZ, el .11. !.oW·doi\(' hydrochlorolhiazide and preservation of bone mineral
densily in older adult...... randomi7.ed. double-blind. placebo-controlled trial. Ann
lnum Met! 2000;133:516_526,
62. Mudge GH. DiuretiC! and other "gnn, employro in the mobiliution of ~dema fluid
in, The Pharmacological Basis of'lllerapeulics Gilman ....G, ct .11.. edilors, New York-
Macmillan. 1980; PI'. 892-915,
J.5
Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors,
Angiotensin-II Receptor
Blockers (ARBs), and
Aldosterone Antagonists
Lionel H. Opie • Philip A. Poole-Wilson • Marc A. Pfeffer
"AngiOlcmin-wllloerring enzyme inhibitors hlll'e beerl sholl'l! to !lCIl't'
IIII' broadest impllCl of (Ill)' drug ill wrtliovtlSClIllir medicine.'
JlARV[¥ Wllfll:, 2003'
"The ultimaI/! qllestiml raised is 1l,llefllef higll-risll parienrs shollld
rcecil'/.' ACE irrhi/Jirors or IIllgiocensill-recepror blockers afrer
IIll'oamlial ill/llrc/ioll.•
MANN,2003'
Since the description in 1977 of the first angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, caplOpril, by the Squibb Group led by
Ondetti and Cushman, ACE inhibitors have not only become the cor-
nerstone of the trealmem of heart (ailure, but increasingly also playa
major role in hypertension therapy and in cardiovascular protection.
3 ,'
"the purpose of this chapter is to SUlVey the pharmacology, the use,
and the limitations of these agents and their new relatives, the
angiotensin receptor blockers (AnBs). Frequent reference will be made
to the role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) in car-
diovascular pathology, with excess activities of angiotensin-II and of
;lldostcrone playing major adverse maladaptive roles. ACE inhibitors
<lct on the crucial enzyme that generates angiotensin-H, whereas the
ARBs act directly on the major angiotensin-II receptor subtype-I (AT,
subtype) that responds to angiotensin·J1 stimulation. In addition,
spironolactone and eplerenone antagoni.le the effects of aldosterone.
As the result of many careful long and large trials, it is now clear that
ACE inhibitors give both primary and secondary protection from car-
diovascular disease, thereby interrupting the vicious circle from risk
factors to left ventricular failure at many sites (Fig. 5-]). The ARBs Me
very well tolerated, and in several but not all outcome trials give bene-
fits equal to those of the ACE inhibitors. 111e final step in the ltAAS,
aldosterone, is increased in heart failure. Aldosterone inhibitors have
protective effects additive to those of ACE inhibitors ill heart failure
and in high-risk post-myocardial infarction (post-M]l patients.
MECHANISMS OF ACTlOH OF ACE INHIBITORS
!.ogiGllly, ACE inhibition should work by lessening the complex and
widespread effects of angiotensin-II (Table 5-]). This octapeptide is
fonne'" from its precursor, a decapeptide (/Ilgiolcmill-I, by the activity
of the ACE. ACE activity is found chiefly in the vascular endothelium
of the lungs, but occurs in all vascul<lf beds including the coronary
arteries. Angiotensin-! originates in the liver from
(mgiorcl1sillOgcll
under the influence of the enzyme felli'l, a protease that is formed in
the renal juxtaglomerular cells. Classic stimuli to the release of renin
104
CIIAI'TER 5
ACE Inhibrwn, .-\R&. and Aldoslenmt AIlUlgolli.sf5
•
105
ACE INHIBITORS
Dzau-Braunwald model
RISK FACTORS
0
__ hypertension
CJ ............ lVH
o
Ischemia
(
Atheroma
!
ThrombosiS ~ Sudden death
""
/?0
Infarction
\ ~ Re-infarctklo
Loss or muscle
I
Rernoclelinge
I
ILV fa"'''' 10
e
= ACE inhibitor eHect
fllur. 5-1 Dual rok of ACE inhibilOrs, bolh pr~ntingand treating
cardiovascular disease. Nolt, multiple sitcs of anion in both primal')' and
s«ondal'}' pm.'t'ntion ACE inhibitors have an indirect effeo in primary
prl'Vl'mion by Icssening hypertension and by dccreasing left vt'ntricular
hypenrophy. They protect the blood vessels indirectly by an amihypert,;:n-
sive effect and dircctly inhibit carotid atherogenesis and thrombogenesis.
Given al tht: stan of myocardial infarction, they improve mortality in high-
fisk patients, By an alltiarrhythlllic effect, they Illay act 10 prevent postin-
farct sudden death. lly 1Lossening wall stress, they beneficially improve
poslinfara remodeling and decrease the incidence of lert vermicular
failure. The concepl ofsequenlial changes leading to a chain of e."enlS from
risk factors to lefl \'l'ntriaJlar failure is based on DZ,lU and Braunwald ,-
LVH = left \'l'ntrkular hypertrophy. (Figl/ft C /)1 Oplr. 1005.)
Potential Pathogenic Properties of Angiotensin II
Hurt
Myocardial hypentophy
[nterslitial fibrO$is
Corooary Arteries
Endothelial dysfunction with deceased release of nitric oxide
Coronary constriction via release of norepinephrine
Increased oxidative stress; oxygen-deri\'l'd free radicals formed via NADH
oxidase
Promotion of ;nnammatory response and atheroma
Promotion of lDL-cholcstnot uptake
-
IncrnKd intraglomerular presw~
IncrnKd protcin kalt
Clo~largrowth and fibrosis
I~ sodium mbsorpcion
.......
IncrusOO formation of aldost~rone
Coagulation System
IncmKd fibrinogen
1~Sf:d PAl-I relative to tissue plasminogen factor
106
•
5
Afedumim15 of Action of ACE IllhibitDo
include (I) impairoo renal blood Row as in ischemia or h)1JOlm-
sion; (2) salt depletion or sodium diuresis; and (3)
~adrmngtC
stimulation.
The Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
This prOtease: has two zinc groups. of which only one panicipates in
the high-affinity binding site that interacts with angiotensin-lor with
the ACE inhibitors. This convening enzyme not only conve:ru
angiotensin-! to angiotensin-II but also inactivates the breakdown of
bradykinin. hence the alternate name of Irininl15l'. ACE inhibition is
vasodilatoty by decreased fonnation of angiotensin-II and potentially
by decreased degradation of bradykinin (rig. 5-2).
A#ernate Modes of Angiotensin-II Generation
Not all angiotensin-ll is generated as a result of the activity of ACE.
Non-ACE pathways, involving chymase-like serine proteases, can do
the same job and also form angiotensin-II. The exact role ofsuch non-
ACE pathways is still the subject of controversy. One view is that more
than 75% of the cardiac angiotensin-II formed in severe human heart
failure is formed by chymase activity, and that inhibition of chymase
prevents cardiac fibrosis and limits the progression of experimental
hean failure.' However, ifthis path were really so important in human
hean failure. why does therapy by an ARB that would block all the
angiotensin-II fonnoo both by chymase and by ACE not give: results
dinically superior to those of ACE-inhibitor therapyr
CONVERTING ENZYME EFFECTS
OJ*I (2004)
BRADYKININ SYSTEM
.
,
ANGIOTENSIN SYSTEM
Activated
Factor XII
Kininogen
Angiotensinogen
I
EE>I
(aIPh82-globolin, hepatic origin)
Pre-kallikrein- Kallikrein-.
I
.
...--Renln
Endothelium
EBI
I
Angiotensin-I
~
~
-llJ1w1y1dnln,
(decapeptide)
~;:~~I~ns
!~--l~~~-l
\
Ina~~:
IA-II via AT1I
VASODILATION
pep
0:;/\
'"
" ...SOCONSTRlc;1\
Increased
E£>
Potentiation of
akbsterone
~
sympathetic
release
--
"""'"
F1••n
S-2: ACE inhibitors haw dual ~ilatory actions, chidly on tM
renin-angiolellsin system wilh ancillary eff«l.S on the breakdoo.-Tl of
bradykinin, lbe rnuh of the former action is the inhibition of the vasocon·
striClory S)'Slems and tlw result of the latter is the formation of vasodib.lol'}'
nilric oxide ilnd proslaqdin. Thex effectS of bradykinin may protCCl.
the endOlheliuln. (Figure C LH Opit, 200S.)
CHAPTER 5
A/J.lnhibitorJ,ARBs,.dnd .....ldo:llmlne .....nttlgonists
•
107
Angiotensin-II and Intracellular
Messenger Systems
Just as there are many intermediate steps between occupation of the
~-adrenoceptorand increased contractile activity of the myocardium,
so there are
many complex steps between occupation of the
angiotensin-II receptor and uhimate mobilization of calcium with a
vasoconstrictor effect in vascular smooth muscle. Activity of the sig-
naling syslem stans when occupalion of the angiotensin-II receptor
stimulates the phosphodiesterase (called phospholipase C) that leads
to a series of signals that activate a specialized enzyme. protein kilw5e
C. which in tum evokes the activity of mitogen-activated protein
(MAr)-kinase pathway to stimulate ventricular hypenrophy.· In blood
vessels, phospholipase C activates the inositol frispllOSphal£ (lPJ) signal-
ing pafhway to liberate calcium from the intracellular sarcoplasmic
reticulum to promote vasoconstriction.
Angiotensin-II Receptor Subtypes: The AT, and AT:
Receptors
There are two angiotensin-II receptor subtypes, the AT, and AT1 recep-
tors (I:ig. 5-3). NOle the potentially confusing nomenclature: both
receptors respond to angiotensin-II. but are subtypes I and 2. These
link to separate internal signaling paths.? Clinically used ARBs should
be considered as AT,-blockers. The effects of angiotensin-II acting via
ANGIOTENSION-Il RECEPTOR SUBTYPES
""'-
A-IJ
I
AT,
Lata 'etal phase
? Antigrowth
? Apoptosis
Cardiac disease
7 Vssodi/atory
? Protective
~.~
~
",,----
PAl-1
A-I, A-II
U ••n
5-3 Proposed roles of angiotensin II receptor subtypa, which
3"e (alloo AT-I, AT 2 and (putative) AT-4 subtypes. Most of the physio-
IClJical effcrts in adult VilS(.ular smooth muscle cells are conveyed by the
I,r·) receptor subtype. The /1.1'-2 receptor is of substantial importance in
lalt fetal Vilscular growth, exerting an anligrowth effed. Hypothetically,
lhelle re<:eptol1i may also playa beneficial role in Vilrious myocardial
pathophysiological conditions (see text). ,0.1'-4 receptors are postulated
to hIve an antifibrinolytic effect. (Figure C LH Opit, 1005.)
108
•
5
Medlimism5 of Action of ACE /nhibilOr5
AT,-receptors on the diseased hean and failing circulation are often
regarded as adverse, such as stimulation of contraction, vasoconstric-
tion, myocyte hypenrophy,6 and anti natriuresis. In fetal life, these
AT,-receptors act as growth stimulators, which explains why ACE
inhibitors and ARBs are prohibited therapy in pregnancy. The physi-
ological role of the AT1 receptor includes the inhibition of growth· in
the late fetal phase (growth can't keep on forever). [n adult life, the
role of the AT1 receptors is much less well understood, but could
become more relevant in pathophysiological conditions, the receptors
being upregulated in hypenrophy and in hean failure. [t is postulated
by Dzau and others that the AT) receptors may reduce some of the
adverse effects of AT1 receptor stimulation by a Yin-Yang effea. Con-
troversially, other workers suggest that there could be mixed or even
adverse consequences of long-term AT) stimulation as occurs during
therapy with an ARB when only the AT, rcreptor is blocked.s By con-
lrast, during ACE inhibitor administration the aaivity of both recep-
tors is restricted because the formation of angiotensin-II is inhibited.
Ren;n-Ang;otens;n-Aldosterone System
The major factors stimulating renin release from the juxtaglomerular
cells of the kidney are (Fig. 5-4): (1) increased ~,-sympathetic aaiv-
ity; (2) a low anerial blood pressure; (3) decreased sodium reabsorp-
tion in the distal tubule, as when dietary sodium is low or during
diuretic therapy; and (4) decreased blood volume. local formation of
angiotensin-II following renin release seems to explain efferent ane-
riolar vasoconstriction in the renal glomerulus. Thus, for example,
during a state of anerial hypotension, the increased efferent aneriolar
vasoconstriction resulting from increased angiotensin-II will help to
preserve renal funaion by maintaining the intraglomerular pressure.
A-II AND Na+ BALANCE
Opia 2004
rp;:jiI
More Na+ ..-/ L:...:.:..J
reabsorption
K'
~
J
Aldosterone
-_./
No·
No·
No·
No'
../~
Na+ pump _
Insulin excess
INa+ retention I
Diuretics
JG
'- Na+-
depletion
~,(/
LowBP
Figure
5-4 Renal
mechanisms
whereby
renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system promotes sodium retention. ig '" juxtaglomerular
cells. (Figure C LH Opie, 2005,)
CHAPTE R 5
t\CE InhilrifOfJ, t\RBs, and Aldos/erone AIl!"gonislS
•
109
Feet/back inhibirion of renin by (lIlgiotcl15in.// means that renin release
is suppressed both direclly by angiotensin.11 and indirectly by the
sodium retention associated with the increased aldosterone levels.
Stimulation of aldos/erolle by nngiotensill'// means thai the latter stimu-
lus releases the sodium-retaining hormone aldosterone from the
adrenal cortex. lIenee, ACE inhibilion is associated with aldosterone
reduction and has potential indirect natriuretic and pOlassium-
retaining effects. Aldosterone formation does not, however, stay fully
blocked during prolonged ACE inhibitor therapy. This late "escape"
does not appear to compromise the antihypertensive effeclS achieved
by ACE inhibitors; nonetheless il might detract from the prolonged
benefit ofthese agents in heart failure, [n the RALES study, added low-
dose spironolactone (mean; 25 mg daily) on top of diuretics and ACE
inhibition reduced mortality (see p. 141 of this chapter).
Adverse Effects of Excess Aldosterone
Aldosterone, released eilher in response to angiotensin.11 or to stirn·
ulation by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACl'H), has major effects
Oil elcctrolyte balance. It retains sodium and helps to excrete potas-
sium by inhibition of sodium-potassium exchange in the distal renal
tubule (Fig. 5.4). Water is retained with sodium. In heart failure,
plasma aldosterone rises up to 20 limes normal, in response to
increased angiotensin-II, coupled with decreased hepatic clearance.'
Aldosterone, some of it locally produced, may adversely aller the struc-
ture ofthe myocardium by promotion ofcardiac fibrosis.' Aldosterone
also promotes endothelial dysfunclion.
1O
Sodium Status! Renin, and ACE Inhibitor Efficacy
Renin scrretion from the juxtaglomerular cells is enhanced by sodium
depletion, which in turn increases the hypotensive effect of ACE inhi·
bition. Therefore. in the therapy of hypertension, ACE inhibitors are
often combined with either a diuretic or a low-sodium diet or both.
Snit scl15itillity means that certain individuals, especially the elderly,
react adversely to a high salt intake by increasing the arterial blood
pressure. In normal subjects, a high-sodium diet leads to increased
tubular reabsorption of sodium, which inhibits renin release, which
decreases efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction, so that renal blood flow
increases with increased sodium excretion. Furthermore, less forma-
tion of angiotensin-II leads to a lower level of aldosterone to promote
sodium diuresis. In some hypertensivc patients, the above sequence
does not happen in response 10 sodium so that there is sodium reten-
tion with increased sodium-calcium exchange and vasoconstriction.
In the elderly, minor but significalll degrees of sodium retention may
result from impaired renal function. 'Ihe result is a low renin StalUS,
common in the elderly and in elhnic groups of African origin.
Autonomic Interactions of Angiotensin-II
ACE
inhibitors
have
indirect
permissive
amiadrenergic
effects.
Angiotensin-II promotes the release of norepinephrine from adrener-
gic terminal neurons, ;lI1d also enhances adrenergic tone by central
activation and by facilitation ofganglionic transmission. Furthermore,
angiotensin"JI amplifies the vasoconstriction achieved by (ll-rcrcptor
stimulation. Thus, angiotensin-II has facilitatory adrenergic actions
leading to increased activity of vasoconstrictory norepinephrine. ACE
inhibitors have vagomimetic effects that could explain why lachy.
cardia is absent despite peripheral vasodilation. The combined
antiadrenergic and vago-mimetic mcrhanisms could contribute to the
arttil/rrhytlHlu'c effecrs of ACE inhibitors and the reduction of sudden
death in several trials in congesrive hearr failure (CI-II'), especially
post_Ml.
l1 An additional factor is probably better potassium retention
(as a result of aldosterone inhibition).
110
•
5
Mechanisms of Aclion of ACE Inhibitors
Kallikrein-Kinin System and Bradykinin
Besides decreased formation of angiotensin-II. increased bradykinin
is another possible alternate site of action of ACE inhibitors (see Fig.
5-2; Table 5-2). This nonapeptide. originally described as causing slow
contractions in the gut (hence the brady in the name) is of potential
cardiovascular importance. Bradykinin is inactivated by two kininases.
kininase I and [I. lhe latter is identical to ACE. ACE inhibition, there-
fore, leads to increased local formation of bradykinin, which has
major vasodiialOry properties. Bradykinin acts on bradykinin recep-
tors in the vascular endothelium
10 promote the release of two
vasodilators (Table 5-2). First. there is increased formation of nitric
oxide. Second. there is increased conversion of arachidonic acid 10
vasodilalOry prostaglandins, such as prostacyclin and prostaglandin
E, (PGE,).lndomethacin. which inhibits prostaglandin synthesis, par-
tially reduces the hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitors. The current
concept is that bradykinin formation, occurring locally and thus not
easily measured, can participate in the hypotensive effect of ACE
inhibitors and may act via nitric oxide to protect the endothelium.
lhis is one of the several mechanisms whereby bradykinin can lessen
the adverse myocardial effects of pacing-induced heart failure in
dogs."
Conversely, in a bradykinin B2 receplOr knockout mouse.
spontaneous heart failure develops."
Bradykinin formed during ACE
inhibition may also contribute to the protective effect of precondi-
tioning on the heart." and to the vasodilator effects of ACE inhibi-
tion in heart failure." Renal prostaglandins may respond 10 bradykinin.
During ACE inhibition there is increased local symhesis of the active
bradykinin in the kidney. Such bradykinin stimulates the formation
of vasodilatory prostaglandins. These potentially favorable actions
of an ACE inhibitor would not occur with an ARB (but there would
also be fewer adverse effects of bradykinin such as cough and
angioedema).
Tissue Renin-Angiotensin Systems
Although the acute hypotensive effects of ACE inhibition can clearly
be linked to decreased circulating levels of angiotensin-II, during
chronic ACE inhibition there is a reactive hyperreninemia linked 10
reemergence of circulating angiotensin-II and aldosterone. I lence, the
present proposal is that ACE inhibitors exert their sustained amihy-
pertensive and ami-heart failure effcas at least in part by lessening
formation of angiotensin-II within the target organ. acting on the
tissue renin-angiotensin systems. Likewise. this is the proposed site of
Table 5-2
Organ(elle)
Actions of Bradykinin
Cellular Effect
c.,,,,,"""""
Go'
Vascular
endOlhelium
Respiratory tract
Hean. vesocls
Hean. myocardium
Ca" mobilization
Formation of nitric
oxide (NO).
prOlitacydin
Formation of
prostaglandins
Endothelial protection
Prec;onditioning"
Slow contraction [brady,
slow; kinin. movement)
Vasodilation; antiplatelet
aggrcgmion; endOlheJial
protection
Cough, angioedema
Panicipale5 in
experimental coronary
dil.ltion induced by
ACE-inhibilion.'l<
Protec;ts against repeat
ischemia
C II ArTE R 5
ACE InhllmOl1, I\Rfu. and I\uktslerme I\nLllgorusts
•
111
STRETCH AND CARDIAC GROWTH
""""""
-
FIBROSIS
P1<C
MAP_
I
Proter<Noc::ogtlf'l(IS
I
HVPERTROPHV
-
•
AT,
Ca!diac
myocytes
Angjo.lI
Ren'n
,..,
"
ang,otensinogen _
Angio-l
para\.~ri"~':""_+..,.+. ...
ATt
c.2+
FibfOOlasts
Angiolensm-I
~ ACE
\A-II
Angiotensin-If A-II
A-II
Flillr. 5-5 Role of OIrdiOK li!>lille renin-,mgiOttngn S)'!;lem, hype>-
thtllOillyas in ltft venlricular hypenrophy (LVII). involving rTl)'OC)'IC$,
fibroblil'Su,
va$CUI;lr
smooth
musdt',.
and
endothelium.
AT, '"
angiotensin·1I re<:eplor wblype-I; IT : endOthelin; CF. grOWlh faaor;
MAr kiM51': mitogen aClivaloo protein kinase; POCF: platelet-derived
gr()\<o1h faaor; PKC. prOtein kinase C; TCF: uansforminggroWlh faclor;
other abbreviations as in Fig. 5-2. (Figure CI Lli Opir. 2005.)
action, in addition 10 blood pressure reduction, in the regression of
LV hvpt'nrophy and vascular remodeling (fig. 5-5).
Genotypes and Response to ACE Inhibitors
ACE gene polymorphism is often considered as a possible genelic
faaor Ihat could predispose 10 cardiovascular disease, although the
eo.;dence remains controversial. A different issue is whether the ACE
genotype could regulate the response. for example, to exercise train-
ing. and whether the response to ACE inhibitors could likewise be
sensitive to the genotype. The DO genotype (where 0 "" deletion) is
associated with greater myocardial ACE levels than its presence," the
latter being the ACE II (' "" insen.ion) genotype. In a series of nor-
motensive British anny recruits subjected to intense exercise training.
lhe DD genotype was associated with a greater degree of exercise-
induced left ventricular hypertrophy.l1 Controversially, DO lIlay be
associated with increased myocardial infarction. 'I1lUS variable clini-
cal responses in different individuals to the S<lme dose of an ACE
inhibitor could potentially bt': explained on a genetic base. However,
much more data would bt': needed fonnally to link DO to slruetural
hean disease.
112
•
5
PhllnlUlcology of ACE Inhibitors
Angiotensin-II Receptor Type AT, Blockers (ARBs)
Angiotensin-II has been called a "molecular murderer" with seriOU!
adverse effeclS on the hean, the coronary arteries, the renal glomeruli
and on thrombosis (Table 5-1). Because ACE inhibitors have their
major effects by inhibiting the formation of angiotensin-II, it fol1o...."5
that direct antagonism of these receptors should duplicate many or
most of the effects of ACE inhibition. One advantage of ARBs
over ACE inhibitors is the much lower incidence of cough and angio-
edema, the latter hypothetically being induced by bradykinin and
prostaglandins. ARBs might, again theoretically, be able to avoid the
hormonal MescapeM (hyperreninemia and increase in angiotensin-II)
found during prolonged administration of ACE inhibitors. '111is
conccpt is also controversial, and not supported by data from one
trial.'
Furthermore, ARBs should be better :lble to act against the
non-ACE-dependent chymase paths,S because of more complete inhi-
bition of the synthesis of angiotensin-II. But it is proposed that the
lesser formation of bradykinin with the ARBs than with the ACE
inhibitors may lead to correspondingly less endothelial protection.
PHARMACOLOGY OF ACE INHIBITORS
Major Indications and Classes
lnese are heart failure, hypertension, acute myocardial infarction, and
postinf:Hct follmv-up;
renoprotection, diabetic nephropathy, and
hypertension; and cardiovascular protection (Table 5-3). From the
pharmacokinetic point of view, there are three cll1sses of ACE illhibitorli
(Table 5-4). lhe first is represented by captopril, a compound active
as it is, yet subject to furthcr metabolism in the body to metabolites
that are also active (class I). The next category consists ofthe prodrugs
of which enalapril is the prototype. l'hese arc active only once con-
verted to the diacid by hepatic metabolism (class II, Fig. 5-6). Third,
in a class of ilS own, lisinopril is water-soluble and not metabolized,
and excreted unchanged by the kidneys (class III). Probably the major
site of ACI; inhibition is in the vascular endothelium, accessible to all
ACE inhibitors, whether lipid-soluble or nOI, Yet it lIlust be admitted
that ramipril and perindopril, the agents linked to major cardiovas-
cular protection in thc HOPE and EUROPA studies, arc both lipid-
soluble so that penetration of myocardial cells to reach the tissue ACE
is theoretically more feasible."·l10 The major outcome trials with
ACE inhibitors and other inhibitors of the RAAS system afe listed in
Table 5-5.
Side Effects 01 ACE Inhibitors
Cougll has emerged as one of the most troublesome and common of
the various side effects (Table 5-6; Fig. 5-7), some serious and some
not, l11is side effect took a long time to be discovered. Patients with
heart failure often cough as a result of pulmonary congestion (which
may need morc rathcr than less ACE inhibitor), and in patients with
Table 5~3
IndicatIOns for ACE Inhlbltors, Based on TnaJ Oata
1. Ilean failure, all stages
2. Hypenension espe<:ially in high-risk and in diabetic patients
3. AMI. acute phase for high-risk patients, poslinfarct LV dysfun<lion
4. Nephropathy, nondiabcti< and diabeli< type I
5. Cardiovas<ular protection in spedfied doses (rnmipril. perindopril;
trandolapril pending)
CIIunon: Not dll lhe ab<Jvt, d,e hcellsed i"dicdlio". and lhe I;ce"se for" .pecific ACE
inhibitor will VA'Y fmlll lhe abo>~. Check lhe package in",".
AMI. aCUle myoca,dial in(uctioll.
Table 5-4
Summary of Pharmacologic Properties, Cllmcallndicatlons, and Doses of ACE Inhibitors
"'"
Elim t'11
TIP ratio
Hypertension
lflIart failure or postinlarct,
Dru,
Ugand
Active Drug
(hoo~)
% (FDA)
(usual daily dose)
target doses used in large trials
Class I: Gaptopril-Uke
Captopril
51!
Captopril
4-6 (total captopril)
25-50rng 2x or 3x
50 Ill}; \x
Class II: Prodrugs
Alacepril
Carboxyl
Captopril
8 (Iotal captopril)
12.5-25 Illg 2x
Not est.lblish~...1
Bcnazcpril
Carboxyl
Benazeprilat
I!
1O~40mg in 1-2 doses
NOt establish~"<i
Cilazepril
Carboxyl
Cilazcprilat
,
2.5-5mg Ix
Not established
Dclapril
Carboxyl
Dclaprilat
1.21.4
7.5-30mg in 1-2 doses
Not established
5-0H-dclaprilat
EnalapriJ
Carboxyl
Enalaprilat
6: II (aecum)
5-20mg in 1-2 doses
IOmg 2x
Fosinopril
Phosphoryl
Fosinoprilat
12
50-80
1O-80mg Ix (or 2x)
Not established
Perindopril
Carboxyl
Perindoprilat
3-10
75-100
4-8mg Ix
Not established
Quinapril
Carboxyl
Quinaprilat
1.8
SO
10-80 mg in 1-2 doses
Not established
Ramipril
Carboxyl
Ramiprilat
13-17
50-60
2.5-10mg in 1-2 doses
5mg 2x
Spirapril
Carboxyl
Spiraprilat
<2
3-6 mg 1 dosc'
NO! established
TrandoJapril
Carboxyl
Trandoprilat
10
50-90
0.5-4 mg Ix, then 4 mg lx'
4mg Ix
Class m: Water-Soluble
Lisinopril
Cub"",1
Lisinopril
7; 12 (accum)
10-40m& Ix (may need
10-35mg Ix
high dose if given Ix)
Dal' b"ed on FDA.,pprowd inform'tion where available
,crum" accumulation half-life; Him t,/, .. dimination h.lIf-life; TIP ralio" trough/peak wio., FDA.approved valu.,.,
W
'Thumwln, Hl'i~nrnlion. 1996;28:450,
'Inilial dose I mg, 2mg i'l black palientS.
Table 5-5
Major Outcome TnaJs With Remn-AnglOtensln-Aldosterone Inhlbltors
Ref1in-angiotensln-
R1..
Chronic
Heart Failure,
AMI, Ear1y
Diabetic
Chronic Renal
aldosterone blocker
prevention
HPT
Heart Failure
Post-MI
"'".
Nephropathy
Disease
ACE inhibitor
Captopril
./ CAPP
././ SAVE
././ type 1
,
Enalapril
././ ANBI'2
,/,/ SOLVD,V·Heff.
,
CONSENSUS
IJsinopril
,/ ALLHAT
,/ ATlAS
,/,/ GISSI
Perindopril
,/,/ EUROPA
Ramipril
,/,/ HOPE
,/,/ AIRE
,/ MICROHOPE
./,/ REIN, AASK
Trandolapril
'/./1 PEACE pending
,/ INVEST
,/./ TRACE
ARa.
Cand~nan
,/./ CHAR,\I
lrbesanan
./,/ ID/'.'T, lR,\iA
Losarta.n
./,/ with LVH, LIFE
r~ 1./ EUrE 1 & 2
~, OPTlMAAL
././ RENAAL
Udose 100 low)
(Idose too low)
Valsanan
1 VALUE
././ VALHeFf
././ VALIANT
Aldosterone Antagonist
SpironolaCtone
././ RALES
Eplerenone
././ EPHESUS
././ • mongly illdk,H~d; ./ = indi(JI~d; ~ '" no1 indi(at~d
C II A PT ER 5
.-\CE Inhibitors, ARBs. mlll Alrlosrffime Amagmlists
•
115
CLASS 1/: PRO-DRUGS
Opie 2004
ILipid - solubleI
ORAL PRO-DRUG
oSenazepril
oCilazapril
oOelapril
oEnalapril
oFosinopril
·Perindopril
oQuinapril
oRamiprii
oSpirapril
oTrandolapri!
(
+
,,/" Fosinopril
Feces -
Spirapril
.......... Tandolapril
Active diacid
"-
Inactive
Bile
most
Active diacid
RENAL EXCRETION
FI gu re 5·' l'harmacokinctic pallerns of prodrugs lhal arc con·
......rted 10 active diadds and thel1 acrellod (class Ill. The predomi-
nant pallern for most is renal excretion bUI wilh some dnlgs.
especially fosinopril. biliary and fecal cxcretion may be as impor-
l:llll. (Figlntl' (l LI / Opie. 2005.)
Table 5-6
ACE Inhibitors and ARBs: Side Effects and Contralndicatlons
1. ACEi, Side Effects, Class
Cough: common
I [ypotension: variable (care with renal artery stenosis; severe heart
failure)
Deterioration of renal function (related in part to hypotension)
Angioedema (rare; but potentially fatal)
Renal failure (rare. risk with bilateral renal artery stenosis)
Hyperkalemia (in renal failure, especially with K-retaining diuretics)
Skin reactions (especially with captopril)
2. ACEi, Side Effects First Described lor High-Dose captopril
loss of taste
Neutropenia espedally with collagen vasculat renal disease
Proteinuria
Oral lesions: scalded-mouth syndrome (rare)
3. ACEI and ARBs, Shared contrallldlcatloos and calrtlons
[>regnancy (NR: prominent FDA warning)
SE:Vl:re renal failure (caution if creatinine >2.5-3.0 mg/dL
220-265I.l moI/L)
Hyperkalemia requires caution
Bilateral renal arlery stenosis or equivalent lesions
Preexisting hypotensioll
Severe aOrlic stenosis or obstructive cardiomyopalhy
Often less effeo:;tive in black persons without added diuretic
I
Plasma K+j
I 16
•
5
Ph1U7Jlru:010gy of ACE InhibilOrs
ACE INHIBITORS, POTENTIAL SIDE EFFECTS
Opie 2004
~/e\'e (±)"::;"~k,","
~I",I'
@""i,1(1
CHF
~~~'
Arterioles
V
Aldot
I
Acute BPi>
GFR falls
nDelayed
jJ,
~
\7 onset
Care with
K+ retaining
diuretics
Hypotension:
low first dose
(or perindopril)
Monitor
Chronic
K+, renal
de,
function
cough
Figure
5· 7 l'otemial side effects of ACE inhibitors includc rough,
hypolension, and renal impairment. Angioedema is rare, To avoid hypOlen·
sion in heart failure patients, a low IimtCSI dose is usually given. liMo =
aldOSlerone; C/IF = congestive heart failure; CH< = glomerular Iiltration
ralC. (l'igllre C> U f Opit'. 1005,)
hypertension such side effects ,He generally discovered only if volun-
teered. In some centers, the incidence of cough is thought to be as
high as 10% to 15%, whereas others report a much lower incidence,
such as 5.5% in
IIOrE:~ The cough is due to an increased sensitiv-
ity of the cough reflex resulting in a dry irritating nonproductive
cough, quite different from bronchospasm. Increased formation of
bradykinin and prostaglandins may playa role Crable 5-2). Several
studies suggest relief of the cough by added nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drugs," with the downside of diminished antihypertensive
effects. As an alternative, the combination of low-dose ACE inhibitor
and the calcium channel blocker (CCR) nifedipine lessens the cough
through unknown mechanisms. Logically, and most often tried with
success, a change to an angiotensin-II receptor blocker consistently
lessens the cough,21
Hypotension Particularly in Cil F, orthostatic symptoms attributable to
excess hypotension are common and may necessitate dose reduction
or even cessation of ACE inhibitor therapy. In general, so long as
orthoSfatic symptoms do not occur, the absolute blood pressure is
not crucial and many patients do well with systolic pressures of 80 to
90 mml [g. Hrpollmrelllill call be an indicator of heightened renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone activily, and when present,
there
is an
increased risk of inducing hypotension.
Hyperkalemia Ilyperkalemia is a risk wht:n ACE inhibitors are given
with potassium-sparing diuretics or in the presence of renal failure.
Thus potassium supplements or retainers should be used with care in
the presence of ACE inhibition, especially when there is renal failure.
The KALES study did, however, show the safety and efficacy of low
doses of spironolactone when carefully added to ACE inhibitors
and diuretics in the therapy of severe systolic heart failure. 24 Careful
monitoring of the senlm potassium level is essential because of the
potelHially serious harm caused by hyperkalemia.
Renal Side Effects Renal side effects with reversible renal failure can be
precipitated by hypotension, Predisposing are a fixed low renal blood
flow as in severe congestive heart failure (CIIF) or severe sodium and
C II AI'T ER 5
ACE Il1hrbJlors. t\RBs. /lml t\ldOJII'TO/1r AII/Il.~OIum
•
117
volume depletion, or underlying renal disease including renal anel)'
stenosis. In theS(' conditions, efferent glomerular arterial constriction
resulting from .1I1giotensin-1l may be crucial in retaining the GFI{
(glomerular filtration
rate).
Rarely,
irreversible renal
failure
has
occurred in patients with bilateral renal artel)' stenosis, which is there-
fore a contraindication to ACE inhibitors, In unilateral renal anel)'
dise.lse, with high circulating renin values, ACE inhibitors may also
cause excessi\'e hypotensive responses with oliguria and/or azotemia,
To obvi.1tc such problems, and especially when there is uniliueral
ren,ll ,1rtel)' stenosis or a low sodium state, a low first test dose is
required with blood pressure checks, An arbitral)' high value ofSCOim
creatinine is often taken as a contraindication n:lble 5-6). A slight
st,lble incre.lse in serum creatinine after the inuoduClion of an ACE
inhibitor should !lot limit usc.
Serious but Rare: Angioedema Although rare (about 0.3% in AU.! 11\1:
rising to 0.6% to 1.6% in blilck individuills), angioedelll,l can be life
threatening.!' ,,, '111is condition un \'el)' rarely be f,uill, the incidence
ofdeath increasing from zero in a large study on 12,634 patients given
enalapril for 24 weeks:''' to about one in 5000 to 10,000 patiellts."B
The mechanism depends on bradykinin.l " Prompt subcutilneous epi-
nephrine and r,lfely even intubation may be needed. l '
'111e ACE
inhibitor must be stopped and an ARB can be considered. Although
with a switch to an ARB, more than 90% may become free of ACE-
inhibitor-induced angioedema:"
there are isolated instances o( an
ARI~ also being associated with angioedenl.l.
Pregnancy Risks All ACE inhibitors (and AI{Bs) are ernbl)'opathic and
contraindicilted in pregnancy, with the greatcst risk in the second and
third trimeslers. '111e FDA requires a boxed warning in the package
insen,
Neutropenia Whether the SII.groups in the captopril molecule really
are the specific cause of neutropenia and/or agranulocytosis is still not
cle'lT. The association with high-dose captopril, usually occurring in
patients with renal failure and especi:llly those with :l collagen vascu-
1M disorder, is undoubted. In the case o( all other ACE inhibitors,
the AmeriC:ln package inserts all wam that :lvailable data for non-
captopril ACE inhibitors (I.e., all the rest) are not sufficient to exclude
agr:lnulocytosis at mtes similar to those found with captopril.
111
re:llity,
neutropenia
seems to have disappeared with
high-dose
captopril.
Contraindications 'nH~se include bilateral renal anel)' stenosis, preg-
nancy, known :lllergy, or hypersensitivity and hyperkalemia. Often :l
high serum creatinine above 25 to 3.0mrJdL (220 to 265Ilmol/L) is
taken as an arbitral)' cutoff point (or the use o( ACE inhibitors and
(or ARBs, especially in hean failure. However, over.lll benefits can be
attained with lesser degrees of renal insufficiency.Jo
ACE INHIBITORS FOR HEART FAILURE
Neurohumoral Effects of Overt Heart Failure
A cmcial problem in CHI' is the inability o( the left vt"ntricle in severe
(ailure to maintain a normal blood pressure and organ perfusion.
Enlll1ll(/'(1 (lcril'ir}' of lire ffmi,r-IIugiofCllsi,r 51'S/I'm (Fig. 5-8) follows fTOIll:
(I) hypotension, which evokes baroreflexes to increase sympathetic
adrenergic disch,nge, thereby stimulating the
~1 renal rcreptors in-
volved in renin release; (2) activ:lliOll of chemoreflexes and ergore-
flexes; and (3) decreased rcnal perfusion, resulting in renal ischemia
which enhances renin release. However, even in sevcre CI IF, plasma
renin m:lY not be devated.
31 Rather, to achieve consistent stimulation
o( the
renin-angiotensin
system
requires simultancous diuretic
I 18
•
5
ACE Inhibitors for /-leur! Failure
NEUROHUMORAL EFFECTS OF HEART FAILURE
Opie 2004
Increasing
LV failure
1'~-C.l
Increasing
preload
Na· relention
Edema
,..
EXCESS
BLOOD VOLUME
figure 5-8 Neurohumoral adaptation in hea" failure. The crucial COII-
sequence of LV failure is the inability to maintain a normal blood pressure
and normal organ perfusion. As a result of reflex haroreflex activation and
excess adrenergic stimulation, there is alpha (0.) mediated peripheral vaso-
constriction that increases the afterload and leads to increased LV failure.
Excess alpha (n) adrenergic stimulation leads to peripheral vasoconstric·
tion. Furthermore, excess p-adrenergic stimulation promotes renin release
with increased vasoconstrictive angiOlensin-H (A·II) and release of aldos-
terone. Increasing preload and afterload leads to increasing tV failure.
(Figurr cW Opie, 2005,)
therapy. Angiotensin-II promotes secretion of aldosterone, and also
the release of vasopressin, to contribute to abnormal fluid retention
and volume regulation in severe CIIF. Cenerally, such changes are
thought to be adverse because of increased vasoconstriction follow-
ing enhanced levels of angiotensin-I] and norepinephrine. because of
fluid and sodium retention associated with increased aldosterone
levels, and the dilutional hyponatremia associated with increased
vasopressin levels.
Great Increase in Peripheral Vascular Resistance Thus the greater afterload
against which the failing hean must work is explained by (I) increased
formation of angiotensin-l I, (2) reflex release of norepinephrine. (3)
release of vasoconstrictor emlOlhelin from the dysfunctional vascular
endothelium, (4) reduced muscle mass, (5) thickened capillary mem-
branes, and (6) ahered endothelial cell response to muscle metabo-
lites. Systemic vasoconstriction reduces renal plasma flow, which
detrimentally affects salt excretion and funher promotes renin for·
mation. Vasodilator honnones of cardiac origin, such as atrial and
brain natriuretic peptides, and prostaglandins of vascular origin. are
also activated. but fail to achieve compensatory vasodilation for
complex reasons including receptor downgrading.
Increase in LV Wall Stress Especially during exertion, both sYSlolic and
diastolic wall stresses become too high for the depressed contractil-
ity of the failing myocardium. The inability of the left ventricle to
empty itself during systole increases the preload. The combination of
increased pre- and afterload, so common in CIIE leads to progres-
sive ventricular dilation with wall remodeling (myocyte hypenrophy
and slippage with malrix changes), so thaI the ejection fraction
progressively declines with time. Load reduction and in particular
angiotensin-II inhibition may retard this detrimental process. Accord-
C II A PT ER 5
ACE IIlllibilOrs, ARBs, /llld AlrlosrerOlIe AIlf{IgOllisl5
•
119
ing to the Uipll/ce /lIW, the stress on the wall of a thin-walled sphere is
proportional to the product of the intraluminal pressure and the
radius, and inversely related to the wall thickness:
IV II
cPcc~'c'c,"'Ccc'~XC"R~'d::::;uo"
a
stress ""
~2 x Wall thickness
Wall stress is olle of the major determinants of myocardi,ll oxygen
uptake. Aflerload and preload reduclion, by decreasing the radius of
the left ventricle, decreases {he myocardial oxygen demand. ACE inhi-
bition, by reducing the preload and the afterload, lessens excessive LV
wall stress, limits remodeling, and enhances ventricular emptying."
All these factors improve the myocardial oxygen balance. Long term,
further LV chamber enlargement is attenuated.
Beneficial Neurohumoral Effects of ACE Inhibitors Administration of ACE
inhibitors has a consistent effect in increasing plasma renin, decreas-
ing angiotensin-II and aldosterone, with a fall in norepinephrine
and/or epinephrine, and in vasopressin. Angiotensin-II produclion
falls. Parasympathetic activity, reduced in heart failure, is improved by
ACE inhibition. Although there are some exceptions to the patterns
noted, most of the results are reasonably consistenl. From these data
it call be concluded that chronic ACE inhibition ameliorates the neu-
rohumoral changes found in congestive he;lr\ failure.
Possible Use of ACE Inhibitors as First-Line
Therapy in Early Heart Failure
In the SOl.VD prevention study" on more than 4000 patients, only
17% were taking diuretics and 67% were in NYIIA class I, so that
the question was whether enalapril could prevent the development of
overt heart failure (hble 5-7). Not surprisingly, the most striking
benefits were found
in patients with the lowest initial ejection
fractions, below 28%, with only borderline results in those with values
of 33"/" to 35%. Enalapril in a mean daily dose of 17 mg was associ-
ated with less hospitalization and less development of symptomatic
hean failure. Data from this arm of SOLVD influence the meta-
analysis of Flather and Yusufto show that the morrality benefit of ACE
inhibitors can be found even in the absence of initial diuretic
therapy. H
How Do Diuretics Compare with ACE Inhibitors? In postinfarct l),ltielllS
without clinical heart failure but with modestly depressed left ven-
tricular function, the ACE inhibitor captopril was beller able to main-
tain left ventricular function and size than the diuretic furosemide.j5
There could be many adverse effects of diuretics including acrivation
of the renin-angiotensin axis. Yet in overt left ventricular failure
and in congestive hean failure, diuretic therapy is still universally
accepted as first-stt:p and first-line therapy. This is because of symp-
tomatic benefit, and because diuretics ,He superior to ACE inhibitors
ill diminishing sodium and water retention. There is only limited
evidence that life is prolonged by diuretics, although it is clinically
evident that an intravenous loop diuretic is life-saving when given to
a patient with severe left ventricular failure and pulmonary edema.
Long term, it is now clear that ACE inhibitors prolong life ("I:1bles
5-7 to 5-9) whereas digoxin does not, so lhat the automatic dlOice
current choice of agent to combine with a diuretic in CIIF would be
an ACE inhibitor.
ACE Inhibitors Plus {J-Blockers (and Diuretics) for
Heart Failure
As ACE inhibitors Me so effeclive in suppressing the neurohumoral
response, it is no surprise that ~-blockers, which also inhibit renin and
120
•
5
ACE InhibitQ~ for j-/eml Failun'
Major Outcome Tnals of ACE Inhlbltors In Heart Failure
...,
"",,",m
No. of
Duration
and Drug
Condition
Patients
of Trial
Major Result
CONSENSUS
Severe heart
253
Gmo
40":1> mortality
Enalapril
failure
reduction at
6 months,
31%at Iyr
SaLVO
Mild to
2369
41 mo
18% mortality
(treatment)
moderate
reduction
enalapril
heart failure
SOLVD'
Asymptomatic
4228
37mo
37% reduction
(prevention)
LV dysfunction
in risk of
enalapril
CHF;
mortality
unchanged
X-SaLVO
Follow-up of
5165
12"
10% death risk
both SaLVO
fall in both
,=,
SOLVO anns
V-HeH-1l
Chronic heart
804
24mo
18% reduction
enalapril
failure
in death ys.
nitrate-
hydralazine
SAVE
Postinfarct
2231
42mo
37% reduction
Captopril
LV dysfunction
in risk of
CI-IF; 19%
mortality
reduction
lAACE
Poslinfarct
1749
4"
22% decrease
Trandolapril
LV dysfUllction
irt mortality
AlRE
POSlinfarct
1986
15mo
27% mortality
Ramipril
dinied heart
reduction
failure
AIRE '" Acute InfJrnion Ramipril [[lieaC}!". CllI'
conKestive hun failure;
CONSENSUS. Cooperati,.., North S<:andina"';an Enalapril SurvivJI Study"; LV
d~function. low wntricular eiection fraction; SAVE", Surv;vJI a"d WntriC\Jlar
EnIMgemenl"; SOI.VD. Swdiet of Left Wmricul.lf Dy>ifunet;on"·"; TRACE.
Trandolapril C",diac h,lu,tion"; V·II<:IT·11 • VA Coop",,,i..., Vasodilator II,," Failure
Trial"'; X-SOLVO. Extended Studi"" Of I.eft VentriC\ll", Dysfu"ction."
the effects of norepinephrine, also benefit heart failure. The consis-
tently positive results of the ClBIS II study with bisoproloV6 the
MERIT study with metoprolol/7 and several carvedilol studies.3s were
such that
~-blockers are now viewed as an integral part of the stan-
dard therapy for heart failure. The chosen drug should be introduced
carefully at a very low dose which is then increased over several
months (see Table 1-2). The ~-bJockershould be introduced when the
patient is stable, not when there is hemodynamic deterioration. Sltould
the {j-blocker be combined wi/It an ACE inltibiror~ The answer is certainly
yes, as almost all the patients in these trials were already receiving an
ACE inhibitor. Furthermore, in the Flather meta-analysis, mortality
reduction with the combination of an ACE inhibitor and a ~-blocker
(relative risk of 0.68) was better than with an ACE inhibitor alone
(relative risk ofo.83).j'
Aldosterone Inhibition by Spironolactone or
Eplerenone: A New Imperative?
[n RAtES, a low dose of spironoilictone, often only 25 mg daily, was
given to patients in NYIIA class III·IV. H Prior therapy was an ACE
inhibitor, a loop diuretic and digoxin (in 75%). There was only a
small rise in serum potassium, but it should be stressed that these
patients did not have renal impainnent. a risk factor for serious hyper-
kalemia. Risk of all cause mortality fell by 30% (P < 0.001), owing
C II APT FRS
ACE I'lllibitors, ARBs, alul AI,loSIeTlmc ATlIdgOllists
•
121
Table 5-8
Companson of Some Properties of Angiotensin-Receptor
Blockers (ARBS) versus ACE Inhibitors Relevant to Use
In Hypertension
Maior site of block
Major claims, basic
science
Side cffeCls
Licensed for
hypertension!
First line therapy.
INC VII'"
Compelling
indkations, JNC
VII'"
Favored therapy in
hypertension,
European
Guidelines'"
Major clinical claims
in hypertension
Effect on LVI-I, 'IS.
~blocke~
Effect Oil sex life, 'IS.
~-blockers
Less new diabetes
Outcome trials
(death, moke,
coronary C\-'ents'
etc.)
ARB
AT-l receptor
More complete AT-!
block. AT-2 activity
increased; laller may
increase bradykinin
Generally similar to
placebo; angioedema
rare but found
(CHARM)""
No
I-Ieart failure, diabetes,
chronic renal disease;
post-Ml likely in
future
LVH; ACE inhibitor-
cough; diabetic type
2 nephropathy or
microalbuminuria;
proteinuria
Equal BP reduction to
ACE inhibitors. littlej
1\0 cough, excellent
tolerability. well
tested in LVH and in
diabetic nephropathy
Better (losartan,
valsanan); Major
outcome trial. LIFE"
Better
Losartan; valsanan;
candesartan
LIFE (losanan beller
than atenolol, stroke
less. deaths less in
diabetics)." VALUE'"
(valsartan similar to
amlodipine)
ACE Inhibitor
Converting enzyme
Block of two receptors:
AT-I, 1'.'1'-2. Inhibition
of bradykinin
breakdown
Dry cough; angioedema
higher ill black
(1.6%) than non-black
patients (0.6%).
enalapril data from
OCliWE"
y~
No
A!s for ARB plus post-
MI, high coronary risk.
recurrent stroke
prevention
CI-IF; LV dysfundion;
post-Ml; nondiabetic
renal disease; diabetic
type 1 nephropathy;
proteinuria
Well tolerated, years of
experience especially
in CHF; good quality
of life. Used in
coronary prevention
trials (HOPE.
EUROPA, PEACE)
Beller (lisinopri1,
ramipril)
Better
CAPPP.... srop-i'~
Enalapril > diuretic..••
Diuretic> lisinopril in
ALLI-IAT"J
>. belter than; I\T-t _ angiotensin-ll receptor. subtype one; C1tF. congestive he,"
bihlfe; LVII. lefl ve"tricular hypellrol'hy
to decreases in both progressive heart failure and sudden death.
-111e benefit was found irrespective ofl}-blocker use. The surprise is that
the standard advice to doctors prescribing ACE inhibitors has been to
avoid the addition of potassium retainers because of the implicit
danger of hyperkalemia. A similar picture unfolded in the case of
EPI [ESUS, in which addition of the more specific aldosterone blocker
eplerenone to prior therapy of those with postinfarct heart failure
reduced mortaliIY." Yet in RALES and in EPHESUS, the rise in senllll
potassium was limited and the results positive.
Ilowever. serum
potassium /Ill/51 be carefully monitored, with reduction of Ihe dose of
the ACE inhibitor or the aldosterone blocker in case of hyperkalemia.
Note that an initial serum potassium value exceeding S.OmmoljL was
an exclusion criterion in both RAtES and EPIIESUS.
122
•
5
ACE Inhibitors for I/ellrt
1~lililre
Table 5-9
Comparison of Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs) vs ACE
Inhibitors In Heart Failure, In CV Prevention, and in Stroke
""'"'
ARB
ACE Inhibitor
IleWI fllihm':
Valsartan fur ACEi-
Yes,
~overal but nut all
Licensed in USA!
intolerant patients;
randesartan under
evaluation
M<ljor c/iniCill c/ilims
Use in ACEi-intolcrant
Many studies with large
in l1eilfl failure
patients;
d:lla hase. at least
noninfcriority
12.000 patients.
to ACEi not yet
definite monality
established
reduction of 20%,
prevents reinfarction
I'osr-MI: Maior
VALIANT. valsanan
Sever:!1 large studies.
studies
noninferior to
definite ptotection
captopril in
including LV
postinfarct hean
dysfunction
failure.-'
Diil!letic n~hropa!hy:
Renoprotcnive in tYJX'
Renoprote<tive in type
Major claims
2 diabetes
I diabetes
indcpcndentltof
independently of
hypenension
.lI';
hypenension
slows progress of
microalbuminuria"l
Nondillbelic renal
No outCOme dat~l
&tter outcome,. REIN,
JiJease
MSK
Prevention ofCV
No data. ON TARGET
HOPE reduction of this
compliclltioru (M/,
evaluating telmisanan
primary end-poim by
Ileart failure, stroke,
vs. ramipril in HOPE-
22%; EUROPA,
or CV dell/h)
like study
reduction of MI and
combined end-points;
PEACE underway
f"rrocnrioll of stroke
LIFE, less stroke in
PROGRESS, less repeat
I.VH treated by
stroke with perindopril
losanan usually with
only if with diuretic
diuretic versus
atenolol
MiljOT w<lminss
Pregnancy. all
Pregnancy, all trimesters
trimesters
Ad/litional WIIrni'lgs
Hypotension;
Angioedema;
hyperkalemia; renal
hypotension;
fundion
hyperkalemia; renal
fundion
CV. urJiova,culdr; /1.11. rnyocarJi,\l ;nCuct;on.
Quadruple Therapy as the Ideal?
Increasingly the optimal therapy of heart failure is seen as a combi-
nation of T!-,~ three drugs known to reduce mortality (ACE inhibitors,
~-blockers, aldosterone blockers) and one type th:!t improves symp-
toms (diuretics), with digoxin for seleGed patielHs (atrial fibrillation
or persistent symploms). Such combined therapy receives support
from the EIIPESUS study,'? in which eplerenone was added to prior
mediCation wilh ACE inhibition or an AIUl (86'''10). j3-blockers (75%),
and diuretics (60%) but no digoxin. An alternate multiple therapy
with an added high dose ARB replacing the aldosterone blocker,
receives some support from the CIIARM-AQded study:o
Potential Problems with Drug Combinations
in CHF
Diuretics piuS ACE Inhibitors Additive effects on the preload may lead to
syncope or hypotension so that the diuretic dose is usually halved
before starring ACE inhibitors. The result may be a tme diuretic-
CIt ArTE R 5
/\CE
lllliibilO~ ARBs. mill Aldosrerlme AIlIIlgollist.l
•
123
sparing effect in about half of patients with mild CIIF on addition
of the ACE inhibitor, while in others the full diuretic dose must be
reinstituted.
ACE Inhibitors plus Spironolactone or EpJerenone I[ere the major d<lll~er is
hyperkalemia and the lesser is an increasing serum creatinine/ ,l9 so
that frequent checks are needed. Exclusion criteria arc the prior use of
potassium-retaining diuretics, a serum creatinine exceeding 2.51l1g/dL
(220~mol/L), and a serum potassium exceeding 5,Omm/L Some-
times the dose of the ACE inhibitor must be adjusted downwards.
ACE Inhibitors and Aspirin or Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatories (NSAIDS) For-
mation of bradykinin and thereby prostaglandins may play an impor-
tant role in peripheral and renal vasodilation. Ilence, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatories, especially indomethacin, lessen the effectiveness
of ACE inhibitors in hypertension 4' Sulindac TIlay have less effect and
ARBs seem 10 interact less." '!1lese strictures probably also apply 10
the newer COX-2 inhibitors, In ClIF the interaction with NSAIDs is
less studied. nestrictions on renal blood flow invoked by NSAlDs are
most likely to be serious in those with major renin-angiotensin inhi-
bition receiving high-dose diuretics and with hyponatremia.ol If a'-
NS/\ID has 10 be used in heart failure, frequent checks of renal fUllc
tion are required. Regarding aspirin, despite the persuasive meta-
analysis on 22,000 patients showing similar beneficial effects in heart
failure irrespective of baseline aspirin use.'l the issue of an aspirin-
ACE inhibitor interaction;s llOt dead (Ch 9, p. 282). In practice, low-
dose (about 80mg daily) aspirin is often combined with an ACE
inhibitor in the therapy of ischemic heart failure. Alternatively,
replacement of aspirin by dopidogrel may be considered.
How to Start an ACE Inhibitor in CHF
First the patient TIlust be fully assessed clinically, including measure-
ments of serum creatinine and urea, and eleclfolytes. It is important
to avoid first-dose hypotension and thereby to lessen the risk of tem-
porary renal failure. Patients at high risk of hyporensiou include those
with serum sodium <130mmol/L, and increased serum creatinine in
the range of 1.5 to 3.0 mg/dL or 135 to 265IJmol/L. Patients with cre-
atinine values exceeding 3.0 mg/dL should be considered separately
(see later). Other groups at high risk include those on multiple diuret-
ics or high-dose furosemide (exceeding 80mg daily), those with pre-
existing hypotension and a systolic blood pressure <90mmHg. and
those 70 years of age or older (UK package insert, enalapril). Alllhese
patients need to have diuretic therapy stopped for 1 to 2 days and are
then ideally given a test dose under close supervision, often in hos-
pitaL Alternatively, a low initial dose of a very low dose of enalapril
(1.25 mg) or 2 mg of perindopril (with its slow onset of action) is
given.'"
[f there is no symptomatic hypotension, the chosen drug
is continued, renal function monitored, and the dose gradually
increased." Absence of firsl-dose hypotension suggests but does not
securely establish thal the subsequent course will be smooth. If the
patient is fluid overloaded with an elevated juglilar venous pressure,
thl'n the test dose of the ACE inhibitor can be given without first
hrtving to stop diuretic therapy. "11e addition ofthe ACE inhibitor may
call forth a diuresis, in which ('lSI" the diuretic dose is decreased to
avoid hypotension. Although these procedures arc often undertaken
in hospital, it is becoming more common in selected patients to
undertake outpatient monitoring,
Preexisting Renal Failure In general,
the serum creatinine can
be
expected to rise modestly and then to stabilize. In severe Cllr, in
which renal function is already limited by hypotension and by poor
renal blood flow, it may be a difficult decision to know whether or
not to introduce ACE inhibitor therapy. For example, the serum crea-
124
•
5
ACE Illhibiron!or Helln F<irillre
tinine may exceed 2.5 to 3.0mgldL or 220 to 26511mo1JL The danger
of exaggeration of renal failure must be balanced against the possible
benefit from an improved cardiac output and decreased renal afferent
aneriolar vasoconstriction resulting from ACE inhibitor therapy. Prob-
lems can be expected especially when the glomerular filtration rate
(eFR) is low and the renin-angiotensin axis highly stimulated. The
best policy may be 10 improve the hemodynamic status as far as pos-
sible by the combined use of optimal doses of diuretics and other
agents. 'I'hen the diuretic dose could be brieny reduced or stopped,
and a very low dose of an ACE inhibitor introduced.
Hypotensive Response to ACE Inhibition Temporary renal failure is most
likely to develop in patients with excess diuretic therapy and volume
depiction, in whom there is a greater hypotensh'e response to ACE
inhibitor therapy. 'I'hus it is logical to stan ACE inhibitors with low
initial doses. such as captopril 6.25 mg or enalapril 2.5 mg or even
1.25 mg. [n elderly patients, a low initial dose ofperindopril (2mg)
is less likely 10 cause initial hypotension than a low first dose ofeither
en,llapril (2.5mg) or captopril (6.25mg) for reasons that arc un-
known." Special caution is required in diabetic individuals in whom
renal failure is a panicular hazard.
Hyponatremia: salt and Water Umitation I'atients with severe hyponatremia
are 30 times more likely to devt>lop hypotension in response to ACE
inhibitor therapy and require special care. 111e cause of the hypona-
tremia is at least in pan release ofvasopressin (antidiuretic hormone)
as c.m result from renin-angiotensin activation following intense
diuretic therapy.'] Although the combination offurosemide and ACE
inhibitor may work safely, it is essential to avoid excess diuresis and
volume depletion. Modest. tolerable Sdll rtsrricrion is standard prac-
tice. PatienlS aheady on strict low sodium diets are at increased risk
of first dose hypotension. In patienlS who are nOt volume-depleted.
restriction of water intake is advisable because delayed water diuresis
may contribute 10 hyponatremia in severe CIIE
Outstanding Clinical Problems in the Therapy of
Heart Failure
Drug Dose Whereas in hypertension the dose-response CUNe is flat and
can be monitored from the blood pressure response, in CI [I' the
problem of the optimal dose does arise. Is the dose large enough 10
give as complete renin-angiotensin inhibition as possible? [n the
ATLAS study a high dose of lisinopril (aboul 35mg daily) gave fewer
hospitalizations but no lower mortality than low-dose (2.5 or 5 rng
daily)."
Standard medium doses were 1I0t tested. In the case of
enalapril. the standard targel dose is IOmg Iwice daily. Increasing this
to 6Omg/day did not alter death rale or hemodynamic parameters."
[n clinical practice lower doses than in the trials are commonly used,
below those found to ...."Ork in trials. Although the optimal doses of
ACE inhibitors in CHI' have not been established by clinical sludies,
our opinion is Ihat the dose should be titrated upwards 10 the effec-
tive trial doses without going higher.
Diastolic Dysfunction Most heart failure slUdies have concentrated on the
role of ACE inhibition in systolic heart failure and the indices of
improvemenl in systolic function. Diastolic heart failure is thought to
be.> an early evelll panicularly in kft ventncular hypertrophy (LVII) in
reslx)Ilse to hypertension or aonic stenosis. as .....ell as in the elderly,
Intracoronary enalapnlat improves diastolic function in palienlS with
I.VII due 10 either aonie stenosis'8 or hypertension."
Skeletal Muscle Metabolism in Heart Failure '111C skeletal muscle myopathy
found in heart failure is associated with increased prOlan production
